                                                                                                          We’re on our knees, prying off a baseboard, searching for an ant’s nest. You’re talking, Deer, I’m trying to keep up. I catch something about structural lines and the benefits of chemical dusts.  The sun breaks through clouds and windows, baking our necks. The wind dies as it hits the wall of trees surrounding this house. I could teach you how to deconstruct  this gated community, about the poverty of the third-world children who made our uniforms. I could tell you that when we were young, I cheated every time we played Monopoly.  I’m waiting for rain that doesn’t want to come, for all the green leaves to turn brown and let go of their branches. You could explain the best method to head-butt a soccer ball,  describe the weekend you went to Cleveland for the jazz festival. You could tell me about your murdered friend, the mortician’s work wasted by the closed casket. You’re waiting  but I don’t know what for, maybe a hint of sand to point the way. What can we say, on the floor of this million dollar house, to make our two blue worlds seem less strange?                                                

                                                                                                          Outside the bedroom window of the house he and my mother have shared since ’68, my father watches the post-Christmas blizzard build in the wind’s high octaves.  Gathered in the kitchen and dressed for cold, we see a cardinal in lucid scarlet, unable to reach table scraps and seed from a bird feeder canted in drifts by gale-force winds.  What is it about shoveling snow that makes us feel obsolete as threshers and draymen. It falls until the sky hungers itself pale, just a weak light from the sun to distend our shadows eastward.  We joke that our coat of arms must be shovels crossed over coal bins, even as resurgent wind stacks drifts in parapets to say we’re forever late to the race, even before the icy game begins.  By nightfall, we’re sore as Cain tilling his stones. Thirty years his junior, and I still quit earlier than dad, my feet translating to my legs the never-dead language of numbness.  Leaning against the garage, he reads portents in wind that turns his breath to smoke. He waits for me to warm in the house, then return. He’ll linger patiently. Like bread on snow.                                               

                                                                                                          There are different ministries, but the same breath, feeding on holy sticks. One stares point-blank, blank- eyed at me in the window. We are so close, I pretend to be invisible. One watches while the others doze, faces tucked to warmish flanks. The broad-cheeked one guards. But in the hour it lowers, a faint smile in sleep. Is it gratitude? No, the deer are not an annoyance. They are like the snowy boughs in sun. Ardent like my own delight. I admit that in the wide sprawl of a secret, I have stopped in the midday raiment, and seen the manna sparkle like lichen. So many limbs, the sturdy hemlock and this silent mimicry. They sleep just out of reach. I reach breathless at their breathing – such gestures, the stretched neck, the seeking after.                                     

                                                                                                          The Institution for the Deaf, Dumb, and Blind Faribault, Minnesota, January 1881  What to do with thoughts  but commit them to paper, as I did  in an asylum yesterday when I visited  women who rocked with hysteria,  wombs dislodged from behind their navels  to crawl everywhere— against their hearts,  in their throats, around and around  their spine—in the body, and like them  I have little money and few rights  of my own, but I have a pen in my hand and today the ink resembles hope.                                                    

                                                                                                          Along the Seine the boys dance like cockerels  & croon hymns to the galaxies behind Orion’s  belt.  They drum the night soul  out of its pink pink shell & block  all seventeen bridges this race of androids  can’t stop crossing. The boys call to me  in French. I don’t speak French. I have fallen from the sky  & they want to sew me a dress of clouds.  They know I hear the singing.  My mother appears, a lifesaver hurtling toward a girl being pleasured  by a treacherous swim.  The boys laugh, comfortable birds  out of the reach of any death.  The laughter like rotting meat.        
                                                                                                          That year we took the November like the braids of a woman, went to the sea with nets. How we reminded our ourselves of the honorable exception: Today. Today we would catch a small fish.  We almost never did. One day we returned and found the thin, tenuous stuff of its skin in a net you had left behind. Cold, and smooth in the hand. And the Sea, always a giver of last, but never first rewards, departed, its fins deep in the waves as it leapt from the net.  Many stones and moons later, my spirit wandered back to the memory, wailing. That which comes in waiting drowns in fruition. If only as the papaya flower must to Become.  Turning the gray threads of a Book a shadow in me recognizes revelations. Lion, lamb, the anonymous child. Oh? But what is joy without desire, his wide lover? Hunger without its jar? What is heaven without Longing? Or earth, without consummation?  Not for me to know. Only to grasp, as even the unblinking water does, or as all life must. The body turns, but the spirit still wails, away from the Knowing it has no heart to know.                                                    

                                                                                                          When my cousin was young, she broke into a window of an neighbor’s home to steal a bracelet she had noticed on a table, and instead found the woman  dead on her bed, her limbs grey-blue and bruised, her mouth open in an unuttered vowel. Surprise or ache, my cousin always urged both.  What she remembered were the green eyes, the fingers pointing to the floor, the smell of the body, like it had soaked in sewer water and lilacs, the woman’s  night gown lifted to her chest, her soft belly tugged over the elastic of her panties, her breasts uncovered, slack with gravity. The first woman  my cousin ever saw naked had died of an asthma attack before turning out the light for bed. Years later, my cousin works in a mortuary,  helping families move through grief and I still can’t stop gazing at the dead bodies. At every funeral I look for it – a color, a breath, a nudge. The smell  my cousin described, movement. But, there are no sweet smells or mixtures or jolts of casket wheels. I can see myself in the waxed surfaces,  looking. Just a squint, wishing I could kneed the skin of these bodies with my own hands, to reshape them, to pull an arm up and to lift a leg,  to sit them into rocking chairs, help them recline on soft couches, imagining my cousin must forget to wear her rubber gloves  as she undresses each body, wipes it down, remolds the wounds, hides the bruises, imagining the dead could somehow become  animated once more, if only we’d keep massaging, touching, if only we’d just stop looking.                                                 

                                                                                                          He hasn’t even gone near, say, the Empire State Building yet—or at least, he doesn’t think he has. Now that he’s in New York City, a city brimming with wild, overwhelming life on every square inch of its surface if there is one, he spends most of his time submerged, subterranean, in the Subway. The only crowds he mingles in are those riding to their day jobs, briefcases perched on trousered knees, knuckles whitened as they grip the poles to keep their balance. These are the ones who don’t notice his stares, already deep into a protective layer of unreflective ennui needed to keep their sanity in office life.  These are the cogs and wheels of New York City, he realized in his first week, after giving them more than a perfunctory second glance, after watching them trudge into familiar office buildings and post offices and managerial positions in supermarkets. The sharp churn in his stomach wasn’t something that could be placated by food. Even New York City needs them, these cogs and wheels, even New York City has people who aren’t seeking to Live but just live, and make enough money for a decent home-cooked dinner on the side. Didn’t he leave these people behind in Ohio?  His announcement to leave Ohio for New York City was the departure itself, and he entertained several differing fantasies of his parents’ reactions: his father, red-cheeked and monologuing to no one but the television; his mother, tearful or maybe even angrier than her husband, waiting vengefully, eagerly, to see New York City snap up her son like the shark she and her girlfriends have agreed it is. What he doesn’t know is that his parents scarcely had one at all. “A taste of college and they think the only place they can live unrestrained is there,” his father had said, unnecessarily jerking his head to the side, indicating the city. And then a moment later, dropping the pretense of “they,” he had snorted and said, almost more to himself than to his wife, “A little bit of weed at Ohio State and he thinks he’s a revolutionary.”  It was the 60s, the 70s, the 80s—it didn’t really matter; college students and weed and the idea of a revolution, it happened no matter how big or choppy the waves were outside, roiling with soon-historic subculture or lack thereof. He heard a Beatles song on the radio shortly after arriving (feeling cinematic, slightly fictional, he had wished it to be “She’s Leaving Home” but it was some bland crowd-pleaser, “Let It Be” or “Yesterday”) but the Beatles’ pervasive influence was such that their presence was indicative of no time period or mood or anything else, just of themselves. Sure, he left home, his physical body, but it occurs to him on a day where the weather is just as grey as the Subway that he left the budding wannabe New Yorker back at Ohio State. What he’s been doing is not retracing his paths, leaving them ingrained in a burgeoning map of his own New York, but creating countless intersecting ephemeral ones. He’ll ride from stop to stop and eighteen stops later will have buried the name of wherever he got on and ceased wearing the figurative mourning black. Sprawled across a sweat-flecked plastic seat, he’ll finger the ever-shrinking border on his neck where his unfortunately mouse-brown hair ends and his bare skin begins; he’ll replay fragments of some popular but not too popular underground song about to burst upwards into the people’s consciousness—deceivingly calm folk rock, maybe, or some urgent, furious growl and scream, whatever’s infusing the subculture of that period. He’ll feel restless and full of unused potential for something great. Forever unfulfilled, though—lacking the money, the connections, fancies himself against The Man, always filled with that unrealized potential because he’s too obscure to discover and wouldn’t want to give in to the straight and narrow life anyway. He’ll pretend like he hasn’t been too busy riding the pathways of New York to figure them out. He’ll pretend the only reason he ever gets home—a cheap apartment shared with an acquaintance found through a tangled string of friends and second cousins—isn’t because he has money from a savings account his solid, dependable parents made for him, which he can use endlessly for taxi rides back to the one address he knows.  Not a meandering exploration (like he’ll call it with a shrug to his roommate), but an escape from up above where the real action’s happening, where a wet-behind-the-ears Midwestern do-gooder would have to prove himself worthy of a future as a New Yorker.  He gets off the Subway one stifling night and is greeted by cigarette smoke, especially cheap and foul-smelling, Marlboro Red maybe, blown into his face by a twentysomething whose trenchant air and to-the-eartips hair he first mistakes for a man’s. When he finally succeeds in hailing a taxi (beaten by that girl, who winks at him while pulling her girlfriend, he realizes, in with her), the driver barely even glances at him but says, “You again?” He’s in not just a city but The City and the only person who recognizes him is a taxi driver? This is where he’s been spending his time by choice?  That savings account sure is handy—a week later and this time the announcement is his arrival, his hesitant knock on the door. His mom opens the door, doesn’t even blink an eye, says, “And how was your vacation?”  Saying nothing would at least have been something, but he says, “Just fine, Mom,” and he knows he’s fooled no one, least of all himself, as he brushes his shoes on the mat on the doorstep so as not to scuff his mother’s favorite rug in the hallway.                                    

                                                                                                          You have been alive for the past thirty years. You prefer the ocean to the mountains. You have let your hair grow long again, and tie it back when  the babies come to visit. You had more children, and they had children. In the winter, they come to your house to sled on the hill that leads out of your woods.  You go with them, cradling the youngest against your chest. When the roads ice over, you do not drive. You are a social worker or a psychologist. You prefer too much  rain to too little. You have thought about letting yourself go gray. The chemicals, you say. They’re going to kill us all if we’re not careful. You have a cat.  You have plants. When the roads ice over, you do not drive. You have friends come for dinner on Thursday nights, and in the summer you string fairy lights across your back deck.  You wear ankle-length skirts and keep your glasses on a beaded chain around your neck. You have long since given up your Firebird for a Subaru or a Volvo.  You have a second husband, one better than you think you deserve. He splits wood in the autumn. He is broad and tall and smiles when you call him a lumberjack. He likes  to cook. You gave up smoking. You play music too loud and drink white wine out of the biggest glass you can find and you can’t remember the last time you shattered a plate  against the floor because you’ve lived long enough to learn a few things. And—this is the important part, so listen well, sister— when the roads ice over, you do not drive.                                                                                                                                                    We came out of the sea at dusk and walked through the dune-grass. Like runaways, we were free  of the house and its babble: pill bottle labels, shopping lists. The ocean banged and frothed.  In the car, we sat a long time, the keys a silver starfish in her lap, silence  a kind of love between us.                                                                                                                                                  Lecture: The Heart of a Man New York, 1878  The night begins in velvet. A sash caresses my curves. My hands  sweep up eight hundred eyes. In June’s heat gas flames pulse  I say, Look to the heart. In Booth’s Theater a chart presses against the stage.  Two ribbons label my creation: the heart of a man, shaped like a vulva  surrounded by down clouds and light. My voice blazes, I have come here  to make this my field of labor: the heart and what it holds.                                                                                                                                                      Whose fault, now the living room’s turned forest? The drying-of-wings fan. Speckled plums in the nest-bowl. We sit with the baby among dust woods, thicket of limbs, tree-light-thrown shadows on the floor. Which is what we are, floored, berry wine and milk drunk. A cosmic circle joke: shelter made from what survives the flared, expired fires. Space so familiar, we’re blind to soil. The baby goes limp, tight fists loose, gold bud popped along a vine, now zonked in a tree’s crook. Somewhere in here there’s an unused altar. Somewhere, an edible root.                                                                                                                                                       —Reykjavik  These rain-faded, corrugated iron houses— bleachy pink and blue, that iodine red, oxidized umber—look like Paul Klee got lost and flew north, or Aix-en-Provence picked up sticks and left Provence. From our perch in the church steeple we can look right down sleepy Vitastigur, the narrow houses lined up like matchboxes all the way to the gray harbor, the five out-of-service black whaling ships with the red H stenciled on their funnels, a yellow helicopter buzzing off towards the water. Lily, is that Mount Esja over there, nearly lost now in the blue-gray mist? (I saw it earlier in the Rough Guide.) Look, there’s Lake Tjörnin like a torn sheet of foil, and down there— that’s our green hotel, where we stood last night on the balcony looking out at nothing much. No skyline to speak of but an alley, laughter from an open door, a glittery trickle of water along the cobbles— just around the corner from that string of bars lit with strings of yellow lights where we found a quick bite to eat when we realized it was nearly midnight. We’ve left the familiar behind—far from home, newly married—awake now for twenty-seven hours and falling in love with a country that never gets dark.                                                  

                                                                                                                                                                                                             For milk and the morning paper, I walk down this crooked arm of road around the woods. Sky twists  like wet smoke in the branches’ gaps. Last year’s leaves steep in snow; tree-trunks shiver and chap. These stretching,  seasonless curves, the tease of softening air might take us in, our skin forget to bristle; sandy, squinting  eyes can blur the shades like reams of filled-in time-sheets, late-night talks that stain and seep into dreams: browns  and whites and duns, then darker browns. Color is in the News, where blue and green define the patchy heat  of a human brain-map: memory loss begins with sex, the scientists say. I read the full story at home,  my thumbprints smudging grey. The steam’s plume climbs. I pour the tea. It’s time to wake you, start the day.       
                                                                                                          How far the unknown transcends  the old dog in the metal  tub shivers  what we know  oatmeal for hotspots, oil  of cedar for fleas, little liver pills—  pain, the palatine  cleft by tumor     a thumb  against the jaw, & harder,  she opens, gags  one by one, & by the hand  she disappeared  in the underbrush    in death,  she rolled & took  on its stench  half willing, half reluctant  of each other  we know nothing,  of another—  I know none  to be led, & leave  the lather, & pouring over—  beneath my fingers her muscles  roll     through water,  she blinks, & rinses  black                                                

                                                                                                          I had a fifteen-minute layover in Atlanta, headed from one place full of desire to another bereft of all. I remember the lights of the city as we banked above it— a vast and toppled Christmas tree no one had bothered to right. Later, I chuffed through the wide hallways— refusing the smiles of the greeters, demanding the path to the place my ticket insisted that I be. There wasn’t even time for a drink before I got in the line and left. Sometimes, I wonder about that Georgia dirt I never walked on. For all I know it is made of watch cogs and glitter. I have only the mulch of the airport planters, which dotted my route through the artificial air of a terminal that shunted me back into sky. On the plane, I was shown the escape routes, and the lights of the world became small and untouchable once again. Up ahead, the stewardess and her cart of little whiskeys came closer row by row.                                                

                                                                                                          It moved inside us, the old story before the story, a fleeing too hard to forget.  In the primitive landscape bushes became wolves and the wolves wrote the government reports. They stung our hunting grounds with their words, leaving a trail we followed.  Once our stories were round but the wolves made them square as their houses.  Turn down the corners of their books until they are round as pie plates on the counter in the crowded cafe.  They divided our way of knowing. Our stories now a bookstore at the site of the old fort.  The wolves kept up their reports— betrayal— betrayal— on the shelving and window sash. Their reportage only made what happened happen again on paper, a map work still legible as rock drawings.  I tell you they occupied the land leaving us to this day their bookshelves and cabinetry.                                                   

                                                                                                          1.  As I slept, a voice—  If you say I love you, you are correct.  If you think I do not love, you are in the dark.  Who am I?  2.  The blind woman said:  Walk in your fullness as a ______.  Do not let others rob your blessing.  3. The tithers pay  salaries of those who do not tithe.  Who are they?  4.  Nazonazo—  question one is God. Two is a poet.  Third, mitsubachi, is Japanese for bees.                                                  

                                                                                                          I. The Plinth  Our son and his friends are building a snow grotto atop ground unyielding as granite.  Their giggles curl in the wind. Candy-colored shovels script against an ice floor—something  accrues with its slick hardening. It returns to the children from winter to winter—how to decipher  the handicraft of snow’s blue prints. Deep in their holes, late potatoes close their eyes.    II. The Wall  Farmers tilled their land and hauled the stones, harvest of frost heaves, to fence lines. Barriers to wandering livestock, markers of possession—field stones, flagstone, tie stones—extended into lichen-crusted vertebrae: atlas of a disappearing landscape.  III. The Roof  Never mind the stars. Come daylight, take the heliotrope’s  measure, the sun’s glance mirrored in a vast, exact, arc:  what’s needed: precision: somewhere to start: somewhere to be.    IV. The Hearth  Wool-capped ladies bring winter apples, and tangerines in miniature wooden crates.  The bread is a day away from stale, but food bank boxes burst with turnips, sweet potatoes,  skins darkly powdered with local farm dirt, beets bloodstain-brown. We stow them in an unheated room.  On the stovetop, cocoa melds with condensed milk in a pot warming on the burner.  Small economies: how the sun weakens in December, bows to evening before the end  of afternoon.                                                   

                                                                                                          They made their peace with the old man, but that did not mean they liked him, only tolerated him. If they had known when he entered all those years ago, stumbling over the scuffed and sole-worn sill of The Foxbilt Inn, lost in the haze of his most recent hangover, they would have… what? What could they have done to the man who sat alone, propped on a spindly chair, the legs shaking like dousing rods? He nursed the same beer he had been drinking now for years. Just how many years, they did not know. With the old man, time played hide-and-go-seek.  He was a fixture of the place along with the jukebox, the pool cue rack, the door that was left open even in the cold, the cityscape of long-necked bottles behind the counter. He passed from one generation to the next, from owner to owner, father to son. No one knew anything about him. The pillars of the community down to the gutter trash had their theories on his origins, his name, how he survived without food, without going to bathroom. They talked about him with glee and concern, no one believing a word of their own gibberish.  That first night he came in they should’ve known. His unkempt mustache draped over his lips like Spanish moss, his breath dead magnolia sweet. His eyes were two raisins pressed into his face, and without even ordering, he had a beer before him. He had not touched the tap, and all the glasses were accounted for, but he sipped, and he stared.  The other patrons talked among themselves and watched the old man. The folds of his skin held the dust of yesteryear, and his ears echoed with the singsong of the people who lived on the land before civilization. They expected hoof strikes to resound off the cobblestones outside, a whore’s caterwaul to trill down the dusky passages, a whiff of fly-glommed dung to slap their noses, tallow candles to flicker where once were light bulbs. They imagined muddy alleyways packed with urchins, sun-beat sailors, and tin cup beggars with filth-matted beards. They gave the old man his space and asked no questions.  Final call rang out, and as the other patrons gathered their coats, settled their tabs, found their friends, their latest squeeze, the old man sat on, sipped his near-full pint. He contemplated the universe in a drop of lager. The bartender asked him to get a move on, but the old man ignored him. He would not go.  Some of the bartender’s friends loafed around to see what the commotion was, and the bartender explained the situation. Together, they politely asked the old man to move, then again, then a third time, but not so politely. They kicked him off his chair, discovering no great and powerful voodoo held him to it. They muscled the old man out to the sidewalk. This was not hard. He was as light as an unfilled piñata, and so they heaped him by the curb, high-fived, and went away.  The next morning, when the owners opened the door, there was the old man in his usual spot, and he had a beer before him. When they saw him, they did not believe. The doors had been locked, the windows not jimmied. They blinked like prisoners released from solitary, dazed by the invention of light. How was it possible? But it was. It was.  This time they hauled him to an alley, set upon him with trashcan lids and bottles and fists and feet. They left him bleeding, unconscious, and were satisfied. The next day, they checked the alley and found a dark red corsage on the pavement. The awkward, sticky bloom trailed off into an archipelago of dots and dashes. The drizzle led back to The Foxbilt Inn, to the door, under it. The locks were secure, but when they went inside, there was the old man in his usual spot, in his usual condition, a beer within reach.  They all had ideas on what to do with him and how to do it, but they rarely said them out loud, did not want the old man’s magic to curse them. If they did scheme, it was always in a dubious, maybe-some-other-time kind of voice. Their fears made them feel silly, childish, and when all was said and not done, they still did not know what to do with the old man because they did not know if he’d done anything wrong, per se.  Even though it was only the third day, they knew he was—whether they liked it or not—a part of their lives until he died, or they did. A man who could survive a beating and heal overnight, a man who could not be stopped by deadbolts, by brick and carpentry was not a man to tango with. They lived with the mystery. What other choice did they have?  Some quit going to The Foxbilt Inn, too spooked by the frozen-eyed man in the corner, but their boycott floundered. They were drawn back, rapt by the oddity of a living statue. The old man attracted new customers, reporters, cameras, sightseers bursting with touristy zeal. The owners charged fees to gawk, and the hooting, pointing crowds were kept at bay with chicken wire. Activists said it was inhumane, and street corner evangelists said the old man was a sign of the end of days, spoke of archangels and Beelzebub. But they all faded away when they discovered he was not a show, just a man existing, sipping his beer periodically.  In time, it was like the man was not there, had never been there, that the bar did not have an old man living in it. And at night, after everyone else had gone, streetlights rubying the windowpane, the glaring shafts of color fixed the old man in his spot like an object, a relic, not a person.  Sometimes an unfamiliar would offer to buy him a drink, the requests sloppy-slurred by the end of the night, but the old man did not acknowledge the gesture. Sometimes they would get belligerent, demand the old man says something, shout and pound the table, and some old-timer would pat the rookie’s back and explain the situation in hushed tones.  Large-breasted women in tank tops stepped around him like he was a puddle of vomit, and bearish men, their wizened faces equipped with mountain man stubble, averted their eyes. The old man made them feel like they should have been somewhere else doing something else for somebody else instead of there doing nothing for no one.  The sullen realization slammed their chests like another body, hurt their heads, and warped their thoughts. The tops and bottoms of their steel trap faces pinched together. Their stomachs grieved and pretzeled. They were all like the old man, cheerless, mute, with no past and no future, no family and no religion. Not yet, they thought and twisted their glasses to and fro. Not yet. And the people who said it and repeated it to themselves did not believe it.                                                      

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        At fifteen, they thought Her a fine, thinly blued vase: Something to fill With poetry, clear tea, just Another butterfly clip there, A cinch of the waist, ready For the red sashes, the rice wine, The heady incense of nuptials.  The carriage was carved Out of thousand-year-old cherry wood. Her slippers felt small, uneven. She was a small child again, Both feet sunk in snow, lost Among barren gardens And frozen ponds.  Have the cats eaten all the koi? She scrambled to sit On the carriage cushions But slipped, and fell– She tried to climb the shrunken bonsai, But tripped over the first branch.  Her fingers latched onto a cushion As she pulled herself up. Outside, The fanfare was already starting. Even through The silken screen she felt Sunlight pricking at her face, The scarlet of silk wrapped tightly About her.  One hundred fifty handmaidens Followed her to the gates of Chang’an, But no farther. As she heard the sound Of a one hundred fifty gilded fans sliding shut, It occurred to her that they couldn’t Possibly carry her to the Mongolian heartland On a cherrywood carriage.  At Ningxia, they strapped her onto a horse. Guards wrapped in steel plates rode all around her for miles. She stared at the dry grasslands ahead and thought of her brother, sitting on their father’s dragon-carved throne in flowing robes of yellow.  All this for one year’s peace.  She clenched at the saddle of the horse and became convinced that the tall, rippling grass curved in scythes.  Ahead, A white-feathered bird winged past. As it passed over her entourage, An archer raised his bow and loosed an arrow. And it fell, circling a bit, like a cloud of fog drifting toward the ground. Dissipating somewhere further along the path to Karakorum.            

                                                                                                          On the rusted back patio chairs we drank late into the evening, my brother and I; drank a cheap California red with a twist top, and talked about a woman we had seen outside the café that morning, a brunette in a bright yellow pea coat and bright red shoes–bright as a handful of flowers along a highway. We could not believe how beautiful she was, this woman, on that bike of hers. The motion of her knees rolling below the hem of her dress looked something like driftwood in a wave. I mentioned this before taking another drink and leaning back in my chair, toward the young orange tree (a wedding gift from my brother) in the large orange pot beside the table. Its branches, untouched by wind, hovered darkly in the air, like fingers grown apart from a hand. Then I stood up and staggered through the yard, under a shower of stars, to the old trampoline, climbing over its metal railing, and sinking into its weather-worn skin so I could see the neighboring houses.        

                                                                                                          death is a current from the familiar to the unfamiliar, an unstoppable arrival upon a bed of corn husks in the blind throttle of hailstones  death is a scattering over a fountain of shapeless linen in the lunge and the loom of an accelerating headwind  death is the all-stone child of a flowing chisel that will not be still for its asthmatic mother        
                                                                                                         remember the pears yellowing sleeves speckled and smudged by emerald  rough soles of bamboo your calloused feet like leather glassy ground aching  weeds crusted by ice snow swooning like first lovers rhythm unsteady  you were a fallen leaf a wooden bench idling against the spring brush  i still remember later your ashes their ghost steps flurrying lost                                                                                                              I.  No crueler temptation exists than the many reclusive, blinking eyes of Barcelona, where the winding deception of the streets encases me both in the past and the present. I followed my eyes here to capture the lifeless stone of your skeletons, but the rhythm of your beating heart has pulsed through my fingers and rendered my pencils useless.  II.  I count in reverse while I dwell here, and each day my spindling fingers lower one by one. And I wish for impossible limbs to provide me with one more pair of hands and ten more days to live like a human who has not yet learned to live within your crumbling walls.  III.  Your shattered boundaries keep me stranded and safe from what I long to escape to and from. For never would I dare defy the restless Mediterranean, with its many desperate hands and stoic silences. Nor the caverns that sigh between great, slanted, Pyrenees, where echoed screams reverberate for years before they meet the silent stone and curved embrace of canyon depths. I fear for my shadow for my fingernails and follicles that will survive me should I find my fate where westward winds have carried all other fallen forms.  IV.  Time will flow in reckless currents and snatch away the futures we do not firmly grasp. Such is our fate, lonesome seaside city, for though my feet carry me skyward, I wish to wake to one more sunrise among trolley cars and foreign tongues. I wish I could kick off my shoes and follow the future of the mountain springs and the circling gulls. I’ve hidden too much of myself resounding through cobbled ways and clipped to swaying laundry lines to ever truly depart.    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    My father’s bloodline was whittled into my wrists while I tossed in the womb. Born to be roots, to blossom, while my painted ghost wandered, haunting the meadow and whispering to trees.  My father killed me young enough to live both these lives, to have an azalea tongue and flint veins. Any grasp struck sparks rioting through my limbs, till my shadow vanished and my breath singed the faces of steamy-eyed men, as well as pastel darlings and their petal lips.  There is nothing to be afraid of. There is nothing that cannot burn. This meadow is the charred edge of old men’s maps and the wraiths that grow here are the wounds of flowers.  When I die, like my father, there is no change.  Just rosy oils flaking away, and blue petals blooming somewhere in the woods.                 

                                                                                                          At thirteen, I watched him from my bedroom window in the brightness of his den. Always at night, with my light off, so he didn’t see me gawking when he removed his white turban, exposing the coil of hair he never cut. He unwound it tenderly because it was a gift from God.  My neighbor was highborn and could not mow a lawn or run a dishwasher. As a child, he rode a red wagon downhill and sat as his servant pulled him back up. My parents taught me how to work, but reverence I learned from him.  How to uncover my blessings by candlelight, house silent as God, to peel away with care my stiff jeans, blouse with many buttons, panties a pure and blazing white. I lingered over my brassiere, its unclasping a relief like prayer, and let slowly loose my breasts, those miracles risen finally on my waiting chest.                                   

                                                                                                          Perhaps she missed being the subject of discussion. Once she was a drop of dark blood in a man’s water glass. Once, she made the primary artery in his neck  botch a tango. Daughters give you power that saps your power, the sun sunk into the young plant’s sturdy tendons. The mother knits guilt tight into  a sweater, a feast for moths. What can she serve except the diluted world in a cup of bone? The world is not for the dedicated delicates.  Perhaps she was glad to see her daughter go, her life will be a purse cleaned of Kleenex, old receipts from half-remembered restaurant fights, the mints’  silvery foil, the private line of the pediatrician. The young men waited in her lobby, fiddled her steak knives, took her money with the grace  of ponies. The mothering softly circled her ankle at the moment when she was prepared to mount some sun-drenched stair. A luxury to allow  the cleaned fruits to remain uneaten, to recline in rooms fragrant with their spoil. Let hell tie his silk ascot tight around his handsome throat  and crook his little finger. Naked under her robe, three fingers of bourbon in the coffee, she swings the hose with the blunt force of the universe.  She’s watering the corpses of the buried pets. No, she’s drowning the plants.                               

                                                                                                          Once I saw you as the silent tongue in the bell of lamplight above my bed and thought, how strange to have any other,  or locks for that matter, though even then you betrayed only the oldest closet, the dark no greed or anger would disturb.  Just the curious eye, at best, the small god that flings an arrow through the hole. To cross the still threshold and yet remain  concealed, is that what a child wants, what a god imagines, or the coroner’s blade, bearing down to part the curtain.  To be the one who walks invisibly in paradise, or here among the mourners, shy to lean over the closed eyes,  to slip the bolt, as if the many deaths we cannot die were one now, our own cut to fit, shadow to shadow, and turn.                                                     

                                                                                                          I look on the sunnyside— I’m fat but not so fat no one will love me. I fit  into plane seats, my hair smells of strawberries. I push the urge to kill beneath my pillow, open my window—  see the green grass beneath a premature snowstorm golden. I feel like a pine whose body can’t bald or run,  who remembers each year as a ring and nothing more. Like all good trees, I need water and an egg. Poets lie. They say  The world is enough , say  Each day opens its palms of birdsong , but most days I don’t give a shit  about birds. I watch sun harden in the pan, eggspit turn white as angels.                                                    

                                                                                                           This is how I pray—in a blue square of light I bow my head over a bowl of Cheetos.  And this is how I am good—I watch dad demand mom bring the salt the pepper  the San Pellegrino the bowl of steamed broccoli the cheddar that she wash his socks his coffee-stained  suit jacket as he tells her you wouldn’t understand you never listen don’t interrupt me  and I hear what he says but doesn’t say— you’re stupid you’re stupid you’re stupid,  and I don’t say anything, I study harder and eat Oreos and feel sugary relief  glistening like snow down my intestines, and when the cicadas or locusts or whatever  buzzes in the leaves fills my room I weigh myself and punch my thigh—  I fog the window with my breath, write the world is too much with us  and watch words dissolve, reveal the oaks’ green teeth.                                      

                                                                                                           in the manure, kisses the anthill and prays for fire. She follows the green porchlight, sets her jug on the steps—drinks until what’s broken burns. She smells leaf cinders, knows winter will come soon, but doesn’t know what will follow: a square of red in the frozen ground—the barn door unhinged—blood-drops on snow: Chokecherries , she’ll name them, then run to the house where she’ll stir mint leaves in a pot of hot water, listen to the sink’s silverdrip. She’ll hear this as God’s bright promise—that the creaks outside her bedroom door will be inhuman, a breeze through the cracked window.                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    as far as I know there is no such place as The Avalanche Café  there is no barista there with dust on her lapels no manager with crushed rock on his mustache  as far as I know there is no such place  with bruised and bleeding patrons and tiny coffees that must taste extra good after a disaster  after you think you might not ever taste coffee again  no such place exists as far as I know  but if it did the bell above the door just rang  and I imagine you just walked in looking a lot better than I would have expected you to look  after all that has happened after all that keeps happening.                                                  

                                                                                                           a V formation of flying geese slowly unzips the sky’s dress  and reveals to our eyes what we have up until now only wondered about but have never seen  and the sky lets us look as briefly as anything else upon her breasts and belly  down here at our safe distance of never leaving the ground  until a jet zips back the other way and closes the sky’s dress again leaving us alone down here with our pangs of brevity  and our longing for wings or the memory of having had wings                   

                                                                                                           long before film was invented rain made a film of us falling  we fell past rain’s window we fell against rain’s window we collected ourselves in puddles on the sidewalks  long before sidewalks were invented  and while rain was filming the wind picked up and pulled us out of our puddles and back up into the sky  we rushed as clouds past skyscrapers and gathered into bigger clouds over bridges  long before skyscrapers or bridges were invented  and rain recorded it all with her camera wondering how she would edit it later  long before cameras or editing were invented  and now rain shows us the films she made every time she comes back around to ask us when we are going to allow her to invent us again           

                                                                                                           this is rain’s kitchen those are rain’s leftovers that’s rain’s dish rack there’s rain’s favorite coffee mug  the book rain was reading last night is face down on rain’s side table next to rain’s couch rain would be embarrassed to know you have seen that  I never treat my books like that rain would blush but I was summoned just after dinner to fall in some town somewhere  so I went off in a hurry  this is rain’s coat closet go ahead     look everybody wants to  you see–there are rain boots a rain coat (rain’s raincoat) and an umbrella just as is in everyone else’s closet  and there’s rain’s telephone she still has a landline I’m old-fashioned I guess rain says  and there’s rain’s bed rain’s night table rain gets lonely sometimes so the bed is always made and rain is always ready for anyone who might want to visit  and there’s rain’s bedroom window looking out onto rain’s driveway and down onto rain’s little street  oh and look here comes rain you thought the air had changed thought you noticed the trees preparing for her  like a court might prepare for a princess if a princess were rain  don’t be alarmed you don’t have to hide rain would love the company after a night like she has had  and she already knows you’re here anyway she started fixing her hair as soon as she saw the curtain move  and she checked her lipstick when she noticed your bicycle  rain’s lipstick is just as she likes it red as a stoplight in the rain of course  you watch as rain slows and runs her fingers along the seat of your bicycle  the bicycle of someone who loves rain leaning up against the side of rain’s house  and you up there waiting for her  ready to help her undress ready to touch her just as you have always dreamed that rain likes to be touched         

                                                                                                          builds a daughter’s house: beams of I like fingers accuse eachother in circular rooms, circuited with silent vowels that string themselves together endlessly. Some words are composed entirely of silence, and these will trickle out of a daughter’s mouth as she sleeps. Of course, certain gradients of daughterbreath won’t translate: fear of fathers, fevers, regret.  There are sixty-seven terms for red, forty-two for leaving, but none for sorry. Unwatched, a daughter’s verbs switch tense, a life unbecoming as was swallows am swallows will . With age the language falls away like scrub from a daughter’s brain, but when it is heard again, her dumb tongue burns with voiceless consonants:  tk tk of fingernails on drywall, sh sh of lace on tile, st st of silver trembling in its drawer. Her mind is blanched in a bowl of light— her lips part, her body stutters, she looses a ribbon of time. Syntax splinters with words unlearned, and hidden roofs collapse inside, leaving only interjection—O a daughter’s life is spent sifting the wreckage of meaning heaped between her teeth.                                                   

                                                                                                          My aunt miscarried four times, and after each one, she took me to Chinatown in the city, and we would watch the gloved men gut fish after fish after fish as if it meant something.  She carried all the ultrasounds for years after, with names and the expected dates of birth scribbled on the backs, and on the train ride home, she’d clutch the bag of headless fish close to her body, and softly, rub her finger over the worn leather of her wallet, where the faint memories of life gathered dust inside.  My uncle used to burn hundreds of matches on the front porch, and the first time we came home, he stared at my aunt’s stomach and stumbled backwards, something immense, something too big to understand, to describe, quaking inside of him. He stopped burning matches and started burning flowers, instead.  My aunt carries him too; in the way she walks, stooped over, with this gentle sorrow pulling her into the floor like sand.  Salma, May 17th 2003 Laila, November 29th 2006 Sophia, January 4th 2007 Hanna, August 23rd 2011  Four seasons for four daughters; every day, dawn is the time for grief, dawn is the moment where my aunt can finally sob under the weight of the world, a 34-year-old Atlas with a home empty of children, and a body that deemed her unfit; I have grown into a family of grief, a life in which mourning and morning mean the same thing.  She said once: I am a shell, and you can hear the ocean sputter and cough in my bones; I swear, I would swim, if I weren’t already sinking.                                                     

                                                                                                          I think about the bullet in his wrist that still floats between radius and ulna. In the wake of his thrashing,  his quiet shatter-sounds, I have heard, murmured, the stories that pool beneath his eyes each morning. I have learned  that there are times when the decision must be made not to cut through muscle, to let shrapnel swim forever.  Sometimes, half-dreaming, I am caught in black water that beads his back with sweat and then his terror is more real to me  than the eighty-six seconds I was held underwater by a cousin tired of my playing in her pool, more real  than the beach-ball grin death wears when you are six years old and drowning. I stroke his back,  try to pull him to the surface. On the midnights when he twists against a tide I cannot see, I am afraid  to touch his face. I am frightened he will feel my love and feel himself held under.                                                 

                                                                                                          There’s softness to the photograph’s image after a year without dusting: my father  in his uniform, the picture hanging in the hall- way, crooked, a single nail pulling  from the drywall, holding the weight mother couldn’t. He told her once that after a month  in Viet Nam, warm water from the shower was enough to make the cocks of the soldiers  hard. Now, spring storm, the sky coming apart in a thousand places and power knocked  from its lines, my wife warms water on the gas stove, tests the temperature against her wrist.  She pours pot after pot into the tub, pours blood-warm water over me.                                                    

                                                                                                                                                     

                                                                                                          She was never that. Years in the Catholic home for children with bad hearts, until the nun who taught piano wrote her mother and said it was just a murmur. As if the child had been speaking too low to be heard. Or the river upstate that slashed among the rocks was her true pulse, where children in hand-me-downs sang about heaven’s glory and the nun raised her pale  hand to keep time. Which is all there was. Time. And then the running out. Father long gone somewhere down Tenth Avenue. Mother with son and another daughter at home, and another daughter missing, the neighbor who took her just a myth, since mother really gave the child away–love a rounding-out to the nearest whole number, the space between decimals  a lack of air. There’s a turn in her eye. A suitor’s face blurry, his hands not the ethereal doctrine and psalm of Saturday confession or girlish story-telling. What slides along the thigh, what burns? Something rising into her small breasts with an incipient mother’s urge, something behind his tongue. A slow throb. Red the way blood darkens in the air until she can hardly speak.                                    

                                                                                                          Down by the Common, there’s tell of poorly moored boats, a cab lost to drink, star men, their hands colluding.  I repeat  the large black space like a yawn.  Wind unzips our coats.  We do not recognize friends in profile.  Turn your own head; become  uncanny to me.  Drink through your vision quest.  Show me your face.  The teeth you hate, that roguish beard.  Lend me your tired mouth                                           

                                                                                                          This is where I called for God and you smiled. This is where I tried to say enough , but only gasped my breakage, bucked like a mare.  Beast breathing hyperbole. Slow  don’t —I said don’t to the music, my body’s syncopation: ass clap, uncanny fetal curl, bruises to lick.  I said don’t beneath the white pillow, said white pillow but meant my teeth were learning each feather. Bone crack played back like a laugh track.  I was naked when I was the pillow. Then I was not pillow but stone, hardened by what you called devotion . Gods call things other things all the time: mine  meaning love, love meaning attention falling beyond indifference. This is where I call you God and laugh, a minor lapse: I make due, am inner-snared  and pose macabre, my spine-curve harsh. I’ve lost your name in my mouth’s keen dark.                                      

                                                                                                           We are not coeval / With a locality / But we imagine others are -George Oppen, “Of Being Numerous”  at the boundary around makeshift up buildings of a New York  running this      late-season almost winter oasis number  an unremarkable  storm rose  the trees  decline  a recurring Atlantic      a freakish  time coast show  were swept away found dead faced  were swept away by contentious experts  in hurricane decades through glass  power blinked off precise body of an hour  the Atlantic was decades  a murky vivid display of mysteries notably of greenhouse emphasized of trouble seas the risks  the system environment becoming area  vexing  things typical of the middle      latitudes  are rare enough  heavy are expectations and atmospheric  wreckage without     
                                                                                                          we are not dead in the shower not dead on the express train not dead limbs piling into stairwells not dead yet telephone noises the universe inserts pre-paid postage Earl Grey Rosemary’s grandmother take courage thoughts floating together elevators all over the city rise in synchronicity the ink bleeding all over palms in the lobby it’s the image, we’re entertaining views of St. Francis’ truly alive rain from a fire escape  in the 1970s when the New York electric grid kept blacking-out on my futon, ghost-like idlewild, a closed eye and poetry forever turning itself into a kind of ocean, broken language keeps spreading out like static and so I keep to my lost corner, my electric space-heater                                                    

                                                                                                           the regular wheel and the grindstone, original punchclock, machine, conveyer I am writing over and around the space where your leg meets the rest of you, the wind weaves through the buildings like electricity and draws the road up with its accompanying noises, sings the thought, quiet heart, hollow bones, cautious warmth in new spring with airplanes overhead. I once saw a video of a man being swallowed by the ocean in it he is holding a sign but the words are in a language I  don’t understand he is facing away from the water and towards me, you, whoever is watching the long arm of water reach out and lift the man and his sign—captured in the same mechanism, wheels, language, eyes squinting into the camera, arms holding the sign, not disappearing, not disappearing     
                                                                                                          I ask Dad if he knows where we are. He hears and says are, and looks proud he raised a girl to ask smart questions. I talk at him and he becomes a myna in his black chair: he scoops my last word, a shelled nut to twitter with his tongue. Then he drops it. I say the cockatoos love the new aviary. I tell him it’s going just fine in his pretty shop. Shop. The word’s too hard to sort out, but he likes holding it awhile.  He doesn’t mind being an old man in a small room, but I take it all less well. I want to hand him my day’s news like unwrapped candies. I show him a catalog. I say help me choose a new cage heater. He says heater. I hold out little stories about our new broods, but he takes them like chokecherries, like raw potatoes. Still I hope for something. Like yesterday, when we watched the game, he looked ready to heckle Canseco. His mouth sucked tight on its drawstring and his jaw bobbled. He swallowed and didn’t let out, but just there was a ruckus I might have heard.  The question he can’t answer is when. He expects to leave soon, and the new orders are not to try and stop it. I think about this when his shoulders shrug as he sits down, like a parakeet after preening. I keep looking for a change, for some signal. In the meantime we have our two chairs and the Red Sox. I glance over, anxious that it could happen any day, something as inevitable as tall new feathers on a clipped wing.                                                

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     After benzonatate, a pearl-shaped drug that numbs  the muscles that create the desire to cough after a deep breath. It must not be pierced by the teeth when taken.  I was instructed not to bite into the pearl.  Momma told me I could have anything I wanted if I swallowed it right.  It’ll numb your mouth, don’t let it touch your teeth.  I dropped it down my throat without water. No problem.  I gaped my mouth to prove the pearl disappeared, which was  the one time my empty mouth pleased my mother.  I floated from the blue bathroom in her secretary heels. I had done something no other girl could do.  Step right up, folks!  This little one here  swallows pearls.  So proud, Mother let me keep the orange bottle of pearls under my pillow like treasure,  No girl I knew had jewelry more than hard sugar on elastic bands  or seashells on dental floss with knots that would have to be cut from your neck.  And then one evening the radio featured a love genius who helped unmarried ladies.  She instructed them to throw away their diamonds:  What can a man buy you  if you already have them?  I turned to my mother, who had run out of lipstick that Easter, who could not fathom a trash can glowing hard with carbon. It was funny  to imagine the rich girls sneaking out from their parents’ houses  for night burials, waving to gals on the other side of the street. Oh, the ballet  of nodding hello while holding your hem high enough to keep  diamond necklaces from spilling out.  Were they embarrassed by their white panties blushing out at each other or the soil in their front teeth?  I saw them clearly, even in that dream picture. They crept back into their houses  and under a ruffle of sweet covers, crossing their fingers for husbands with the blindest  hope—like how I turned to my mother so she could watch me take my medicine without water.  It would be easy  to be my mother’s husband, I thought as I slipped pearls down my throat for seven nights—  which was a way of throwing out something precious. And because we felt rich for the first time in our lives,  she let me have that one small talent.  As though she’d never felt such wonder, she threw her hands up and she opened  her red mouth wide with disbelief—which was a kind of currency then. The only cure she could offer. For weeks, the wet paint scent surrounded our white necks.  We undressed in the science labs,  our locker room in a kind of ruin only women can do—  our damp lace on the floor for the longest of days  and the men afraid to go near it it seemed. Rosetta left  the fogged up crucifix necklace  her mother bought her when she began to bleed and so we  knew that it was in there, pure gold under the tile for a year;  it glared out at the razorblade that I offered.  This is no accident. The men wading through the dust  of the red tiles and the brown tiles  and the versions of ourselves that we left for the men to repair. I read healthy people share treasure, blueprints, a dead lizard, an inscribed ring. Names create, shared names unfold a map of the thing created, complete with volcanoes, gold mines, sea beds, puddles, hole-soled shoes, fault lines, a topography of not, for example the word daughter . I name my past  daughter , and my daughter is less secret, more jewelry—The charge of admitting I gave her up is tourism: “I went whale watching. Here are the pictures.” I want to meet her like you did, and you, and the every other person I tell what happened, who says they too didn’t choose, weren’t kept, but are glad now to share life, even though life took, takes, will take without giving its name. What could I tell you of bombs? I don’t know their mechanics— how to sheathe lightning, what it takes. What it takes. Years before I learned to drive— in an ’88 Jeep Wrangler manual, three-on-a-tree shifter seats rusted to the floor, I spent two days in a classroom. No one spoke. We watched fire replay itself over and over. Our bodies not grown—hearts pumping blood, a hundred thousand miles of vessels woven around each bone. On the televisions, towers fell and re-fell every half hour, the mindless collapse as sure as waves pulled to shore. I know nothing of bombs, of dark eyed light jewels over a desert loaded with explosives and silence. What I could tell you—those birds in the yard each winter are juncos. See how they move like ash through the forest, through manicured lawns? 1.  We are in a constant state of falling then the parasol flips: sudden leaves on the statue wind-whistled through Post-it notes  Are we ourselves again, are we—  2. Lying lengthwise Under their skirts—the trees like my college roommate, found you before you learned the secret to not drowning. Walk on water.  3. Dusk like dusk in Gambier made you wistful so I folded the page— you’re not making sense. bought and sold a car only to find it broken across the same statue where I left you last summer.  4. Love isn’t elder vales, the soggy marsh of peat and chivalry just statues where you’ll press your forehead to monument Proust in your back pocket  (Tell me something I don’t know about Chicago)  5. Honestly: to hone thistle whittled to the grit of bone and—  I’m not you, darling. I breathe fault lines and perhaps—  6. We rose to the roof like champagne bubbles gasping for it  it—elusive, it—ephemeral, it— a three hour-requiem  for your shoulder blade I wore my Bridget Bardot dress [you didn’t notice the duct tape]  7. New York didn’t miss me my exodus from taxicabs the taste of elevators  Salut au monde! Paris an absence of office supplies.  8. The train, unspooling: your pen-caps Isadora Duncaned  9.  I can’t write your name so I’ll clasp months and galaxies between right-angled wrists I must confess, I’m making this all up  absolution in lunch lines maybe medieval Ireland— But how am I? I am so many things.  10. You said: I like the idea of wrists, not their bend I heard that in a poem once  [Are we repeating ourselves again, are we—] Tell me something I don’t know about the sea. The clock at 3 a.m. still ticks. Many wend their way through an empty station. One may forget the import of such events, though they are always happening. Someone is eating shepherds pie, and another is anxious. A foal has gone missing. Stuff can be pressed onto us, like an irritated perfume thick enough to bend trees. In a white and blank space, there is a ring of trees. If they sing or do not depends. Pulling an escalator up from its casing. If the earth is like an escalator being pulled up. The escalator of the earth leads straight down. The casing of the earth inhales the escalator. A ring of trees rend a song up in a white space that releases a thick ooze of breath. A foal is born, someone is pulling up husks. One may remember the importance of an event, one may be anxious looking out to sea. A station is crowded and one may be stuck. The clock at 3 a.m starts ticking. Father’s aquarium buzzed on the dining room windowsill, next to his African violets.  He measured the fish-food with teaspoons and kept a pH strip stuck to the filter and Windexed the glass with old undershirts.  On Saturdays, he sometimes let us pick a new fish at the fish-store; my favorite was plecostomus and Sister’s was neon tetra. When one aquarium filled, he started a second.  After Sister and I left the house, I used to telephone on Sundays and he would read me the water temperature.  And then, one day, a man followed Sister home from the train station and cut her hair with a knife.  After that, Father stopped going to the fish-store.  He let the fish die and did not replace them.  He let the pregnant guppies give birth in the big tank, and all their babies got eaten. Clumsily and tenderly at first, like preschool attempts at origami; folding and unfolding sections to see where the corners go, where the ugly parts can hide and where all the pieces best fit.  Then taking our awkward swan-bird-ball-folded-paper-thing home shyly and proudly, placing it on a mantle so everyone who comes can see. “Look! I made something! I am not quite sure what it is, but look! I made something.”  But over time fearfully and rarely, as fingers grow more adept at taking things apart than putting them together, more careful knowing that paper folded along the wrong lines too many times tears easily and neatly.  And things stop making it to the wall.  Until one day, when dusting out the attic, a swan-bird-ball-folded-paper-thing is found wedged under an old trunk, with what must once have been a wing bent over what could once have been a head and thinking, “Wow, I used to make things,” but then, that was a long time ago. Holly Solomon, soon to be mother from Mesa, Arizona, woman of recent infamy: I read the blog they wrote about you on Gawker. The title mostly says it all: Woman Blames Husband  for Obama’s Re-Election, Runs Him Over with Jeep . It’s amusing the way they feature your car in the title. One commenter wants to punch you in the face. Yet another asks in earnest,  “Am I alone in feeling as if another civil war is brewing in this country?” Holly, for you, I can’t help but wonder the same. Your mug shot discloses a divided face: one eye,  hooded and angry. The other implores. In another picture I find, you look young and bright in your framed glasses, arm-in-arm with your husband, Daniel, perhaps at a family dinner.  Holly Solomon. Your name is gorgeous for its assonance, delightfully poetic. All those round, resounding O’s. Holly: I wonder if, years ago, late after a night with Daniel, you began  testing his last name. Did your heart skip at the prospect? That gorgeous sound you would inherit. I like to imagine you curled in bed, warm on a frigid desert evening. Perhaps  on your regrettable night, as you circled Daniel in your notorious Jeep, staged beneath white halogen lights, this memory began working its way up through your heart, its soft darkness  a bud unfurling in your throat. Perhaps, after hitting him, you spilled out of the car like upturned water. None of the accounts tell, Holly. Between you and me, I’m not sure anyone else cared to ask. I spy on my sick mother through the wall heater, crouched at the rusted frame until the grates line my forehead, until I grow cauliflower knees from the living room carpet.  Parts of sentences glide through the metal. Today, she tells my father that I took the five cocoons (the ones she cradled in the peach jar for weeks) and cut them each in half.  I want to tell her I hate the piano lessons, how my hands crabwalk and stutter across the black and white, how silences between songs are cracks in a sidewalk, traps for a wheel. There was a boy, a bathroom. I don’t want to talk about that.  I want to talk about the girls I kissed in Texas. The cuter one was fat, Christian, an astrophysicist,  the other one had a cross burned into her hand. I want to talk about the boy  (fat, too, but not as cute) who said that if I was going to run my fingers under the water fountain  until I was ready to stick them in an electrical socket, I should at least kiss him first.  I don’t want to think about three Marches ago, dumb and drunk on gasoline beer, the four mouths  that congealed like lard to mine, the way I picture myself gasping, a fish in crude oil, the way I didn’t pull away.  What I want now is a boyfriend with a mouth like a black hole. Kissing you feels like leaves. Fall is near. I’m not sure what gust sent you here, your mouth like something buttoned and unbuttoned with care. You hang over the field rolled flat as dough, straw soft, hungry for hay. Round noon the crows fly away. See them tunneling over the grass- bent belly dance in the sun glow. (You can’t coax back a crow.) Kissing you feels like a street-dance. Remember the day I carried you off your post and down a steep hill yawning green? I went swimming in the river while you dipped your hay feet, thinking all the thoughts that keep you up nights in the corn rows, black eyes bolted open.  My favorite nights were the ones I kissed your hands where they swung in the starched air. You were a maestro conducting the orchestra of everything. In the distance clouds and bullfrogs learned to spell their names. People clapped their hands in farmhouses and the crows flew home. I once saw someone break  open like a question—  a girl with light under her skin, her children gathered like rivers  behind a dam  in a house with no windows. I remember only the girl’s wedding,  the comet tail of her gown  held in the children’s hands like so much light,  her potential flung to a universe unfolding so that all anyone could see  was the glowing map of her veins. In my family, women shred men like ginger. Rub until all that is left is a gush so pungent it could choke you better than any man. Mom learned how at just fourteen.  Now she knows how to work the old skin from a root, how to pull it across the plate like it’s a carpet, but I don’t get it yet.  Mom says ,  drag any man across this sharp plate . She grabs the ginger from me, pins it to the grater, gnaws it down like it’s a man’s wandering hand. She says this is better than shooting him.  Mom is muscled, chiseled, and I glimpse her broad back, jerking elbow. Nothing like a black woman’s night sweat skin that men can’t resist touching, but men only really love her cooking. They say she always puts her foot in it.  If only they knew, if only they knew what goes into everything she cooks. Every man’s fist to her fourteen-year-old jaw. My mom’s neighbor numbing her thighs. His sensitive fingernails. Every man’s claw. His hand on hips, his crooked kiss down chest. Every man’s thrust. His Get me some damn food, girl . His dirty carpet.  And he says, You’ll never be strong enough to fight back . Over the ginger, we pretend. I can see Mom squirm and drag and drag her rapist across the plate like he’s just torn ginger. She is all night-smoothed skin. All Detroit twitch. All power hips. All stronger than they are. In my father’s retelling of the talk, a stork wanders a beach  searching for an oyster. He wants its pearl. And after he takes it,  after the oyster has finished resisting, he cannot put it back.  I’m not thinking of sex. I’m thinking of the parable  of the merchant who seeks the kingdom of heaven and finds  it is a pearl of great price. Or the dream where my cousin  comes back from the beach where he killed himself  wet and smelling of salt. I return to this cove where the sand  forgets its pattern to find the soul, pale and baroque,  but I don’t—Oysters swarm my feet with their open, vacant mouths. In my father’s retelling of the talk, a stork wanders a beach  searching for an oyster. He wants its pearl. And after he takes it,  after the oyster has finished resisting, he cannot put it back.  I’m not thinking of sex. I’m thinking of the parable  of the merchant who seeks the kingdom of heaven and finds  it is a pearl of great price. Or the dream where my cousin  comes back from the beach where he killed himself  wet and smelling of salt. I return to this cove where the sand  forgets its pattern to find the soul, pale and baroque,  but I don’t—Oysters swarm my feet with their open, vacant mouths.                                                                                                           They are like those crazy women  who tore Orpheus  when he refused to sing,  these men grinding  in the strobe & black lights  of Pegasus. All shadow & sound.  “I’m just here for the music,”  I tell the man who asks me  to the floor. But I have held  a boy on my back before.  Curtis & I used to leap  barefoot into the creek; dance  among maggots & piss,  beer bottles & tadpoles  slippery as sperm;  we used to pull off our shirts,  & slap music into our skin.  He wouldn’t know me now  at the edge of these lovers’ gyre,  glitter & steam, fire,  bodies blurred sexless  by the music’s spinning light.  A young man slips his thumb  into the mouth of an old one,  & I am not that far away.  The whole scene raw & delicate  as Curtis’s foot gashed  on a sunken bottle shard.  They press hip to hip,  each breathless as a boy  carrying a friend on his back.  The foot swelling green  as the sewage in that creek.  We never went back.  But I remember his weight  better than I remember  my first kiss.  These men know something  I used to know.  How could I not find them  beautiful, the way they dive & spill  into each other,  the way the dance floor  takes them,  wet & holy in its mouth.  from Muscular Music (Tia Chuca Press, 1999).         Here is a joke: a zucchini walks into a bar, leans and calls, bartender, a shot of whiskey and a glass of Chardonnay —and the bartender shivers and says he is needed by the harbor, a lemon peel clenched between his teeth. Ask for Rueda, Bacardi torched cherry,  Galicia by the bottle, but he says he does not gamble. The spades are after him the way the Russian mafia drop by for tea. This could be a good joke, if it were told in an Armenian marketplace where children turn to birds. I say I do not like to gamble and I do not know wines, each exotic like the girls you cannot keep — Loire, Reuilly, Chablis . When he nods, he holds the fluted neck and pours. I’m in Utah, which keeps surprising me. Both Salt Lake City and me, here in it.  Surprise: they asked me to read at BYU, but said swearing or saying “Jesus Christ” or “God” wasn’t okay.  Or being gay.  Okay.  The gay kiss-in in Temple Square.  Surprise:  we still do that. Surprised each day by mountains taller than clouds, than flight paths, freshly white each morning.  Surprised by all the white people, any Ayran crowd making me look around, nervous. Surprise: I don’t like being white when everyone is, and you can’t always get coffee with your pie. I went to rent a car downtown, surprised the bus never came, surprised it took an hour and a half to walk halfway.  Surprised by the man who rented me my car:  Ken Chukwuba, who feigned interest in me.  “Why are you here?”  I’m a visiting professor. “That’s good.  Where from?” Boston. He didn’t look up, did paperwork. “That’s good.  What do you teach?” Poetry. “That’s good.”  Do you read poetry? “No.” Then why did you say “that’s good”? You don’t care. Then Ken Chukwuba started laughing, said if I wrote him a poem I could keep the car an extra day.  Ken Chukwuba, I asked how to say your name so I’d know where the stress would fall.  I teach people how to write in lines of iambic pentameter, like what Shakespeare wrote, but better.  Because they write them in Salt Lake City, in Utah, where the LDS stores grain against the rapture in white silos, file all our families’ trees in mountain caves. Because the inversion sometimes rises, clears for Wasatch, Oquirrh, Timpanogos, Wolf, and Ken Chukwuba and I are here. I think it’s a poem.  I think I wrote it down. Andrea  calls.  We talk for an hour and then she says she thinks  she wrote a poem. I think it has a title. She takes  the phone downstairs—footsteps, shifting handset.  She finds  the book— I hope I can read my writing —and then reads  —her voice gentle, low, an excellent thing in a woman—  you don’t have to ask about the odds, they’re  stacked against you like cordwood, like—oh, wait.  No.  I’m sorry.  This isn’t it.  I thought it was a poem but it’s not. Wearing Wellington boots, we followed the retriever along the perimeter of the property.  Just that morning a man and his son had brought in firewood from the fallen tree.  Through barberry: a small clearing in the woods, hollow like the inside of a cello.  I walked around a tree stump, like Mustardseed. After sunset, we looked through a square window  into the stark cabin where she writes. Within a bubble in the antique glass, the sky swirled—  reflected like a sequin, like summer even, though it was New Years Day, and the world  was dusky, and the dog, the house, the woods, the books— they weren’t even ours. Poetry held me awake till five the night before my mother’s brain surgery: rattling the drainpipes  of our hotel near the hospital, knocking on the windows. Succubus. I let her in. She pressed  into my hands my notebook. I’d give in to her, write a stanza, then dim the lamps; she’d coax  them back on. We grappled for hours to whimpers next door. “Don’t wake her,” I whispered. “Don’t wake my mother.”  She laughed at my carefulness, rubbed my cramped hands. An hour later, I had a poem lying in my lap. Soon  my mother’s skull would be open. Poetry pulled her brain-damp fingers from mine. I turned off the lamp and she climbed  out the window for another rendez-vous. Two hours till the surgery: I woke haggard. The afterimage etched into my eyes:  was it from the lamp, or her bright skin? I snapped at the surgeon. Some cried in the waiting room;  my hands itched to revise. I forgot the drill buzzing at my mother’s temples. Crumpled in my suitcase was a poem. Janet read a story in my kitchen, little whispets of chalk stuck in her teeth. I made aspic in the sink, listened to her speak. Janet watched her lover starside my palm. At a party we danced together, sexless. She speaks to me of bay leaves, her mother’s silver of never wanting children. Janet was a virgin until she wasn’t. After that there was no name for her. 1  One is asked to remember but one cannot remember.  Remember Wounded Knee, they say.  One can look into the backyard a century later and see Late December snow.  Among the clumps of snow, a few blades of grass.  To remember, you must recall yourself Sleeping in the snow.  Remember yourself waking in the cold, under wool blankets Frosted with breath.  Remember rising to piss, standing in the night, The steaming puddle.  Think, the puddles of blood would have steamed Like this.  Reading your daughter a story, put your hand to the plaster. Feel the cold pressing against the wall.  They’d have had only hides. Look at the empty trees and recall in the photographs the bare bones Of the teepees.  Recall the families sleeping on the street, New Year’s Eve, New York, Bundled in cheap bags on the subway grates, steaming As if the world bled beneath them.  As if they were bandages pressed to the hemorrhage.  As if they survived on that wound.  2  Outside, in the tenacious snow, Grass blades spear upward like the fescue blooms, still-shot explosions Between the bodies of women.  South Dakota. The soldiers stand with their bayonets among the dusted dead.  The puddles cannot find the drain and so freeze. Bits of garbage in their hair.  I turn on the kitchen tap, the water runs cold.  My wife, after baking, leaves the oven door open As my mother did mornings I dressed for school.  See me standing in the cold waiting for the bus. I am going to learn the history of America.  The books will be largely black and white, the grays In between The color of late December bunchgrass.  Once the grasses on the plains grew higher than the horses Men spurred to cross.  Here, we mow the grass close to the soil, the black crickets Skittering before the spinning blades.  We go to the fence to cut back the bird-dispersed pokeweed. The shears stained berry red.  3  Willows are bent for the sweat lodge. Willows like crooked talking sticks choking from the powdered rain.  Sunday church bells and the sun climbs, Gets tangled in the netting of the naked oak bristling in the cold Leather sheath of itself.  Every photograph suggests the day was overcast With the shades of gray Each teacher and politician will assure us exist.  There are, too, white men born of those shouldered bayonets In dirty coats Carrying bags of discarded beer cans to the grocery stores.  There is a white man in the uniform of night Shooting a cashier at the Gas n’ Go.  To this day on the Warm Springs Reservation they go to the mountain, Seekseekqua, Five glacial blankets and a beaded shawl of snowmelt lakes.  I’ve picked those huckleberries, jarred them as they have, infused them In vodka, folded them in dough And baked them, and left the oven door ajar.  Once I did a sweat lodge on the reservation.  You may use, I suppose, any number of stones to heat.  You might cut any thin wood to bend your poles, and willows Will grow back out of the snow, Go on stomping the ghost dance forever.  4  Deep calls unto deep At the noise of your gathering puddle.  Bloody waves fall over us for seven generations or forever.  Walk over the snow to the trashcan Through the bayonets.  Tools that dug the trenches in which the sewage pipes are laid Are not unlike those that made ground for the dead.  Digging, digging.  Restless wanderers, we have found the banks, mounted on the half-starved Horses of our debt.  The generals are well fed on our puddles of frozen fists, Cramped fingers holding that pose forever.  We forget so easily. By summer, no one remembers the first snap on the grass, Cold feathers on the glass.  By summer the sky looks promising.  By summer the trees cover themselves with leaves and hide The tawdry nests.  The cardinal’s nest is built of whatever is dead, and it is A brittle nest wherein they sleep  Uneasily.  5  They could not find the ravine and so froze.  See the tanagers perched in the cold waiting. They are going to learn the history of America.  If there is a silver lining in the gray cloud, men will mine it And leave tailings over the whole of the Dakotas.  Once I did a sweat lodge in the Oregon forest beneath Seekseekqua.  I had to look up that name as our mountains are frequently named For presidents.  Where I was born Washington sent two generals up the Susquehanna To burn villages and pumpkin fields.  Where I would stand by the river, a teen, smoking Soldiers drove cattle And wrote in their journals of how fine the land would be for cultivation.  Water everywhere. Timber everywhere. A blind woman they found stirring the sooty dirt with her finger.  A dog hung on a wampum post.  A white child in a field.  The ground, eventually, like us, like the women on Wounded Knee Creek, The women lying in the snow, Must get tired of crying out with blood.  Cries puddle and freeze.  And each year the snow tamps it down further into the earth From which the willows rise Hysterical in the wind.  6  Reading the story of Wounded Knee, put your hand to the plaster. Feel the cold pressing against the hide.  If you have something other than your body to bury, Other than choice…  Wounded Knee Creek runs cold.  The mind’s photographs, willow-thin and brittle.  In the sweat lodge, the stones grow so hot you can see straight Into their hearts.  Pour water over them and they crack but do not bleed. Only the wound survives. Numbers never tell you of their animal mysteries. They materialize like deer abreast the underpass and vanish scarcely glimpsed, tuft and chrome.  Instinctively you count them—two doe and a fawn, a buck in the distance—as if they’d eat straight from your palms.  Even with the weasel, you yearn to stroke his rodent belly, slick back those rounded ear flaps. Whiskers gone in stretches of seconds. The slip of pheasants from tall grasses, wings tipped to air.  You’re behind in mortgage payments and slip on the bills the postman shoves through your slot like so many noisy birds. Maybe you’ve been dressed and served. three, zhūn, difficulty at the beginning  Invoke a spirit I am sure of this.  Rubbing over a stomach with blood from the thumb  of our butcher’s newborn will create balance in tautness: a sewing needle disguised in the pork mince could become a leech black and wriggling, a comma.  On the path from the hospital bamboo shoots surviving three frosts seemed to be the only medicine I could think of;  the black earth bald and grainless, new to heat, and waiting to break, opening here opening there opening here once more.  #  I bend down to watch a clasp of yarrow flowers sprout,  white petals clumping together like overcooked spittles of rice,  thinking that it was too late to do anything now: nothing that could be teased out into a ritual.  Instead, descending like a curse, the rainclouds  burst over this side of the valley, some artifact from the purple sky swelling; stretched the square of our insect net fits just enough over the bed.  On the night, that was the first night of thunder, it seemed the whole mountain shook, breaking, reforming.  And the rain was seeping through the cedars like a glue that you may find if you, expecting blood, swatted a mosquito with the flesh of your palm.  So the daughter was both born and not born.         forty-four, gòu, coming to meet  In the beginning the first line drawn is all that could be lost. I break into the tree with its masculine and its feminine. I break into the chest to find each ring the same stencil of a circle. Nothing in that draw . The wood peels back to reveal a heart, carved in with the kitchen knife. Murder can be so sweet.  I took something deep and wet from your wounds. In the trenches I slipped my arms inside yours until we fit together. That motion was a code, was the second, were coordinates.  Temptations often present themselves in thirds. We all know falling so love should be no different.  I find the lake dead, and the wake of our boat drunkenly sways from shore to shore. Inside a tree I seek shelter, rounding up every question. Did I turn off the gas, did I lock my doors? Fourth includes everything just lying under heaven, winds reaching the minarets, the spires, the short end of a blunt cross on my skin.  Hidden lines: a melon covered with willow leaves left lopsided on our table like a raft between us. Eat, before it spoils —I add hastily aware of not wanting to rush you. Know this, the fifth is inside us all waiting, pale and consumptive. So consume it .  On the sixth day I dreamt the pier had been wiped away. When a man has withdrawn from the world, draw out everything that is missing. In the end a mother is always right: she knows of marriage, the way to open an envelope without tearing its bill inside, shapes the clouds can mean most of all when they obscure your face in the distance. the animals are not suspicious. The deer twice beguiled by a fox to enter the lion’s den can speak but does not at death say  I was suspicious.  Hiking to Prophet’s Rock we join a company of gnats, disciples, small carousels at your neck, my back.  When we reach the den of snakes where The Prophet promised victory to his men, where the records say he watched them fall despite his chanting from behind, we are suspicious of the wall claiming that the dead were never counted.  What beguiled us? It’s only here we find the steep path down, not back. The gnats unlike disciples cannot speak. They find our sweat. They think the hand that breaks their cursed procession is not my hand.  I find you swimming, cheeks flushed like summer squash. Your father’s screams echo against the riverbed as he drags you by your earlobe from the sweet lick of Indiana freshwater. I wish it were Thursday night again, Molly piercing through your flesh with a needle from her grandmother’s sewing kit, with a diamond she stole from her aunt. Now your ear bleeds, sore and crusty, diamond popped from its socket like an arrowhead. Your father ripens, flesh maddened, a husk, the blood, war paint, water clouding like dusk. for Frida Kahlo  Lady, keep the tequila by your lamp for when you need a knife. Dip the brush in azul for feathers so a bird will fly above your bed & you can wash away  the memory of his sweat, the taste of hothouse flower women. Your whiteness is twin: one side a mirror— see what you are , the other a window, I have already  changed the sky . Girls are stripping the petals, dusting their tiny mouths with sugar & smashed pecans. When you spin in your  white dress, greet the crowd with your stained mouth. A dove and an elephant , they murmur, but you’re rewriting the song  into a jungle. Bring out the longest rope & tie it to him—say, I will look at you until the blood runs out . This is when  the shadows start & you will walk him back to the banquet, knowing that what is colorless is not innocent, nor safe. Years ago, we were a waif’s companion, standing guard on dilapidated porches. Always outdone by injury, speaking through tresses. But it was good to be part of something dangerous. Free in an uproar of white linen. Leather, whalebone, reed—every prison, temporary.  We didn’t ask for Lara Croft, for Hasbro. The celluloid ascent of those infernal lips. To be rendered brick and bulbous at right angles. Like she swallowed the world’s largest Victoria Cross— only the sharp points remained, remaking her thorax, inside out.  Much later, we shook free on the border of Libya. Hunching quiet. At last permitted our patience. Pressing all the strange world’s children and their suffering, closer. Madingo, Muhajir, Machinga. Sindhi, Baloch, Mendes Sherbros. We knew then, what would happen. What could, and could not, be taken.         We died in the wagon. We had been sick since Wyoming, since the skin of things had begun to pock with sagebrush and knobs of rock, like the wrecked face of that bare- knuckle man back in Cincinnati.  We said our little prayers. In our fever the angels came. They had no teeth. Tongues thick as snakes, sky-wide mouths, lips cracked as ours— in this dry place, we decided, even the seraphim must thirst.  We ate the meat they gave us and were hungry. We drank the milk and were thirsty. We pissed where we lay and did not understand. Yet we asked no questions. We knew the only answer was farther West.  And here is what they did: Above a dry valley, up under a sandstone ledge, they shoveled us in. If it weren’t for the blood, our snapped and lolling bones, dust the wagon left settling on our lips, we might have had the look of lovers.  Once, we were given an orange. This was early, just across the Missouri, the grass thick, green willows weeping along the creeks. We would still walk then, a minute here or there, hand on a horse’s muscled rump. And at the very hour of our death, again we tasted it, how we ate it peel and all.                                                                                                          The common field is the seat of barbarism;  the separate farm, the door to civilization. -Congressional Debate on the American Indian, 1859 My surname means dweller in the common field , Irish but true:  the family farm growing little but eleven children in a single room:  who fed them how I don’t know:  that clapboard box still standing outside my grandfather’s house he built himself:  cheap paneling, trowel from the Masons:  secrets he’d never tell us: gold plating that wasn’t even gold: Texas inside and out:  the one state proud enough to sing itself possessive: the Rio Grande dividing past and here:  here where we were lucky, could buy land and seeds, barbed wire to hem a horse named Velvet, so shy or nonexistent I never saw her:  who would claim a horse they didn’t have:  a family whose name (a man later tells me) equates with “nigger,” “low-life” back in Ireland, though no one uses it to mean that here:  just hard to spell, like league, with a T: everyone stumbling, asking me to repeat, wanting it to end maybe agua , something drinkable:  first-world problems:  land that was ours in poverty and wealth, sickness and no vows broken:  not like the Indians (a fraction on our other side):  corn silking half-baked sky in territories too far off the rails for anyone to buy what someone said they had to grow: the labor is not, admittedly, always valuable, and yet it redeems the Indian, who laboring learns to labor for himself: who was not trusted with money because he’d waste it like the rain and sun will waste the snow: nothing anyone ever said of us, or not in public notes or policy (my drunken uncles drunk losing jobs but never the word civilized ): to break down prejudices of the untamed savage is a work of no ordinary labor: labor laboring to make itself into something more than duty, more than hammer on two-by-four: destiny bright and shape- shifting as the lava lamp by the TV, oil and wax rising like some holy ascension, my grandfather in the patched recliner watching Westerns:  true we have taken his land, or the land on which he roamed, but he did nothing to improve it : someone in my family came here first—after the first someone came from Ireland to Tennessee to Texas, built a one-room house, turned up the dry red dirt the dog was named for—Red because he rolled around our God-given land: it may be said  the very foundation of civilization commences with the plow. How many times can you walk back to that old airfield?  No more coming or going, just some rabbit holes, a tower up to its ankles in grass, a wind sock limp in wind.  If you stay a long time, maybe an owl will do something average in the darkening sky, and the train, whether coal or steam, will seem a steady, appropriate sound. In the day tall fields buzz with the dust of insects flying stalk to stalk, speaking tongueless tongues.  Grass and root get the last win. Runway lights that once drew home tired eyes are dark as rock come night. You might be tempted to swear that this is a place for being found but details are never the same: now a family of foxes is curled into commas in the hull of a Cessna, the tower is crumpled into blocks.  Maybe there never was a train. All an empty place wants is you to witness its emptiness.  What it means to say if only and mean it. Instead of burying the shoebox, we take off our shirts and kiss the ground. Again, the moths fly out, the gross wonder. We’re still young. Shaped by summer and its lesions. We toe the line between field and sun until it’s light in our mouths.  ∞  I’ve picked up carving linnets in the attic of an abandoned house to hold onto something flightless. To be uncrushing. Outside, the wind curls talons from the ice near what used to be a kitchen window. If you close your eyes you can smell the river from here.  ∞  I remember us buying peppermints from the gas station outside Florence on our way to Chernobyl. Your tongue a radioactive stripe until we drove to the ocean where there was nothing left.  ∞  Imagine this is still the late nineties. The man scratched in rags on the bench behind the church drinking the ship right out of the bottle. On his back he finally hears the angels’ light breathing. They say nothing, which is: I’ve been waiting for you my whole life. The tongue, which is the stethoscope of love, is searching for a pulse among the bottles.  It’s nestled in the mouth of the young boy who served me rum. Drunkenness is everywhere. The trees have let their branches out like limbs, the whores. They stumble in the wind.  My kiss has slipped off like a dress. It keeps on unpeeling itself, a gift. I tell the boy his body is a language and I want to learn it. An addict  for his dialect, I mourn it when it slithers back into the bar to fill its gut with more black beer. My tongue back in my mouth like some small bird, love running from me like a feral deer. If the bottle rests to my left, I am beginning. If the bottle lies on the floor, shattered, I am still  just beginning. When I arrive at night I won’t see the lake until morning. If I arrive  at the house in the dark, all day I’ve been thinking how could I change into someone else. Metamorphosis  is the innards of my bag strewn across the table: paperclips, bottle caps, receipts and receipts.  If I buy American, a flashlight lies within reach when I enter the switched-off house—but I don’t  buy American; there is no flashlight, no gas, no way to steep tea before I fall into bed. I sleep  until morning warms the lake, dip a toe in, swim, shower. In the fogged mirror, if I comb my hair  to the other side everyone thinks I have changed. This lake is big enough to hold several small islands,  each with its own lake. If I spend nights here clasping my hands, stirring miso, scrubbing mold,  it’s because I live to watch these things delicately merge, scatter, and reassemble. I walk with my sister beneath pines standing like veterans in salute,  as if to congratulate her on the bundle she carries the size of a grapefruit.  Now the sheen of birch bark after a mizzle of rain demands to be seen;  the knotted faces of trolls begin to ache from trunks. In five months  even the musk of moist honeysuckle and a fluster of pigeons in the canopy  will take on new meaning, and the body of this child shall be a living psalm. To abide the timetable of rails, of wood ties    Believed hard for birds no longer in the field nor nestling the tree    Believe hard in a gun  Do you take her, I do…    I froze above the river once & winter lapsed I. Statement  I was about to say limbs but no, there’s another question of what happened that night, some storm caught in a net, black-thick-push through woven holes. There are still limbs that push too, that stretch and reach, some pale and forgotten. Some weak and heavy, holding other limbs. Behind the lightning, there are eyes. His eyes, she said, and cracked another thunder-limb. No one wants to be seen by it, and the reaching out for no one like caught-rain, supposed to wash away, held by gasps, rain trying to fall, choosing to plunge, but someone chose to stop it. I could have said when, not why. Or, white. His eyes drowned in white rain. It was whiskey-white, taught to weep.   II. What the Devil Looks Like  Cheek bones like fists behind a taut curtain.  Like gambling with eternity, like sweat.  An abbreviation.  Hospital ICU.  Far too much water there and all around.  Limits, a bottom, seeing the bottom, touching it.  An act of God. No, it wasn’t.  Anti-social. No, I’m not.  Laughing, laughing, laughing, laughing, staring.  Wide wild white smile, fire eyes, fire lipstick.  A not-reflection.  150 sleeping pills.  Sirens. The sirens.  Eyes won’t blink, man reaching for nothing.  Like chains.  Like child-safety locks, like running out of time.  Diagonal-cut cinder blocks and lies.  Apartment key-scheme hidden in a bush.  Nostrils that squeeze shut, erupt black-open, the inhale-exhale of a stolen hallelujah.  Like could-be-dead.   III. Signs & Symptoms  You will shiver. You will be cold in warm temperatures. But you will sweat at night. Your breathing will be shallow. Your throat will creak at each exhale. You will picture it each time you close your eyes. You will choose not to sleep. You will stutter, except when crying out. Your unblinking eyes will search back and forth, much like his when you found him. You will hold your hands together so tightly as if you will lose one if you let go. You will forget to eat. You will curse each person who compliments how skinny you’ve become. You will drink. You will turn on every light and TV in the house because you’re afraid of the dark, afraid of being alone. You will drink alone. You will not be able to write. Your body will tense and shake each time you hear sirens. You will dream of death, disasters, losing your way, hiding from beings that can only represent evil. During thunderstorms, you will cover your ears and squint like a child. Body sucked dry, salted self-pity, pageless fists.   IV. Held    V. Botrytis Cinerea  Do you know the voice? It will be easier if you open your mouth,  now breathe in through your nose. Do you have your poems?  The noble rot has spread to the next sentence, paired  tonight with foie gras like whisper-tinted orange pith.  Late harvest fragility, asking something of the author.  Viscous, yet acidic, yet killing you. Tongue-weight  is no excuse. Breathe in through your nose. Shriveled grape,  ask it. Does it still hurt? Sweetness  and sharp drips that crust. Oh, sweet rot, sugar gray fuzz, what should I do?  Scribbles are not palatable flights of stairs, cartoon-flavored impressions. Use your voice.  All menisci are watery. We had it pretty good in those poems, sure. It will get easier. When my brother pulled me out, I wasn’t cold. My breath was blued  by the light, seeped through boughs and singed wings. My calves, blued  from the sleeted wind. And blued, my tongue withdrew deep, a shank  meant for the animal separate of my body. My throat, in the blue  of dusk, cut the river. But emerged a black-bellied fish, stilled in salt. How slowly the world turns on my lips— for now, state your scarlet ideal.  Pride told me it was my sister: the purple conditions of her mouth imperil to the biggest red, my autobiography in the key of cherry bomb.  In fact you are one moment of love me, my country & a hundred fathoms of neutral wonder—  the body must start somewhere. No history agrees on how fingers should be the most beautiful,  still I fingerspell you constantly: crescent moon, bull horn, gun. Tonight, the storm makes a de Kooning of the sky. Clouds the color of your mother’s necklace— let’s call it ferocious sensuality — the one we lost between Amarillo and August. Over and over. Silently. The clasp breaking.                                 The way an & never would. So what if  we grieve             for what chokes us. Let’s coax another year, one more frontier, one more fuck this drowning —              Or we could stop right here, between the sky and the road-dead deer. Here:      I’ll be the desert. You be the plains. Let’s lie down with all that nothing between us. The wind will wear our promises down to bone beads small enough to string— or swallow. I.  My previous experience accompanying my constant companion had not adequately prepared me for the depraved situation upon which Sherlock Holmes had stumbled. It was the summer of ’95, and we had few cases at that moment; some rather embarrassing business with the French ambassador had just been straightened out, but the situation had so overtaken Holmes’ time that he had turned away a surfeit of clients just before his culprit more or less placed himself in my dear friend’s exacting hands. We celebrated. We slept. The sun set. Then the girl in white at the window, then at the door, then pleading, bent-kneed, at my friend’s unworthy feet. I stood with my notebook: small white shoes, buttoned at the ankle . She could not, or would not, open her pink mouth. This is what I am prepared to tell you: a fortnight found us bedded down in a Berkshire stable. A duke’s fists full of needles. The cellar below our feet filled with the dying girls sunk down in their skirts. I could not know. I thought neither of us could. Each horse a renowned runner. Her mouth had bled for weeks.  II.  My previous experience accompanying my constant companion had not adequately prepared me for the depraved situation upon which Sherlock Holmes had stumbled. Much later, when the two of us were in our cups, he would blame the entirety of the mess on my propensity to watch the pretty parasoled girls out the window. You see, Doctor, but you do not observe , he said, bowing wretchedly away at his violin. It was the summer of ’95, and we had few cases at that moment; some rather embarrassing business with the French ambassador and his rosebush of a daughter had just been straightened out, but the situation had so overtaken Holmes’ time that he had turned away a surfeit of clients just before his culprit more or less placed himself in my dear friend’s exacting hands. Then? A fortnight of death; another of silence. Indeed, a single day of Holmes taking that most abhorrent cure—the black moods in which he cursed every petty aristocrat by exact indiscretion before he lapsed into a twitching silence punctuated only by his gnawing at his raw lower lip—that is to say, I passed long hours at my club. I became a rather dab hand at euchre. I saw her still: the beautiful girl in the street, her dusty skirts, the shock of leather in her mouth.  III.  I’ll say that I developed a fair amount of skill propping bruised men against myself, but my God, your wasted mouth. Later, when the two of us were in our cups, you would blame the entirety of the mess on my propensity to stare at you across the room. You see, Doctor, but you do not observe , you said, sliding the needle behind a shaking hand. It was the summer of ’95, and we had few cases after that rather embarrassing business between the French ambassador and his filly of a daughter—you naturally had straightened the situation out before I came home from the track. The girls there like spit and grease. Send me on an errand to the horses again and I could conceivably mouth the pistol myself. Your exacting hands. Then? A fortnight of silence. Indeed, a single day of your black moods, the women sussed out down to boot size, to brain, your evident hatred, the twitching silence, the hawker’s punctuation, you gnawing and gnawing at your raw lower lip—that is to say, I passed long hours at my club. I became a rather dab hand at the cold. And then that beautiful girl in the street, like some blessedly silent memory—all I had now three years past—her dusty fingers, the shock of love in her mouth. I am a kind man. You cannot be the last thing in this world for me. Maybe I learned it in the backyard collecting sticks, building huts of salvaged cardboard, mud. Maybe it was the way dirt nestled black under my fingernails, only to be wrestled out in bathwater; maybe it was how I refused the bath. Or how I’d cut my knees scaling the low, rough branches of our neighbor’s pine; or tangle my hair into knots rummaging the scrap yard, baiting crawdads, skipping rocks in the drainage ditch. Maybe it was helping dad change oil in the Ford, or building campfires or digging up earthworms or the long afternoons spent scouting abandoned mines deep in the backcountry. Maybe, though, it was the way their eyes brightened when my mother, clouded in rum, shook the dance floor/pool hall/parking lot. How the right blues song would launch her hips, and they’d sit layered in smoke and Jack Daniels, spellbound, taking in the show. Or maybe it was how we’d pass romance novels in the lunchroom, sharing particulars of genitals and musk. Or how we practiced our new art on Coke bottles or bananas, straining for the stretch. Maybe it was the way we forced our eyes to unscramble porn, or the sweetness we discovered in the meat of each other’s breasts deep in our mouths. Maybe it was the tequila, the salt licked off a neck. Or the way the first boy in Juarez slid under my skirt in a back room. The way the point guard unbuttoned my shirt in the stairwell after practice. Or how the kid with the teardrop tattoo beneath his left eye gripped my hips, how he never uttered a word. Under the white tarp of this Watertown boat, I tell you your joke: Goes Car. In it sit Dagestani. Chechen. Ingush. Question, who is driving? Do you know where you’ll go when you die? The police. But your ear, sweet, is leaking. Blood angles your face, brother. I heal death with my tongue, lick your English and kiss it clean. Brother now , I whisper, to Shut the fuck up . Moment of silence, and I listen for ticking. For the sounds of Boston angel trumpets. Wrestling coach. Police. The sound of you in a singlet slamming boys smack on mats. Crushing brothers. Your arm hooks over the edge: my boy, released. Ten minutes from a two-week vacation,  a van flips on an exit ramp.  In a small town,  the van is bigger. On the highway,  it’s just a van, heading toward a hotel.  This is global positioning: a man is ejected and the van  lands on top of him.  In a small town, a priest  knows the man’s name, but Death does not  concern itself with formalities.  It also does not take the man whole: only his legs and anything else  it can grab below the waist.  At a Chinese buffet,  Death is stuffing her cheeks  with crab rangoons, while a family stands behind her with empty plates.  Nobody stuck  to the vinyl booth finds “You will suffer”  inside their cookie, but it’s implied  in the parking lot.  A child breaks free from her mother’s arms and runs head-first  into traffic.  In the city, there are always  detours.  But in a small town, there’s one  name for each baby born, and eventually it’s on the lips of everyone in the street. I didn’t go to the parade because I do not particularly believe  in the power of numbers. My friends have all left me anyways  and the rain is  up against the sky where I like it. If we continue with what we should,  we all stand to lose getting naked and swimming in lakes.  Everyone will be doing it then. They will name it something paradoxical  like natural hibernianism. People will forget what the word hibernian means,  because they will be too preoccupied with all the parading of lakes  with flags and their naked bodies. And no one will think to go out at night  or of moonlight through what is left of the shuttering aspens. There’s a maw in my throat. I can’t love anything beyond the meadow. I plant teeth there, not for quarters, I want  a top-down popping red car that jets me through eye-hurt sun streets. In the meadow, moonlight picks its teeth on scraggly trees,  bats dish dash like nervous hands. In my dream, the meadow is always hot pink. I slap and slap the slap bracelet,  wear my wrist welts everywhere. I am my immigrant parent’s American. The Ramones is so loud I don’t hear the whistle—  my car crosses tracks one second before the train passes. I die on the barn floor, and I die the day mom says, Losing your brother  wasn’t an accident, and I die at meadow’s edge— the ground so spitshine clean so snowy fresh. Would it be so bad if I followed the ambulance home just to see what the body looks like  or is there nothing else but a few quick breaths and a knocked cup of wine  is that so bad of me to want to see the other side of the thing  to see into the past just a little bit as if Coltrane walked off a bus and tipped his hat to you  or farmers tilling a field with a few bright tractors and a flock of birds just above your head  is that so bad of me to wash down the street with a bottle of Coke  to see again everything I’ve already lost and to see the other headless men still searching  for a brother to bury In this story we are old and proud in our slack skin and one-pieces on a rock coast of Chicago. With our gray hair, we are elegant animals gathering light. You are telling me stories about your dead who are not us, not now— a love taken by cancer, who left you wintered by grief for two summers that are not this one. The wind is in love with us, keeps teasing the pages of books that have been written to buoy or bury us. You are laughing loud because it is good for the lungs to laugh loud. The years we spent licking whiskey off our elbows until we collapsed into welcome mats, never burned us down. We are old enough to know to be good to our working lungs, our working legs, our working hearts, which have delivered us here, to this beach, this city, this thinning side of happiness. I carried John in a small sparkle-pierced wound above thin upper lip— A beauty mark like Marilyn he explained, his voice stoned and astral, sweet lilt so hushed you’d think he was afraid of waking  years of ashes lining the unfinished attic hotbox. College: good years for fantastic. Say the glass pipe tasted like diamonds and Paris. I’ll listen. The band below reverberating electric hype  through floor beams—cute little drummer of paradise got his eyes on my mouth. Girl , John said. Get it while it’s good. We were good in the night, the glory stars all ours for following south  toward the wide grid wards of Chicago like so many misfit Michiganders. Alone in public, I deserted a gallery dizzy with drunken city believers, lamenting:  What am I doing with my life and where’s the rent check?  The late shift piercer at Tattoo Factory in Uptown asked if I was sober, if I was sure. One beer all night but manic as the lake wind, I’d have taken a dozen fat needles in my face if he and my checking account  would’ve approved the only beauty I could believe: something violent and shiny. I’d been putting it to bed for years with spiked teas and NyQuil, adoring how it could be heard even without words. Its power  like mirrors: pitiless, everywhere. I wonder if I’d taken the El downtown, the Jackson 6 south to Cove Lounge or Bar Louie, if I could’ve sighted your wetted silver stud sticky with gin and tonic,  if there could be a story where you and I met wearing our sad human suits and were saved somehow by the company, by the not welling alone with the hell of it. If a wreck like me  could’ve stopped the newspaper headlines: the young man, brilliant of course, dangling from the bound sky of the university geo lab. In the shrunken obituary photo, the starlet  glimmer pain still there, hair bleached platinum— I was making myself in this image, John. My hair already pale straw the day I learned you were done and put my beasts to rest  in a pill-softened bed. In a queen-less drab town, the gilt bead flew from the steel hardware’s end under the gust of a full-lunged flu sneeze, and the two-year-old hole sealed shut too quick  to slide a twenty over a glass counter and ask to replace the familiar mark. Beware of the mouth: just half an hour and it starts to heal. John, I keep waiting for your face to close.                                                                                                                      A runway to nowhere, beetle casings shine on the bayonets of grass, forfeited shields, waiting.  Deafly, calendars lay in kindling heaps in pieces like wet wrens, each unfilled box to be counted among the dynasties of the harvest, & what the rain takes apart with its tiny hands.  At dusk, the faces move away from each other on the shelves—they insist, remember your place in the lineage of stones . But there is no place beyond the moles, only ellipses of ants crossing doors of caskets, carting crushed commas on their backs like their own shadows.  I listen to the first snows developing into the negatives of pictures in the dark— the way my mother worked a needle into rose blooms, as if it meant nothing.  One prayer comes to me over & over, sliding up & down my synapses as on empty elevators.  I dream dreams now in which I do not appear. Texas shipped up the horns, & Kansas put the bodies under them the signs says, as if history were matter of poundage. I was born at four, seven & some spare ounces, no more than a steer’s leg those Junes in the Bluestem Pastures. Cowboy Junes. Junes of saddles broken into red sand like all the oldest books. Like my Rosina, my Anna, yes the Cardarellas & the Meehans, all the ones who waited to cross on cattle ferries, to die in ways only butchers would’ve known about, ways none of them imagined as they watched the Adriatic grow smaller in the leave, waving to those too old to travel. After a while, even the patina tumors of Wyoming sagebrush sprouting around mesas half-erected by God, tilted West, & farther west, & west, & west: into the great deserts of light. Even the Spanish nuns in the rocky-pass monastery a few miles outside Laramie, perched in buzzard-black gowns, wished the many stars had ears in the pew-less churches of the mountain’s universe. And once, over streets named for states, on a balcony, the North face of the Rockies, I thought of my father, the white boils on his knuckles, the light in his eyes floating like a fly in Scotch, & coming home late from the city, staying up through the REM cycles of prairie-gray kids, anserine vagrants choosing trees in the new heat, like Jack Kerouac. And in every window in the 1:30 L-train: a lit sin waiting for the orange underworld to snuff it like a cigarette cherry, & I could tell you Jesus was a raindrop on the rail on East 17th Street. And I could say it was The Buddha pushing his stone of cans to the repository, a field nurse wheeling blown ends to build a fire somewhere never caught on film. I could write you an equation of faces on the I-70 corridor, forgotten like high school algebra. I could blow a sad trumpet for the man in the apartment two blocks up, North Oakland, still as a bald mannequin sipping honey-colored liquor from a delicate, cut glass that catches the one lamp turned on in the Pacific night, & I could say the whole room was a leafy dream closing over a flashlight in a bear pit, & could grab your hand to take you to where new flowers do not know us in the liberating dark. But in valleys near San Joaquin, while kit foxes eat tomatoes alone, late-night, listening intently for slipper-footed coyotes, grape-pickers stir in the outer sheds, praying to Our Lady of the Elder Twigs for what grows tender, like bruises, while the mattresses laid in the highway yards, go on sleeping in the past.   *Note: Parts of the last two lines are adapted from Pablo Neruda’s poem “Youth,” as translated by Robert Bly: “the mattresses sleeping in the past.” Those feathers in the bushes were not left by angels—  those smokestacks blowing, trying to be light, say believe  or be lost . And clouds move over just-hammered nails.  Who are we to live forever? Along I-80, goats graze,  testing the fences, not knowing there’s no heaven—  & grosbeaks going South, to the Carolina basins, rest  in palm-crowns older than churches: they do not care  they may vanish in the Atlantic. My father is dead—  by my foot, an ant on his way to the hole, a sibling  on his back, follows instinct down to dark: how we  miss what is gone, simply because it’s gone. And a drift  of leaves hides the buried from their names, & there are  dead hives in the river with no fear of night, & it is  quiet on 18th Street, in the year of the boar & the verb  “to be.” A voice saying: sleep—we are less important than bees .           The details are as yet unclear as to the how and where –  how to arrange the bones with their ends touching like so,  and exactly where to conjure the handful of dark purple  heart – and the timing of it. See, the parts won’t fit  like we were taught. The cloud folds into a box without  assistance, cools smooth and heavy like milk glass in the child’s head.  We should probably fill the rest in beneath it until  it looks presentable, add meat to the rough frame we’ve made,  but I also sort of like him this way – loose and preliminary  in his conception, a sketch of slender branches  caught in a river eddy on their way elsewhere. Better,  maybe, to leave him like this, unfeeling and questionless.         Dry eyes, how I wanted a rainy day. We got sun instead, some clouds, my heels sticking in the sod. There was a notice in the wrong paper, turf, but no tombstone. I wasn’t pretty enough for the occasion. I had nothing to say. When the sky turns in on itself, how much can we endure? I wrong myself with what can’t be undone. The pottery I’ve chipped, the yarn I’ve unfurled, her matchstick arms, her faded dress. With my life she could have lived forever. Dew on our faces. Watercolor world running away. I could split my fingers on light. The magician makes a balloon-animal virus and we applaud. Disappointments gather round: I need a show of hands. But it’s evening, time to go in and gather stones for her arrival. Where day is a room named after itself, men scrubbed the color of sunrise  revolve like planets around our wounds. As we wake we can feel them  thumbing our scars like rosary beads, whispering prayers to keep themselves  from falling into our skin. In the quiet room, silence enters  the thigh via needle and prayer is listening to what the body says  after it’s tranked out of its native language. The records will say I was once  a nest of maladies under the tongue of a man whose mouth was his name  who siphoned five minutes from each sunrise, that I was a chart  of scrips and milligrams in an alchemy meant to yield a version of me  that could fly from that nest. Tonight, I’ll sleep in a linen closet  in the arms of a girl who, for a few hours, cures my crazy with hers.  Tomorrow,  memory will be a palm full of clouds tipped from an orange bottle.  I’ll swish it down my throat with a dixie cup of water.  I’ll lift my tongue  to reveal I didn’t forget, then forget. There’s a parable about memory in which memory is a boat used for trafficking human cargo.  But it’s easy to forget here. We could talk instead about how the Mediterranean scatters  through the city, alleys as veins returning each cobalt glint to the shore, the eyelid at light’s  sluice. Darkness and its denizens, then, are determined by vision. It’s this splinter of daylight  we can neither see nor pluck from our pupils: needle- points tattoo the veins of a girl  whose throat was just used for everything but her voice. Couldn’t we, in such brightness,  just call the promenade our god- canvas and thatch from palm trees, white pergolas, and the terra  cotta shingles of smoke-singed kebab shacks a new roof for this world? Under it, sunrise  would be love’s kitchen. The bronzed hands of beach- drunk youths making meals  of each other’s mouths: all history has time for. We could float on our backs awhile, our breath  tethering us to the stone jetties, our mouths filling with the salt we become as we stop watching.           Sour cherries splattering the burnt lawn and a black dog with its clover necklace.  Rabbit caught, a fluttering heart in my palms. Wagons piling with gold beads of soybeans,  sweet pop of pods chaffing the yard. My grandmother like a queen in all this, distant,  as if always on the swing hung from the oak. Charmer, even the dog would hold her hand  in its mouth. Who wouldn’t want to please her? Woman who tucked her dresses into overalls  to haul corn with my grandfather, who knew grosbeak, goldfinch, junco,  whose call pulled swans to her like water. How to answer when she asked, standing  beside her old photograph, if she was beautiful? Sunset-colored hair, eyes two pools singing  about the sky. I’d go back now and ask— nothing. Whatever lies between fact  and invention is too slim to matter. Just let me draw near them—small self  and grandmother, braiding clover—a bee fretting their hair, seeking blossom. 1  the no of thunder through the curtains   pulled back she wakes  with eyes shut    filling the jar with oil spoons the slow liquid & sets her tongue to work on a gash   a bruise    swallowing her skin   backwards  she   the shape he takes   see   the window on which he sets her    the gentle slope of her back   turns violent in his definition   she   the shape he takes  with his hands find her  in the draining   of water from soil  2  or was it fascination   the impossibility   of feet through squeezed into the boots   to lace with greasy thumbs biscuits in the oven  berries in the freezer  wasps in the basement buzzing while she sleeps    in her ears   this delicate machinery  (if one limits the observation to the shape yes   the organs are the same)  (the feculent and corrupt blood   might be purified   with his help)  No one leaves this town / His grass for miles nothing but milk  in the fridge   cool in the nighttime spills to warmed skin   her skin   an object   she coughs  3  bad blood bad blood   infected without his    work in swell  in thrust  find truth       find good   what’s inside remains dark    the mattress forms to fit her    shape the thing that remains constant    unless filled: the good work  these ailments raise the dead     inside their tiny boxes she remains  asleep    constant breaths   wheezing with dream her room    he crawls into   with her   some nights  (she flips the pillow / she becomes / Him)  of what  the mattress speaks  coils reach into her back until he falls from her    long sigh of green   see  it in the fog Through your navel, the sound of the ocean opens, a cave’s convex  darkness. Inside, a world of Hokusai prints, octopuses  sprawled suggestively on the rocks. Now we are both stars in each other’s  wet dream. Shake the salt from your hair, flip off the camera.  Whatever comes natural. I’m fine just fishing with a pair  of rough-cut hands, the delicious gonads of sea urchins. All the better  for future stars of the Pacific Theater, no longer encumbered  by war, its garish sound effects. Blood. Now is a time for romance,  comedy, maybe even a little catharsis. Or a story set to bamboo  flute about a Chinese man, dressed as a woman, stabbing himself to ease  his anguish, for loving the sort of white man who only lusts after travel,  who goes home to Europe promising to return, when he is really saying  these are the roles we were born to play . It’s a pure sacrifice, playing them. Between the sheets, it’s the same in the forest: thriving on quiet moments of violence,   where we have the same tugged-on   hair, drink from the same empty stream.  Hunt, rut, hunt. Against these mottled logs we loom like giants, snails shells jutting   from the bark like houses built into a cliff.   I whisper. O how I want it, the tickle  in my shorts. The little death that presages my inevitable resurrection. Waterfalls are only   arresting for so long. Pin a man to moss   and what does he learn? You, how to grow.  Me, how to worm. Green weather brings ants from the anthill, their tiny bites tiny nicks   of love. Or I want them to be. Without our flesh   they’d continue their march, just as the forest  is forever full of animals we still haven’t seen. The fox I thought I saw bleeding past my nipples   wasn’t a fox. It was a fern. A red fern. A fern on fire. White taffeta circled her waist looped with a thin brown belt. I reached out and slid my hand under. Don’t, she said. We’re sisters.  Outside the castle, the kingdom fluttered apart. Blues and reds and golds bled out against the snow. Our mother  had lost her mind. She had found religion. At night I watched through the keyhole as she lowered herself in front of the bearded starets. I didn’t know about sex. I was in love  with my sister. This was before Tsarskoye Selo, before Yekaterinburg, before I watched her body drop into my lap like a piece of driftwood, all that dark hair against my hand.  This poem is written in th e voice of Anastasia Romanov, the youngest daughter of Tsar Nicholas II of Russia, and imagines her life at the time of the Russian Revolution. Sometimes a ghost is not a ghost but a woman who hates me a thousand  miles eastward. There is nothing I can do here but palm the weight  of hailstones, wear the green rain as a veil. Two hens named for country  stars attack a hen named for a queen. There is no one I can ever be  to her than the brat her husband loved first. Trees wring bare hands: winter.  Dog-tooth violets flirt with soft earth: nearly. I once had a plan to forget him.  How futile our backstory, how precious her grudge. Today, I drive out  to the field with five white horses just to make sure they’re all still there. is silk and velvet, redbuds and forsythia, lace-white pear trees backlit  in a streetlamp’s planetary glow— a grinning dog chasing cars in tall grass  like gold tassels—some fool burning wet green wood in the near  distance, the rising smoke with a bad smell that creates no heat, no clear  purpose—how I no longer feel out-of-love but simply not-loving. I established  this pattern years ago. For one month I believe I can be someone’s dream  girl, falling for someone’s charm like a migrating bird—the bright flicker  of feathers, the rare trill threading the dogwoods—then gone. I’m down  on my luck again, pissing off every man around. You can call me jaded—  it fits me like a dress that’s so tight I can’t properly sit down. Every woman  must come to a crossroads. I fulfill no one’s dream so therefore I am  everyone’s foe. Oh, charmer— I have learned your bright alphabet  of night-blooming flowers. There will always be dirt in your nails  and smoke on your breath. There will always be smoke in the trees. It’s just because, at first glance, I could’ve called it natural. Suppose all the suppositions are accurate. Limnologists still count the years  numerically and so on. So on and so far as I can’t stand the view of trotlines. Listen, despite everything they’ve told you, happiness is a long shot.  Consider the daylight, our diminished rates of accuracy. I don’t presume to know much about crossroads. Sometimes the bullet just finds itself in the wrong back.  Back and forth between the backyards of the subdivision a bird we can’t identify taxis fish, sits on a nest of shelled chromosomes. Weather is indicative of the winter  we’ve been having. I can see your bronchitis through your nightgown. Just as red as I’d expect the lung-full of algae blooms the children carry  across town you might hear the PA system from the high school homecoming. If you catch a glimpse of me in the grandstands, chalk it up to apparition.  I’ve been up all night with the old man whose come home from the bar where he’d spent the evening gambling his mind and lost it.  I used to follow you into the abandoned building. There is no story to follow that up with. The second floor of our two-story house is water logged. Warped floorboards don’t speak when they splinter.  Quit telling me you have a problem with empathy, I watched you wipe a tear from your eye the day they pushed the dirt back into the quarry. Whatever reservations I had: cancel them.  Truth is: I don’t care. Let’s all just sit here and anticipate a little more apoca-prophecy. Until then, rain running in under the shingles. Ghosts snickering in the attic. When I watch you through the visor of your father’s flight helmet my breath, a scatter plot of condensation on dark glass it’s not valor not weaponry or sky but the skin smell of a person held there, working  Wait you say  I’ll take a picture & I watch you turn from the room  All I think is my head occupies the space made for the head of another man hands on my thighs, thighs in their nylons there is too much of me inside my life—  my life the one name for and so on through the news delivered & news consumed the language fat with names for you  my flame, inamorato . . . I’d thought to be inside this military thing the difficult heart of my dress-up not the sense of trespass into your father the man who gave you the name I use where there is no word at all for t he cashier sinks her hands into my tote she plants this sack of rice which is our dinner for in the middle of a hard sleep the landing pattern pulls the day’s first plane overhead for the unread items continued to accumulate, your lips were chapping & I was  in the middle of my own hard sleep I say. There, beyond the pastures & what Matins were prayed,  a handful of mallards swim towards the bottom lip  of the lake like mothers’ milk. In the almond fields  rabbits make a matinee of their coupling. Love ,  my brother says, is in the hare . We pick apples & pears until  the day is capped with the slow hum of dusk. When the two  of us row our boat home we hope that, to the water,  the rough turbulence from our oars is just a flyover state.  To arrive at our estate we hop over gates & take it slow under  barbed wire. In the distance, not too far, a bonfire & our mother  smoking by the tire swing. Dad sings the Beach Boys with unchained  grief. As he runs my brother kicks up leaves & apple blossoms, but I am  a monster tamed. There are things I want to say to them, words that are  as mossed to my skin as race. But, I know, from reading the moon, that it’s too  late. Maybe I’ll visit tomorrow. All the papers say there’s little risk of rain. The doe hides her fawn in sedge      and disappears in the corn.  Some days     it’s clear enough for love      to depend on the periphery.  I sit in a willow between the field      and marsh, doubt the red currant  and cattails, the farmer’s      rusted pickup and morgue      of tires.  All of it a milkdream  of a baby hidden in a car seat of a Corolla left in the parking lot  of Tan World, waiting  for her mother…   I’d be lying if I said  I didn’t want to build a nest in these branches  to hide you.   But when we were prey to nothing,   we left fields and orchards untended—  they withered as we slept   in full sun.  And so it is:  you’ll grow into your skin   through the flesh of fruit   picked and eaten from every tree.         I go back to Levi Stubbs and the fog when it’s spring again  and I lie awake. Me kissing a girl  the whole ride home, thinking if I pulled my lips away  I’d never get it back,  whatever was happening. Her yes  in the dark feeding mine  as Tommy nursed the ’98 through the hair-pin turns  of autumn, Ridge Hollow Road,  while the other Tommy held the door ajar  and tambourined the dash, crying  right in time with the bass, or left , left  as the tires spit and the car veered, and  we stayed on the road.  Frogs still out in the reeds  because the air was alive. The boys  were alive. And Mary was kissing me  back. Pulse of tail lamp. Four Tops. Fog,  banked road, stench of swamp… And then  I was home and dropped at that house by the lake.  Taste of her lips on my lips, the boys’ voices swept  to mist in my head—  they would be dead in the spring, I would crawl  unhurt over their beyond- hurt bodies—  I sat alone in the kitchen in the same  radio dark  and guided by the singing,  pitched them all the curved road home. 
I carry your loneliness inside me like a horse, one

of those trotters from Zhivago, a movie
                      you saw three nights running
          when I was young

and you were young and there was still
                        a future
           in Super Panavision.

You loved the scalar immensity, Sharif’s

Egyptian eyes burning white Russian
                        in a dream
           of perfect marriage.

Who could blame you? Husband in another town,
                        setting up
           the next move, home

only weekends. The American Dream:

ranch house with leaky basement,
                        sump pump
           like an artificial heart on a stem.

Children: burning out their lives like orphans.
                        Night 1: you bought us
           popcorn so we would quiet

and the gray of the screen

                        *

could become the gray of your mind
                        exploding
           in fur and pink: skeletal Chaplin.

She had your body, wisp
                        of a girl
           with girlish hips, but awash

in glamour, wealth. She wins

Zhivago it seems. You go a second time
                        to be certain.
           Take a friend

a blond like Lara,
                        whose husband—
           the rumor went—embezzled,

slept around, slapped

her now and then. I think it helped,
                      Night 2,
           with the brute,

Victor Ipolitovich Komarovsky,
                      and Lara’s
           deeper, truer

loneliness. Shape of a woman

like the shape of a horse.
                      Ridden,
           put aside wet. You hated

Steiger forever after that. Begrudged
                      him
           even the Oscar. Was he

                      *

the Husband?

The man from across the street?
                      Our father?
           The Zhivago children the four

snot-nosed kids you left at home—
                      with whom?—
           me? When you returned, a glass

was broken, we were bloodied,

fighting. You threatened to leave—
                      I threw you
           the keys—you stayed.

Night 3: you went alone.
                      Eased
           into that slow section—

                      *

Lara helping Zhivago—

you, too, were a nurse. They
                      fall
           in love, beautifully,

without touching. Mend
                      and stitch
           the wounded.

And then the horse again—

Varykino, Yuriatin. Zhivago
                      galloping
           wife to lover,

his passion abducted, con-
                      scripted.
           His trudging back in snow.

Varykino again. Lara

                      *

again. It’s really a house in Spain
                      filled with beeswax,
           the cold an illusion, Hollywood lighting

bathing Christie’s blue eyes (yours
                      were brown)
           as Christie as Lara lounged,

as you as Lara lounged, while

Zhivago penned the poems. To the adored.
                      He has his back
           to her—a candle rages—

she is sleeping. I watch it three nights
                      running
           before I understand the scene.

Then l know—it is you who is awake—

by a strange alchemy—you as Zhivago—
                      the un-adored,
           the un-beloved, become the lover.

The unending monologues when I was home
                      explain it,
           the weekly phone calls,

                      *

word and word and word,

when I moved away, the tapes
                      of your singing—at church,
           with Streisand—the letters

with profiles of Indian doctors you loved,
                      their skin
           as dark as Sharif’s

but with sharper knives. How you

let them cut you again and again,
                      scalpel as poem
           and dear heart, are you breathing,

what can I do to ease the pain?
                      40 years of this.
           A staggering array of scars and drugs.

Ankle, knee, heart, gut.

The writings, the tapes, the “poems”— 
                      Dolores’s poems—
           I stored in a box until—

because I am your coltish son—I trashed. 
                      For which
           I am broken-hearted, late adoring, yours

after all, sentenced to a few crude scenes.                                                                                                           The sight of elephants kneeling into dust reminds me of the car we drove out, past daylight, out to the edge of our youths, where the sky drives  its tusks into the soil and digs up the bones of us. You were driving, pink knuckled and hair like a tumbleweed.  The ocean approached us like a bad cousin. We approached the ocean like our headlights were loaded with buckshot. Someone heard  that someone said there was a lighthouse out here and we were too full of hoped-for headlines, lips too far curled around our summerteeth not to  believe it. I was riding shotgun. I was a landslide strapped to a bucket seat, I was planning to remove myself from this nook of the world.  Any minute the lighthouse would appear before us standing like a bald god between horizon and heat death, any minute the lighthouse  would reveal its stone-bellied hunger, the torch of its eye scissoring the dark into gold ribbons, cutting out the names of the people  we were soon to become. We wanted to know. We wanted to become the stampede of would-be astronauts hurtling towards a knock-off Mars.  But nothing on nothing rolled across the road. But not all change improves. But here is the moon-cold tusk, here is the hammer  we’d have taken to the torch-lens anyway. I want to come home now. I want to get in your car and swerve off towards graveyards planted by mastodons. We can learn to be good. A flash of lightning cutting into the bones of the farmhouse isn’t the same  as capital punishment. We can stop sliding bullets into the terrified veins of an eighteen-year-old you or I  have never met. I plant a fictional garden.  I invite you in to eat its offerings. We’ll starve to death this way.  In one life I was a bullfighter, my coat made of crushed roses, my sword hewn from the shadow of my sword.  In one life I was a stadium where people heaped roses on the slumped body of a bull. We can learn,  we can try this again, so I do. In this life, I stayed home from the bullfight, coaxing  an orchid up from the fictional dirt in my garden. And in that life I was the orchid and the sun  hung itself to be my crown. We can do this all day. Until we get it right. In one life I built  a farmhouse out of lightning rods. Everyone felt their ribs budding through their skin, but we sat  patiently waiting at the table, for the lightning to come and say an honest grace,  say it to our faces, to our teeth. I want to be good. I want to cut off my ear and tie it to the horn of a bull.      What Makes This Mage Unforgettable is the way he every morning refuses  to get a real job / not so long as there is a sky  in which real clouds look down on us  this mage is going to show the clouds  what’s what / he’s going to teach them a lesson  about lightning : it’s no heavy  thing you let go of / it’s a kind of promise  you make yourself : everything’s going to be  ok / when I say that  I know I’m placing a bet  and it’s better to maybe be wrong now and then  than to think that things could ever fail  to be ok / mother says the mage  I made up a new spell for you  ribbitus roboticus hopeless and bottomless  be young & happy for once in your goddamn a cloud  swoops down and whisks the mother  considerably away leaving behind  snakes / the sound of an ocean shore  where vacationing families are painting the matriarchs  happy portraits of the present / this daiquiri is a good daiquiri  isn’t it nana / isn’t it / yes indeed I’d say this daiquiri  may be the last daiquiri I’ll ever need / a satisfied  lifetime of daiquiris / wouldn’t you say that  nana wouldn’t you  but what really wins the mage  a spot in history’s tasseled scrapbook  is the sun  he allows to rise over his roof every  morning like a relentless  terrier with mud on three of its  four paws / how  do you even do that / the sun  is a swole mouse gorging  itself on our world and the mage  allows this to go on / he composes  the sun’s bestiary / one morning  the sun is a lynx  with forty gorged mice on its teeth  the mage notes: be always wary  the sun can backstab even itself / 40 times over  when the sun rises  in the form of a buffalo with one hoof  treading the empty air past the cliff’s blue edge  the mage strips off his cloak like a fever  he enters the forest / the forest enters the mage  the sun drags its beard through the sky  it is possible  one day there will be no clouds  only mothers unhappy with childhood  the mage has a spell that makes  everything turn out ok  it goes : everything’s gonna turn out ok  everything’s gonna turn out ok / e verything’s  gonna turn out ok / and he’ll keep saying it  even if it’s already come not true From the east deep they arrive in the desert. Past the Salton Sea  and here, now into the better part of the Sun Belt. They join up in trailers,  squatters in tents. Cover from weather comes in tarps. The tarps fight for cover,  not from water but for shade. Roosting in the gap where bulbs loop  a wooden frame, a man makes a stage mounted on towers of two by fours.  He leans hard, he is aging brown and tan. His name is Moth and he’s got six mouths  to think about. With several hundred people hauled up, if you need something  you just ask the neighbors, he tells me. Anything dragged in from elsewhere  is shared, fed, or built upon. In a steady stream of burned-out RV’s and buses,  in the wreckage of former homes too ruined to use even for their parts,  he takes me to the junked bus. It gives me the shade. It gives me  someone to talk to while sitting. Everyone talking about East Jesus  in the middle of nowhere, so I believe without seeing. It rained once  they say, not a flood, but a bucketing. I think of how my body takes on water,  how my body leaks it out and off. How I’ll reach for a glass when I need it,  when I want it. Moth motions to the van with its tires gone soft from the desert.  The radiator bakes in its shut down black. He tells me how sand pulls in the cars,  how people wade around inside of it. Like high-water for desert knees.  A fishing rod rattles on the bare wall. Moth’s kid skirts the sand with a broom.  We haven’t run away he says, we’ve run to. When I turn on the stove to boil water,  you come downstairs with your hair down,  which is why the following things exist:  teapots, fire, beauty.  A kind of logic has proved this to be true:  I am breathing, I have senses, I have you.  I asked for proof that God exists.  Why else the elephant, the tornado,  the body’s ability to hold another body inside it?  If this universe is not extraordinary,  if the fact that your mole is in the shape of a hoof  does not mean that every angel is terrifying ,  how can I keep coming home at night  knowing that God is not waiting naked in my bed?  From the city’s highest point, I can see miles of ocean  until my eyes begin to interpret distance as fallacy.  Everything has boundaries.  I cannot love you infinitely.  The sky cannot pour itself into a teacup.  Everything ends.  Not even God can make this right.      [Even when I’m naked I can’t tell the truth] Even when I’m naked, I can’t tell the truth. Breasts, knees, cheeks – I’m covered in twins  that cannot speak.  Maybe if I build a little dim booth, write For everything, I’m sorry  on my front tooth, I could begin to reveal the things that hide in the lining of my coat.  What would God say about my curiosity for abortions, that I believe there is peace  for dead things floating in formaldehyde? And what about my father’s eyes after his stroke,  their endless black unknowing, their inability to know his dark parts are showing?  What if I want to live  in those eyes and explore the world from their damaged hem?  When I begin to speak,  I begin to unravel.  This is how the body travels from dark to darker.  This is how we level ourselves  with the love of our fathers.  Into what loyal jar can I say I wish he would have touched me,  anywhere?  Into what pillow can I scream that I wish I had scars, anything to prove I was with him,  I was there?  I understand confession less than therapy, at which one do I say I need to be touched,  I need a man to make me?  This is what I know of love: the being needed, the being taken.  I’ve mistaken the heart  for being able to love.  The heart cannot love. The heart pumps.  It is more like a well;  made for depleting, for drowning.  This is sounding more like a plea than any revolutionary way of saying loneliness .  If God ever broke into my home and said Speak or be gone I would say You have it coming to you, being another father  that once woke me in the night to say Pretend I was never here. And he wasn’t.  And he wasn’t.  Quiet is my souvenir. We were told what / we wanted to hear, ignored the things we didn’t, i.e., / one hundred  thousand workers and peasants marching on in perpetuity wouldn’t give a ready soldier pause.  Today at the double yang, yellow  flowers on the battlefield / swirl and dance, a moot  elegy for the unremembered. / We head for the foot of the tea slope of Wuyi. Below the / mountain  we make a fire, watch the damp sticks ignite / and if the goddess of these  mountains is not dead she will / marvel at our flames, / candid with a scholar’s bright  blade and unafraid. We pointed / our guns at the sky, fired them into its blue immensity. Kurt Godel, 1930  Neither proved nor disproved:  neither seed heads dragged by the wind nor husks fallen hard from their ripening;  neither the porcelain glazed and fired nor flaked and dried, a scrounged skin, in its barrel;  neither the river that cooled the clay nor the hand that printed it, pressing its double;  neither the watery kick that gives a girl a great whale’s weightlessness—issue as if from its sensitive cask, furious salt wine—  nor the stone stomach. Last meal of anvils. Full lungs that, if lobbed across  a hot city yard, summer death mask, would burst and relieve a boy’s fever.  Neither of these: witch or anchor, Socrates or angel.  Only sorrowing through a tunnel of sleep. A train of days, just flying.  An incomplete arithmetic: the problem like a child’s painting of three trees. Two,  bushy spheres of leaves with fat trunks guiding them toward both ground  and sky. The third, the third— head only. And someone’s hurried blue  scrubbed between the land the tree had grown from and the clouds it moved lately among . /today the story of a boy  and his revelatory revolver  /the pinball he took  like a need to be swallowed  one night last March  when the air spun with snow  and bent your signal  at angles of terrible sound  /a single strand of frequency  was all it took for him  to let a round off into his cortex  /pained and thin as honeycomb  or moon mud. his parents say  it wasn’t the sound  that woke them /but something  in the air /invisibilia  /the hold you have on all of us  /can i say he sailed away  in the golden hold  of a great ship filled with light?  /is any vessel excuse enough  for the cargo the bullet made?  /i don’t know  /i’ve been trying to write  this story down for a long time  but no loose hands will tie together  /dear radio i’m asking for a lot  /i’m prying for answers  /why didn’t you save him from revelation  if not from the gun?  /i’m taking back all this time held  hostage to your drag-race love  /i’m drawing perfect circles in the dark. All water has a perfect memory and is forever trying to get back to where it was. -Toni Morrison  I think of you, my lost girl, when the wing of a tailfin rises beside the boat, dripping in salted robes. This movement, like song, pulls me under, where murk reveals the obscurities of loss. The language is epic, invisible, submarine. A child hears her home in clefs of water, in whale song: unfathomable, plosive, drummed, the loudest blues on earth. A thousand feet down, more join in the refrain. Another endangered syntax descends.  *  Nothing on the sonogram for weeks. The nurse’s dull hand like a river stone on my belly; the doctor’s wintry eyes scolded me, I thought. Oh, secret grief. Are we not all sick with our own scolding? When they found your heartbeat I thought this could be a girl . Just as quick, you were gone. The question, the what-if: always regret. But that is too simple. To regret is to be too late. To regret is to refuse to swim further down.  *  On the operating table, I thought of Jonah: three days, three nights he prophesied in the sunken body’s cave, his mean bed the boggy, pagan tongue of a monstrous fish. The squelched prayer, when my life was ebbing away, I remembered you —then mercy, the sonorous brute relieved of his god- fearing freight. Jonah, spat out on the beach, reborn in his fear, the heart of the sea a God-stone in his gut. But the whale was the merciful one, holding a dove on its tongue. Don’t you see? You pulled me from my mind’s shadowed corners, near drowned in the cage I’d made of my bones.  *  You were the bird inside my veins’ blue trees. That night, I woke; I remembered you— a small heartbeat inside me gone still. I try to convince myself of an afterlife: when a whale dies, it lives a second time. It must drop to great depths, then an ecosystem is born of its body. The sleeper sharks will tear soft tissue from the corpse, its skeleton colonized by a million worms. A root-like structure grows into the bone and all the little animals feed. No one is sated. No regret.  *  The dream again: a beach strewn with humpback calves. Each spews its white jet into catacombs of air. I press my whole body’s strength against them to no avail. The bodies are black dunes on the mute white sand. I give up, walk the road of corpses, and come to it, the puzzle: the clean jaw of a female cow. I measure the slow lines. Each baleen plate a glassy divot. When my work is done I hear singing. The whales, fins like wings, flood the atmosphere as clouds. The heaviest, the lightest things. My heart is full of them.  *  I was prey in the hot slick belly of the sea. I wanted to die of anger. I wanted to watch all things burn. A tamarisk sprang up beside me, and I thought it was God. A worm ate the green plant and I thought, God, devour me. But the worm was full of the saltcedar leaves. The earth refused to wake, to weep. So I walked the tide’s edge to hear the waves’ hushed dirge. The muted tongues of the dead whisper, God is covetous. He will not tolerate your sorrow. I lose what I love and stay alive. I try.  *  I walk the shallow water, for what emerges in its absence. And yours. Deep down, whale song so loud: if not for ocean water, the human ear would burst. The sun harpoons the late day sky. Beneath my feet, a million shards of rock and shell, things that once housed the living. And deeper, the call of one animal to another. Now and again, you breach the heart’s surface: this is your sounding; this is your wake . I hide the body in my mouth: I am not a girl, not a dinosaur. Candy canes, Papa and his corsets. Mama pulls her hair over her mouth. Inside: cocaine, small birds. When I was ten we hibernated, pulled our skins apart and glued them with sequins and mama’s Chanel no. 5. He tasted like cancer. She closes her eyes, her nose a red sunset of places we haven’t been. My ankles make bruises on his calves: the spaces where our bodies don’t connect. This part of you has a name: integument. I prefer facsimile  of a smile; cut flesh that shows the baleen’s bend. Whalebone, however thrown  about by open mouths, can mean so many pieces. Such bleached variety  in the wind,  where even the stones go blank , sleep, struggle along breath that escapes  like steam to cold stream above the deck. There it hangs, brief, in  wonder; pondering whether to drop, to die in the sea—or keep silent, endure  on as if haar , or sea fret, or simple stratus, unhinged, come to earth . The mind is buoyant and just like it, I lift my skirt above the water-mark, for anyone. Bothered eyes take my legs for a guess, though it doesn’t have to work that way— a scar’s all glitz, really, for predictions. I cheapen those who look at me, and skin begins misunderstandings like a lake will dream the trees surrounding it to kelp. Despite the solemn looks that tag us as adults, it’s possible to drag the water and whistle a fizzy song. Regardless how sharp the razors are, the wishes work both with and without reason: a boy, once a man, once stumbled back from me, oak among oaks, into low sunlight which made him golden and impossible. To remember isn’t going backwards; it only seems that way—the wish, like minutes from a long infatuation taken down in mere initials which you carved into his trunk . Our riot quieted to cracked trees, bottles,  the raw gums of winter. Every bar door an exit wound.  C’s voice is a white curtain, burning. The dark a child  listening on the stairwell. This is my history, lost  to clear and unclear fluids. What god knotted these streets  with hooks for swallowing. Words fall like hands.  There’s no metaphor for my sister’s turned back.         I must first call hunger bird tracks in the snow . (Even better— snowfinch prints in a drift .)  Next, I must massage the back of my jaw where I’ve pulled out twelve teeth to carve a sleek hollow, but I’ll show you instead claws digging twelve seeds from the earth. ( Bird baths of my cheeks. )  I must not say how it feels to stand in front of a mirror.  I must paint the birds in their numbered stanzas. (All-time metaphor— each peck the fragile breath of resiliency . Puff-chested, braving a frigid wind.)  I must claim the moon cooed to me about sorrow. I must stuff the birds with breadcrumbs and cotton and sorrow and my father must grow black wings and fly back to the stars.  I must not talk about fashion magazines or my empty bowl of hip bones. I must not tell the story of the junco ramming again and again the broken feeder.  I must ask that you listen instead about how snowfinches lug muskets wherever they march their winged battalion.  ( Warriors of my heart’s wounded flutter . Something like that— how they wear glorious coats of armor against the flash of sunlight on snow.) In winter I knew them all as one dead thing,  but now I love to watch them blossom.  The shortest tree seems Japanese, translates  beauty into sunlike white and pink.  I lie under them deciphering  their shapes. How to give a name to something you know so well: Mother,  I know you are afraid  of my love when I watch the little round discs fall  suicidally toward me.  I am afraid  of what I might call them while they are in the air…  Mother, I want to call them, my Katarina, my riad, my morning floor,  tiny petals like eyelids dropping down.  The first time I dreamt  of falling it was peaceful like this:—  nameless world, filled with green light…  by what name, Japanese tree, by what name, Mother?    VARIATION ON TESTIMONY  BY LISA HITON  I turned before I got in the truck, and in the moment before desertion I noticed his hair: dunegrass, the blonde arcing, the only thing left in motion.  I get hard.  I get gone—  the tires screech and I’m watching the dream in third person:  pan out on dust rising over God’s country.  God’s country.  Later, the body will be shittied by birds. The fence without varnish  digging into his spine. as if by cutting the meat  you release its flowers –  frail parallel lines  leaping through  a cliff & graze  at sedimentation  crashing lightweight  on plastic chopping  boards – hymn of fracture  wings, quiet  pornography of marble  pushed into  a grinder –  whine & gristle  of gunmetal  & mechanic  song of pre-germination, see the veins  of a hummingbird’s jaw  bulge, nectar sluicing  through its hollow –  behind the knees, soft armpit & elbow  in pulse,  stretch marks betraying ripeness  as each tendril claws  to form a nest,  peppered & salted  & palmed, laid  to rest in antiquity  tattooing prisons  on flesh,  a blooming  to baroque petals  of rain, unsalted, as it hits  the murk of flood, hissing ,  how quick you took  me to heaven  and left me there. The words for God’s work are nail through palm and drink my chaliced  blood . My mother schooled me with stained glass, saints with anchors hung around  their necks, golden and risen now from drowning. Or pierced with arrows,  the muscled shoulder and groin, wounds red and shining open, alive. If you kneel down hard  in winter, bare knees in snow, frost-biting your tender skin on purpose. Like holy men who flogged  their backs until the skin disappeared, laying out the architecture of prostration, bent spine, web  of sinew wet with prayer-blood, you give over your body. But if God’s work is expose the soul , if it’s un-map  the skin, if it’s trace litany breaking my bones , I thirst for holy waters , then mother says, open up your body to the air.  To be sainted, leave your home in these silent trees. Slice out memory. Pool blood. Girl, listen, skin your beauty  when my hand can’t cut . This one act will bear you to paradise in iron claws. He jumps out of a moving car trying hard to stay alive.  The Silhouette bar behind us. A hooded moon on watch.  They’d really love us, he says, pulling on my cigarette hard.  Just be all about us. Like he is. Wants to take us himself.  We take his word instead—  get out —head south at dawn.  Past the slow parade of Ohio. The hills of your Kentucky.  At night, we sleep in a tent off a long stretch of freeway.  Where we’re going the water moves up quiet at night. Stirs  in the morning. Look out at the lake. How fast it shifts  underneath. A giant storage battery. A beautiful machine. I lived from one small domestic transformation to another.  At night, the pond broke to take in the rain. In the morning, I heard you gathering your shotgun from the dark corner of the stairs, its long length a well-kept treasure. It might be beautiful in your hands, the way light bursts from it like a brief tulip. To think this is the last thing something wild sees, or doesn’t see, before it ends. You: into the woods, and I: my morning prayers, ending every sentence with Amen , which will always mean  May it be so , no matter how much I hate to plead. When I spit white and dawn my mouth is clean. I touch myself where he touched me. I touch  a myth about a dancing river, a copper fist. I stick my fingers into the river to feel like a glass  balloon. When he touched me I was full of spit. I do not know how to talk empty, talk  backwards. In a horror movie a finch falls out of an ocean. Someone is hungry and the sky  moves damp and slow. I am never full. When it is dark out the sky closes itself like a window. I smile ugly when the sky looks like spilled gasoline and you cannot do anything about it. It is impossible  to burn something transparent. There are birds blooming in the river and no one talks about it. I want to live someplace  bigger than myself. A house burning with the quickness of water. In July you gave me a bowl of spat out cherry pits  and I gave you a dead bird. Now you are taking it all back, flood back to the mouth, fish back to the mangroves  that smell like sweetness and light. The sky looks like a mouth, a mirror. It has a slow storm in its palms and it tastes  like salt, like forgetfulness. I forgot the rules of the world that complain when rivers don’t move. The name of a silent  thing. I will call it a hunger that’s just now nosing for breath. It was her lavender hands, the wrinkles soft like crinkled cellophane, and the valley where we stayed full of log cabins, yellow tents, schools of rainbow trout shimmering the pond. Like a shepherd’s crook the moon guarded us, a tear in the canvas of dark, throwing its light on the nervous mares stamping the stable muck. The pines, all the pines glossed with milk. Glued to her side by the window, studying wings. Flash of sky: blue jay. Blacktop smeared with blood: red-winged blackbird. Her hands. I wondered aloud, overwhelmed by the whoosh of the highway cars curling by out of sight down the hill. And the clifftop triplet of crosses some hiker had strung up with aspen and twine. Bodiless. Looming like an empty well. She showed me them but then that night. Her face, no one saw me see her face, all its light burning out. She was not a deer in the meadow then she was a ghost. A skipping stone makes circles, but a body makes a stone. They washed the lavender off the pillowcases. They caught me looking for her bones in the piano, and if it was not her why else would the middle pedal stick halfway down like that. What is left over is less than before. The word for that is stop . Forever my dad said, which was a zooming out. I was small, they wouldn’t let me see when the curtain closed. The black between stars, up and far away. They said God but when they sang their eyes were shut. But if prayer. I held my brother’s hand and we stood when they stood, and I could see it leaning on them, heavy their carrying hands when they passed in the aisle. But did she stop. Then and there I made myself, all the streaming-in light stained by paint on the glass. And the snow erased the Indian paintbrushes and the birds went with her, the field where no one walked, all a rushing, like bats, the storm of her going. Because it is still possible to whisper yes another hour, wander out through wintering  awhile.  Wade out through the deep snow of the pastures, the lost ones in the small skiffs  of their shadows, the moon’s coins in the shallows of their palms.  Lie down on the frozen drum-skin  of the reservoir, in the immensities of the absences of the grasses, in the perfect ignorance of the wind.  You have had to begin over.  You have had to empty your life of astonishing things,  to give up what the lost cannot be given. You have had to hand your vengeance to the great  gods.  Come, now: it is after every hour.  You have leaned down to your losses’  hearts like yearlings, their little shoes of iron for the voyage.  You have salvaged them in darkness  and done harm.  Come, now: it is after every after.  In the lost’s songs, in this ruin  that has loosed you, be there to listen to it happen: the winnowing, the wilder wings  departing, a radiance arriving through night air.  Be there  to listen to them open: the wild wings in the cold air far above you, the doomed moon  in the tatters of her splendor, the story in the winter’s bitter stars.  In the wind, in the bitter hands of winter, be there to listen to it  whisper: the one word, the world’s song you have not sung, the one song  you can only be, not sing of; the one song in the night air,  in the high pines; its singing, which, in winter, as it plays  you, as you play out through the fading of the radiance, as your changing  takes its place among that radiance, may have grace to make you almost what you are.                                                                                                           Braven Hand, whose beak-like nose earned him the nickname of “Raven,” was hanged for the murder of his lover, Pattismith Oakes, in Tinsman, Arkansas in 1887.  Letters written to Oakes’ family were later found to be forgeries that Hand had written in an effort to prove that she was still alive. Inexplicably, many of the letters speak of her being held against her will.    Mother —  I’ve made myself into a sea my husband cannot pilot. The nights he paddles across my body, I turn my stomach  into a storm of rocks rising from the waters. I clabber my mouth with milk before he comes to kiss, ignore  the figs he brings for me to freshen the bite of my breath. Ten times he’s capsized our bed searching  for a son but I’ve drowned every seed he’s put inside of me. Whenever he leaves, I cast my fingers over the lands  I’ve found hidden in his maps—countries smaller than my hands but close enough to row to.  Each time he returns,  he finds me huddled before the shore—staring past the ships that slap against the fence, the ocean  he’s somehow boarded up.    Another Kind of Beast  BY ASH BOWEN  This land is another kind of beast. And when I can’t sleep, I walk with it, past Birmingham, where they put Buddy Moss’ lady down. This land has feet like small animals. When cold, it leaves the prints of a deer, when hungry, the tracks of a girl. When the land can’t sleep, I walk with it where it wants to go. Past the old kill yards where the wind shakes the slaughterhouse chains. Where a steer bucked loose and sliced them boys and they hosed the blood out with all the rest. The Lord saith this world is the killing floor now. Down here, tombstones grow on their own. Their letters move like quiet through the clover, go house to house until they find their namesakes sleeping in our homes. When our baskets filled, I would step  off the boat and balance in my palm an apple finer than the others—cold  skin that cracked under my teeth. There was one dream: nationalism,  the exposed nerves of beet roots tangled in bullock carts  moving slowly toward the factory chimney choughing its thing at the sky.  Some sentences escape me.  I take the sun and I throw it.  I remember the stoop-shouldered men tracking equations the professor’s fingers  tapped across the chalkboard.  I take the sun and I throw it  in an attic like a servant’s room warmed by a skylight  topping a middle-class house. No heat, no water—but a kitchen chair  and petroleum lamp that I covered  with my two-penny shade. I would wash  my dress in a pail and mend its hem. When I wanted a treat,  I would walk through the Latin Quarter to the creamery and eat two eggs.  When I came back to myself, I would ask why I fainted, my stomach  round with radishes and cherries. In this atmosphere of wrinkled linen,  I would wait for the poplar leaves—  my window shut tight to their branches.  I would dress myself in navy for him, my blouse with robin egg stripes.  My husband’s jacket boxed his arms in a cut ten-years old. We owned two bicycles.  We celebrated up the boulevard Saint-Michel, watching the city pass us from the top of a bus,  our faces pinked by the sun. And we lunched on bread and peaches,  slept in a room with faded wallpaper,  and slept through the night. He had no sense  of time: a few thousand pedal strokes, then we arrived at a pond grown in with grass  where he gathered irises and water lilies for me while I slept. Once, he dropped a frog,  light-bodied, that peed into my hand. And in our little flat, I would peel parsnips  and onions for the noon meal. When I woke with the autumn light,  I left for our shed  in my lab coat without a hat or a scarf.  I met the wagon usually loaded with coal in the street that morning.  I touched the cloth of one sack & cut the strings with a bread knife & opened its mouth  & put my hands deep into the ore, the pitchblende mixed with pine needles  from Bohemia. It was like creating nothing out of nothing, all summer  in the shed without cupboards:  particles in glass tubes on shelves  we nailed into the wall, bluish outlines glowing like what  we couldn’t describe. I sat in the dark,  in the violet activity, and watched. As a child, I would dig up mud  with the tines of a fork and form the dirt into huts,  pushing windows in with my fingers.  There is an actor among us  that lives in the earth and in the air. In the evening,  we would return exhausted, our arms prickling in red veins:  our best disguise is an appearance. I would sit barefoot on our front step,  scraping it with my shoe. I loosened sand from the toe.  I also wanted a child. I remember the forest differently: trees stood stiff as slender ghosts once did, crow feathers blackened the ground before me.  There was no room for siblings with gypsy-colored skin and stubborn manes. I know about this the way a huntsman knows  how sharp an axe must be before saving the girl. I was never she. No one ate from my hands, led me out of my crimson robes.  I had no stag-heart to fool or follow. What flickered here was my hair, wisp by wisp now approaching silver.  I am forgetting the dignified shape of the lover’s neck. When my eyes are shut, I still hear the animal’s voice, rhyming. I remember my mother in flowered skirts, thighs stung by wasps as she hung the linens behind the gazelle house. I was her corked migraine,  small enough to make a fist, and stuff it in my mouth. If it’s true what they say, and you are what you eat then what did that make me?  There was nothing sweet inside that house except for tea. And so I saw with my hands, shoved tennis balls under my shirt like breasts.  Come summer, she’d blow on the back of my neck as if fanning a spark, telling my skin a secret. Those two feverish heads did not gather sleep. Only mothers prayed. Inca doves were slaughtered.  Their scaled bodies rubbed against each small chest. The neighbors’ beasts multiplied in spite of chains  or as a result of them. Little mouths with pink, puckered gums declared thirst.  Brine was offered, syrup from a sweet potato, nothing. From the nightstand, objects glittered as if to flirt  with the air. Tonsils removed and stored as poor man’s rubies. How much grief can a mind hoard. The Blackfoot of the Plains had over a hundred words for the colors of horses, their many varied, running shades. If only we could all be as reliable as the horses we rode in on. I want many words for you. I want something as far as I can throw it. No, farther. You say, I throw like a girl. I do everything that way. I ask, is the flue open and you look up the chimney. I ask,  can you see the sky? Can we have heat? Before you walk away, try to find it. Fix the dripping radiator. Don’t travel too far—walk, or ride out on some journey alone. Our brains too big for our bodies, too big for the cage of our skeleton. Even our bipedal nature changed everything. The bones in our feet rearranged. This whole house smells of body. Damp shower and sheet. I show you my socks that are starting to thin and you say, here come the toes . I point to our curtains falling from window. You won’t fix it all before you go. In the beginning Georgia burned. In the beginning you were born in a motel pool, all blue fever. The soda machines in the corner sputtering with quarters in their bellies, made you think of time, shuffling and reshuffling. A smokestack, slow lips of a song, your sister kissing a man with the back of her teeth as if digging her hands into the calm, bent earth. All of it soft, bruises flush with light, open and glowing, blooming and unblooming the way it is impossible to grow into something unstill. flat sky reflects a frozen marsh when I could not find, could not feel  the hunger as I thought I should  and look at the arrangements they make across the earth— leaves tougher and wiser,  eight weeks of winter in the veins.  When the answers go, where the answers go, I cannot up and follow.  Questions left like shoes beside the door, wet socks stuffed inside them.  What I would not suffer, will not suffer.  It is entirely your fault you are alone.  What I want is to chronicle change.  What you wanted, want, will want—  Just look at the leaves. Look at them now, and now, and now.  Mornings cupped like someone else’s hands.         I.  Here is Muldrow Glacier, and here are Camps Six and Seven.  The dotted line running up this side is the route of ascension.  Over there is Archdeacon’s Tower. Here and here are probable sights of bivouac.  This is where his sleeping bag was sighted but not recovered.  It was wrapped around a pole as though a signal to no one.  X marks the axe— also seen but not recovered,  like the bodies of three other climbers: X  X  X — schemata of the mountain’s stigmata.  II.  In theory, a map is useful: it renders two- dimensional what exists in three dimensions,  or in this case, no dimensions, unless we’re counting time, which is like  wearing both shoes on one foot. In fact, a map’s convenient, able to be folded up  and carried in my pocket, opening and closing like a lung. But in the end a map is useless,  only gravity’s graffiti and snow’s slow pentimento. Unrepentant map, no X marks the mountain’s fontanel,  its loosely woven selvage he fell through into, the legend- less depths of the wild mind, the memory      leaving us  only this permanent impermanence, this paper tattoo breathing in and out the black ink of not knowing.         On a thin protrusion of Massachusetts rock surrounded on three sides by sea  down a U-shaped street abutting the beach  in a shingled house    among shingled houses locked up for winter  chilly and silent except for the hum of empty refrigerators  in a room at the end of the hall—Lena’s room— we slept. By morning  we had set ourselves adrift  on a white raft    on a gray sea the cold of which  was a fact that couldn’t touch us.  Our little raft  kept twirling and reversing   fore and aft    above us a swaying  forest of masts smooth as polished bone.    From somewhere along Route 127 Lena’s mother approached.  A neighbor had spotted our car.  Meanwhile    off the port bow    a buoy konged and Lena     all skin  among scattered pillows a valiant    amateur sailor  began the slow descent along my belly into the sheets’ folds  where    nervous at first she would soon taste the salt of the sea lapping  against the damp-dark hull of the boat. A shower curtain pretends to be a forest w/ bark painted on no    birch exists  in Brooklyn   no forests  I plant a universe of moss in a broken  light bulb     add in plasticsheep & their keeper    I draw tarot cards  from maman’s palm knowing she can’t read her own blood  (my fortune goes unannounced) after rain I go out     to the streets  pick up snails     let them slink up    & down my arms  I mistake my neighbor’s face on fire for the moon Mohammed Awidi, on his zoo in Khan Younis, Gaza  Even if the formaldehyde weren’t homemade. Even if I hadn’t needed  to walk through fire for needles, for mounts, for glass eyes – no one knows  how hard it is to stuff an animal that might have died  hating you. First day the ceasefire let us through:  the lions carved kitten-size. The porcupine starved to an empty anemone.  The baboon’s cage filled with corpses he refused to let us touch.  But the worst were the monkeys, the ones we found wide-eyed, looking up,  clinging to the earth like they might fall off.  Tonight we will walk the grounds together & brush aside  the small ghost paws that tap our ankles. Tell me:  an animal is a body all the way down – it only knows what the body knows,  it cannot see God washing his hands. It cannot see the villagers steal  from their homes, with water-pails, with long, long ropes – & it cannot hope  to see them again, or for that matter wonder why don’t they come back. It’s not a thing we bring up, like a white stone  stopper in a white milk jug. Like the words might  escape if we aren’t vigilant. & We are vigilant,  all goose-flesh & pink- rimmed eyes, in fear  of our lives, all day, all night, especially at night.  We brush a square patch of mirror with sky.  Hypothesize. Mention how the blue  of an eye is colorless. Just an empty iris, like  the less there is of us the more we must deserve.  & ‘more’ is the word, isn’t it, what boys  in hooded sweatshirts ask for? Chalking the sidewalk  is good honest work, but then so is washing it away. i remember it   like a bullet     remembers the bone.  she was only fifteen   and i a year older     but we wanted it  more than anything.   i remember afterwards     her body heaving  like a racehorse   on the floor     of the empty house  next door to mine   as an unwelcome terror     let itself in  like a six year old   understanding space     for the first time or  like the alleyway robbery   of a pear-cut gem     i’d carried around  for years, not knowing   what a diamond was     or that it was there  all along   deep in the left pocket     of my favorite coat,  though sometimes i remember   myself double, holding     both the stone and the gun. On nights when the moon has fully emptied out itself he would watch the waltz of gnat & lizard on the ceiling a distant sound of froth muffling their tongues.  When the crickets’ legs have stilled & tangled along with another (an amputee, with equally broken music) he would pull himself up from the mat of woven  leaves feeling each bone grind against cartilage (& his cartilage moans ‘muscle’ & nerve tickles his tender swollen mosquito bites) & he takes out his makeshift gas lamp from  an old cupboard, twisting the rubber plug free, refilling the oil. He pulls a small metal latch & a fire ignites sputtering as he fiddled with the gas knob till he is satisfied  with the intensity (the lizard’s shadow on the wall flickers, as if tiny palms were pushing against its belly) He straps it & a small knife on his hip holster & descends  from his stilted shack, the low tide lapping at his rubber slippers sand coaxing it into its crushed bed, forcing him to remove their wet grip & fling them out like freed crows, stripping into flies  into night. Pumping more fuel into his lamp, he begins his trek, feet wade knowingly through the seaweeds, shy cartographer flesh meets ocean flesh. He would reach  out for edibles, tossing them into the pail: clumps of seaweed cone snails, black & white sea cucumbers that he would dismember first. Stooping close, his hand brushes beneath  a bleached table coral & carefully picks up a sea urchin his flame illuminating its dancing violet spines. Turning it over he presses on the circular lining of its mouth with his thumbs  cracking it open, pouring out the violet liquid. He scrapes off the orange sex sacs with a finger, raising them to his lips, slipped inside for tasting. From afar he sees some antlered body ascend  bursting over the surface before shattering. The pang of salt deserts without leaving claw marks in his throat catarrh parching his mouth – how long, since his gas ran out? Wet lace-light on the window retracts into morning as if  a crumpling prayer: Closer yet  I approach you, / What thought you have  of me now, / I had as much of you – A rocking chair pendulums,  soaked, in the soft breeze. However sure I was – am gone,  now hum low a low hymn, lift breath from the loam, fill it with speech.  Let your own lilting break the horses that saddle the rain. A woman forgot her baby in the park. People found it murmuring in the bushes, called it Fairy . I want to keep sleeping when his yell slices twilight — not feed the baby, whose appetite is unfeeling, total. The baby grunts, spits — I want to be alone, but it would be good for me to go out with the baby. If I keep walking, he keeps sleeping. A woman at the park’s edge holds honey petals to her nose, breathes them the way I breathe the baby’s furry head. A woman left her baby in the car, rushed to work — her baby overheated & died. I forget things so often now. I never forget my glasses. It would be so easy to forget the baby. Old bikes lie on porches, washed in yellow light, exhausted. I hover two fingers above his chest, search for breath. I love to hear the baby’s slight gasp when I turn on a light — I study his open mouth, flick the light on & off & on until I can’t. I forgot my keys, my jacket. A woman drove off with her baby on the roof of her car. Did I fasten the buckle around the baby’s soft waist? I didn’t want to come out today, but it is good to smell the oily pizza boxes at Pino’s, to dodge the garbage truck lumbering down Hastings Street, men hanging on by a tiny crescent. They found her baby at 45th and Cholla on the highway line, alive, not even crying. I had a hat once that I loved, red and blue wool. I lost & found it in a Shaw’s parking lot, mashed down, brown with exhaust. I washed it by hand, hung it up to dry. The baby licks the stroller harness, wets the rip proof vinyl to a deeper red. When my mother’s voice breaks, she says marriage & it sounds like cage . When the train doesn’t come. I drink for quiet. When I’m on a rooftop. When I see a bridge. When I’m expected to beg. When they tell me my ending isn’t believable. When they say it’s too much poem, not enough life. When the doctor snaps his rubber gloves. I’m on my knees. When I become vessel. When my father spits Bible. When he says he knows how I want it. When the bees sting. Smoke is blown in my face. When I’m told I’m better when I smile. When there’s a hand over my mouth. When I taste raw honey. When it snows too early, I smell the school bus. When the air conditioner is busted. When the light goes purple. When the chlorine stings, when the whiskey stings. When dishes shatter, or bones. When I hear about women swallowed by love. When they call it love . When a bad thing is done & everyone laughs. When he calls my writing college girl psycho babble & everyone laughs. There’s blood under my fingernails. There aren’t any windows. The handle’s emptied & there’s no ride home, radio playing that song with my name. I see a high river, a tower collapsed. We commend the spirits of dead cows whose bones bleach in the cruel radiance of the sun god Ra’s land, these Egyptian pastures. Mirages melt salt pyramids at the edge of escarpment and cedar thicket. Snag yourself on a limb or a great- horned owl’s call navigating back roads or the guitar music at the local pool shack referred to as “a bar” despite only Shiner in its beverage coolers. The drunk dart players spin on their axes of booze, smoke, and country lyrics but remain beautiful in their constant twirling back into each other. Have you ever watched them? Have you ever listened to the sermon of bodies relaxed and laughing? To commune as they do you must give up your good life, the city, the Q train, Park Slope, and pizza. Traveler, settle here if you know what work is and cannot escape it without feeling guilty. Come and teach school at least. You’re the man with two wives caught between deciding— the two cities you keep like two young families who don’t know each other though they met on the 4th of July at the fireworks show in this two-bit county that includes Llano, Kingsland, and part of a vast lake that touches the sky when you stand beside it as the thunderheads build the same blue erasure they are building today with their ruthless anvils. Disappear here and no one will ever find you. Steal a truck and head out on 16 to the coast, or the border, or hell—drive wherever you want with the lover you miss and have not written yet but will write to today when the rainfall ceases, and you’re left in a Ford with some paper, a pen, and your fingertips inked blue as if dipped in blood from a vein in your arm extending for miles if you stretch it out in your imagination all the way from Brooklyn to your heart in Texas: just the way you like it. “Rep. Joe Wilson shocked many observers Wednesday night when he shouted, ‘You lie!’ after the president denied that health care legislation would provide free coverage for illegal immigrants.”             – CNN.com, 2009  And so what if I didn’t die. Blood for no reason I thought it was cancer  in the toilet bowl. I was nineteen, if that’s what you’re thinking,  and had experience saying goodbye to someone whose body couldn’t hear me.  I kept my head until we reached the pool and segued into a story about my birthplace  and how my nails were all turtles swimming back to land. What I was trying to say  was that my aunt was an American citizen who lived as long as she did because  she always took down the Christmas tree. The water we put our feet into  was the neighborhood’s crater and I’m sure those going to bed heard me  because I said I wasn’t one to cry, and so he should listen.  Every ornament was an ovary she boxed, but what I had to say had nothing to do  with dying. She wasn’t my aunt by blood, after all, and my medical history  was an unidentified coastline. I said I am in trouble. If there was ever something  wrong in me, I couldn’t see anyone, just to check. Do you understand?  He understood as much as you and who was to blame. When the water levels were low I drove to the northeastern shore of the Great Salt Lake  thinking again about having lost the spelling bee on the word rustle , spelling instead, and slowly,  wrestle into the microphone’s foam. One folding metal seat left occupied behind me,  the crowd waiting—what had I imagined I heard in the trees? With my grief counselor I talk about hallucinating,  as a child, a double on the dashboard and my double would say, “Don’t you say a word,”  though I’d already be looking past myself and at the horizon of taillights reddening.  It is possible to have been this way even then. Even then it is possible something split in me  the first time I lied myself a citizen. At the tilt of a head, was I the young woman  or the old, the duck or the rabbit in the optical illusion? After the accident I turned out  all of the lights in the room while I watched, concussed, from the mirror. I edged like a fever  with nothing on the tip of my tongue. I imagine from a distance the glare off the water desiccated me. People disappear. And go looking for a place to be looked at. All the way down Wilshire and above us: like a sheet of indigo tile. As we waited, our nicotine glowed in the distance like flies to some heaven, some high road. “Who sat on mountaintops in cars reading books aloud to the canyons?” Like gods and at home being extras at best. I almost believed love then someone new called me and time’s been repeating. Time’s on like a show. They say we’re all wanted for living, that somebody’s coming, but even the darkest of frames make a face feel unsafe. Yours was here, yours was seen and it could have been two but you sold it for nothing. Goodbye to all that then we’re back low, trying to fit the right size for what passes as days. Take a vitamin, angel. Drink water. The earth is a big thing. Would you still like to have it or take the check early tonight? I get worried then go for a drive with my eyes closed right here—on the thirty-third floor of my thirty-third year— what a party it turned out to be. No one wanted to leave. When the car you steer best is not yours; or the body. The house and the job. Rooms of white lines. Gold lobbies. We cringe at these lists but without them, who’s counting? I was flying over the country with you, over states in their neat squares and fixed laws. Flying over the country with women and men in their trim suits and skirts. Some nights I wait right out front for a moment well after I get home. (Forced silence.) I know what’s inside. We know what comes next. All through our last year we find remnants, the shell of a turtle long after what lived  turned dust, the skull of a fox, clean as the first scent of fall, a nest untangling  in the wind, the same wind that rouses the chimes, sweeps dead leaves  into the river, and farther down river a man hauls a net  into his boat, the way you hauled secrets into yourself, each day growing  heavier and heavier. This morning, I sat on the patio crying for you,  and I heard my neighbor teaching his toddler to count. He called out each  number, and she chimed back her bird- like approximations. And though I’ve never  met them, I loved them, and for today, this was enough. The green island of your life will recede.  It will hover above its reflection as the boat cuts its wake and a white  lip curls steadily from the sea—  the harder you grip the rail and stare the more there will be no apparent change  but the shore will nonetheless flatten into a dark line then only the idea  of a dark line so that when you look  away and then back you will not be certain where it is & how you stand  in relation to what is no longer there.  o  Changes will alter the knit of your body.  Not these hands gripping the boat rail now made of fine-grained vapor  but the body you left on the kitchen floor  where its weave of ligature grows slack as it sheds its  memory of habitual movements and coagulations and chemical shifts  occur as if you were a warm loaf left cooling on a countertop— n. the close of day; evening; twilight  Hour ghosts boil bark into cool water for a town to rub on its burns. Hour dogs pass to mountain shale then back to hunter below a half-gone moon. Hour the pastor’s hand becomes a bride confessing to a diamond lost and found in the parish boy’s boots. Hour a fox crossing the porch sounds not unlike a widow sweeping straw. Hour grace is left playing with matches, hour the sun drags out the moon to stand against a tree and shoot. Hour the chickens get their names, the thistle their thorns. Hour a truck drives like an ocean in peacetime, hour the coyote bums a smoke ring from the boy growing his father’s hands. Energy can only be compacted to the point where it starts to hate itself,  so I ran until I collapsed. As I laid, panting, in the grass,  the sky darkened into a pond pricked by constellations of koi gasping for air.  It looked as if they were praying to me, which was strange because I also wanted answers. Trees palsied  though there was no wind. Beginnings often take the form of tremors: foreshock, shaky hand,  contraction. Singing overlaid the rumbling, which was seismic — the singing was really  screaming — if I were a stone, the blows would have broken me open  and revealed a hollow lined with chalcedony, startling us both. & here i am: somewhere in the middle of my life in the middle of texas listening to a man on the radio tell the story of two brothers falling from a high rise: one survives, the other does what you’d expect, & i am lying on my back listening for the sound of skin against pavement, for the radio to start spilling over its limbs & every place i’ve ever lived was a desert once & will become desert again: i call my brother just to hear him breathing & he’s an empty sound, a scythe knifing still air: how you can look back on a life & see only salt there & isn’t this gravity: the planet sprinting through blackness while i listen to another man grieve his dead, knowing my own brother might outlive me, his voice a stone falling through the line, landing somewhere wet inside me & outside my window in the middle of texas in the middle of the street two boys in matching greek jackets stumble drunk through the dark, arms desperate for the other, bearing their terrible closeness, fighting god to stay erect. Always the sensitive child  The needle on my father’s record player  Would jump at the suggestion of movement  When dancing          the lyric would become  For many hours              my love              wind  All of my love  As it stood the standards were best played out of sequence  & vinyl was a new country to sink your teeth in  For fear of ruining the music  I’d let each note drag its battery through my stillness  & still were the wild legs of my heart  If only i’d known what loss would cause  The glasses to come crashing out of their cabinet  What needle would exaggerate each fingerprint left  Always tender i’ve grown into the kind of man who can’t walk  Through the produce aisle without weeping  Hearing my dead lover in the water & wind  Spilling over the collards  Every grapefruit tragic & taunting with its bitterness  & its sweet                                                                                                           These latticework arches of steel are Sutro’s Il Gesu —his mother church— housing pristine baths behind glass the color of rosemary.  1896: six saltwater pools, men and women clad in bathing caps and one-pieces. One woman dallies on the stairs, grazing the water with her toe.  Now, the baths are ruins. The shoreline listens to the sea’s quiet, the same way  children listen with cupped hands to their parents arguing in the next room.  A model being photographed in the ruins balances on her toe’s knuckle, posed like a dancer,  the wind catching her dress and spinning her slowly like a weathervane. These ruins,  gloved in moss, festooned with the red of wildflowers, are altars  in this small valley carved into the cliff side. How the hawk, in her hunt above us,  hovers on the updrafts, achieving the perfection we only imagine— to fall and be held up  without having to choose between the two, is the kind of grace we can live in here.  No better sea bathing in the world , the program reads— a quarter for the day and children free on Sundays.  From the lip of the hillside, I take a picture of the model, who’s stripping off her dress to reveal a Victorian bathing suit  underneath, and tucking her long, black hair into a bathing cap. She runs her hands  down her legs like a boatwright testing the curve of a keel. The hawk folds her wings  and dives, but rises from the hillside with nothing. In an hour, they are both gone.  I walk through the ruins, past a sign that warns:  People have been swept from the rocks and drowned .  I stand on the shoreline wall. The sea wants nothing but for me to fall and keep falling;  the waves, like bulls, crash against the wall but their bellowing becomes a mist of salt. They won’t take me today.  In the distance, a container ship crests the horizon. It’s carrying something for me, I know. How I can tell—that’s another story. In the mornings I peel off my sadness & hang it up to dry. I walk throughout  the day with my organs out as the mosquitos orbit my blood.  I watch a petal bloom into a skirt of pink & think of how I waited for my first period  for years & the morning the red stain rippled in the toilet. How I played football  with the boys in the school park & let my moustache grow longer  than anyone in my class & isn’t that a type of girlhood  too? In my sex dreams a penis swings between my legs, a pendulum or clock  tower puncturing my days.  I watch myself destroy the bodies of others.  & my wetness blooms across the sheets. Maybe this is why I wake up sad.  Longing for my other body only to rise, drowned in an echo of its silhouette.  Mother, where are you? How would you have taught me to be a woman?  A man? Can you help me? Each day without you I pile questions  & whisper them to the soil, your new body & the grass laughs  in my face. Sometimes I laugh along & for a moment forget  I was talking to you. Sometimes I let you go & my body is fully mine.  Fully alive, dancing, boy-girl feet pounding into the earth.  Not the graveyard it pretends to be. Sometimes, I come home full  brimming with the hours of the day. The fault from my sudden joy,  my forgetting, glowing guilty on my skin. I put my grief back on. I’m not used  to being happy. Like how I’m not used to high-heeled shoes. Or too many rings.  But, please, know I am not complaining. Don’t take from me my loneliness.  I promise, my small joy is not goodbye. how many times has someone killed my name before meeting me?  my own lover bleeds out asghar with a knife, cuts the seeds  from the pepper & doesn’t worry if it will continue to grow.  a seedless hari mirch . it’s getting harder for me to eat spicy food  & I pretend I don’t know why. all my life I’ve been trying to remember  who I am. all my life I’ve been erasing myself to make seats at the table  for everyone else. how can I demand more from the world if I can’t even  ask for my name in love?  -//-  on the train another white girl compliments my eyelashes  & then starts plumping on mascara. she preens & preens until they are three  times the size they once were, looks up at me & smiles.  can’t we be pretty without being theirs?  when I start to cry she angles her body away from me & pulls out her compact  mirror, which says conquer .  -//-  I hate being called by my name when I’m getting fucked.  each lover I’ve had who’s laid it out to rot & calls themself sexy.  the carcass of my name clings between their teeth like old  meat. it haunts the entire room all night, keeping me  awake. no one else can smell it.  -//-  I read about the white poet who took a Chinese name  & can’t move for an hour. I read about the Syrian orphans  being made every minute & weep into the floor.  I remember walking the souks of Aleppo at night & how everyone  smiled. how a man gifted me a bar of soap that is still  unopened because I thought it smelled too silky to be wasted on my skin.  I wonder where he is now. the white women in my timeline  think I’m racist because I write about cultural appropriation.  why can’t we have that too? somewhere, the girl is still riding  the train, plumping her eyelashes & peering into a mirror that tells  her to conquer. I can’t get out of bed & my lover doesn’t understand  why. no one knows the ways in which I am tired, my dead name  on everyone’s breath.        Each box thrums like a buried heart, gives as the heart gives. Until collapse. Working  the memory of venom from my hands, medallions of hello, Spring’s down payment. Sun ekes out mist after morning’s slap of rain, the hive  rising to a pitch of almost , of fury, the wait, atoms heated and trying to disperse.  I am dressed as an ineffectual god—colors that claim no fervor from them, nor invoke the fur of predator. I am pleased, unnoticed while working.  Only when they’re alarmed, if I forget the smoker, will the stingers dig me. I fight  the suspicion they would steal from me— not mosquitoes with their derrick forms. My reflex: swat, and only then consider  the ripples rolling outward from under my palm: fish tip out of the boiling oceans and drop  into the sky, tugged by the moon’s thin line; Nor’easters stalk the autumn coast, drunk through startled-bare forest. I savor the thought’s little fat on my tongue; I’ve lost  three summers of weight around the waistline and I’m not sure I’ll get the hang of this. I don’t know why  we exist but I know whose hands these are, who I am, I know everything they touch. In two days I will open the hives to find them bare, not even a corpse. Teeth  picked clean. I see rivers boil under the flowers they ferry, bees plunging toward those petals to drown in the acid.  And how could they be saved? Today I do nothing but watch them ease back into the rainless sky, un-disappeared, the mass of them hovering like an empty thought bubble,  or at least, empty of words known to me. Each a curled letter, each its own striped flag. Start with sediment. Plant a tree in your backyard, wait forty summers or more, two generations for the sapling  to grow and flesh and buckle. Then you’ve got your wood. Here, you run out of matches. Here, the rain  streaks in dark gashes against pale-faced Tuesday, subway stations inundate, flood as if to pad a thrashed knee, hobbling  your only route to the store. In a city of millions there’s no way you’ve never passed a hit man  on the street, right? Just yesterday you saw the bald man’s dull rag wrapping his fists, a red shadow  just below his navel. His smile, a knowing one, self-aware but not embarrassed. He hustled past you,  a wind-up toy speeding along for now, not noticing how life-drunk, how moth and staggered the walk  you’ve kept up for years. Ask the full-chambered sun to come back, spin light down  through the storefront with its giant flickering M, illuminate the golden fibers of the rope coiled on the shelf  like a snake first glanced at noon, shining and dozing, wrapped around some grass, its eggs, its pitted venom.  Your wallet sprung open like a car’s steel ashtray, overflowing. Inside every neon sign a gas is trying to expend  its bright, inside every cradle of ink you see your apple tree hung with burgeoning fruit  swollen and desirous for the earth. There is no pit in the pomegranate large enough to harbor rest—  search anyway, your skin licking the mashed juices, maddening shreds of the sun’s  one language. Outside this blue jawbreaker of a planet is cold nothing and the Lord; at the core  of each poison apple, a seed. The potential for heat. O taste & see David’s lips, his mouth: a crucifix for my wet begging.  When he sang worship songs—  I emptied my pockets, my purse, & let down my hair for a tenth of his blue gaze.  The Lord said He was the One , so church girls bought wedding dresses.  O to be saved by a man who could sing like that— silky vocal runs warm on fingertips melting sin.  I never sought to be like the stupid girls  but when he grabbed my crotch, I said— Yes. An altar for his drossy hands was my body.  I became the Easter poinsettias too, open & red, shiny with lacquer.  Yes to curry that laced our tongues with yellow spice. We laid in bed & burped & laughed all night.  We saw a couple having sex in a car. He stayed & watched as they watched him.  I held his hand on the streets walking home, thought I heard a voice say He was the one , but—  the summer wind can mimic almost any wish.  A grown man crying in my car— A grown man picking a speck of black pepper from the wet groove of my gums with a toothpick  like wheedling a soft prayer. Amen.  He almost destroyed New York, but I didn’t want New York anyway. Amen.  How every tug & tough was a bite that drew no blood.                                                                                                                                                      Amen.  The last email said I was just  a really good friend… a sister in Christ . Amen.  We slowly gnawed at the savior of desire,  a valley of dry humping that made raw heat but no spark. Selah.  & when he wasn’t singing I was lying with my body.  & when there was no more milk— I left him,  but in some ways I am still walking down this aisle on my knees. Today is a new year and winter and there are so many things I’m ready to think about.  Like that it’s morning and the power plant is a womb for clouds.  The clouds aren’t real because no matter how hard I look I see  only clouds in them, not rabbits or a pirate ship or hands. The sliding glass door  before me should be cold if I touch it but it won’t be because I can’t feel anything anymore  after flooding my body too many times with an army of synthetic soldiers.  I know now this isn’t a solution. I now know so much more. I know  that last night five thousand blackbirds dropped dead over an Arkansas suburb  and it wasn’t my fault. I’ve only ever killed a robin and I’ve never been to Arkansas.  This year I won’t feel responsible. Last night I was out on the deck  watching fireworks chew through the air, flocks of green and gold that showered  back to earth. Last night in Arkansas, nightfeather was everywhere. Did they fall  at once or scatter? This year I won’t ask questions like these and I won’t be  disappointed when I’ve come up with an answer. I don’t need answers.  I can go to the mailbox and find a tally of the grams I’ve shot-up  equated to the hours of daylight I’ve got left and be fine, knowing  that it’s time to make some changes. Last night was the last night  I’m high. I mean it. While everyone was drinking and ringing in the New Year, I stood in the yard  and decided that sometimes you have to tell yourself you’re the first person  to look out over the silent highway at the abandoned billboard  lit up by the moon and think it’s selling a new and honest life.  All you’ve got to do is take it. It’s simple, even when you know you’re not the first  to stand on a lawn of frozen dark and scratch his arm dreaming of the future.  I know there are ways to feel different than how I do just before the train pulls in,  or when I walk the halls when everyone’s asleep, or when I’m asked to hold  the shotgun, or when my brother won’t give me cash when he’s just trying to help  and way back in the ruins of my mind, I want to make a blackbird  of him. I’m capable of that. And so are you. I dreamt disappointment  is like finding a balloon in a drawer. Once it floats out, you can’t fit it back in.  It just hangs there. I just hang there on a string. This year I won’t be  okay with that. In two days I’ll admit myself in exchange for putting out  the white fire on my scalp. A paper cup, a pill, an I.V.’s plastic needle  dry-humping an old stab spot. My bones will announce themselves  by packing up and moving out, I’ll melt into my bed sheets like I used to melt  into upholstery. They’ll say the hard part’s coming. When you can’t  take anything for the pain, the pain takes you. I’ll wait. I’ll be ready,  I’ll look out my picture window where across the street  they’ll be building a bigger, better ward. Open floors of steel stacked up  with tarps for walls that fill like sails, a galleon on the caustic waters  of the troubled. Blasts of light from welders like headless phoenixes  that would burn my eyes if closer. Two things brought together  through an arc of white energy. I like the sound of that.  But I’ll be there to pull myself apart. It’ll start. I’ll hear a blizzard coming  and think maybe someone should do something about it. The cold is already here,  filling up the window. Maybe the window was a bad idea?  Imagine that, the first window. All that light bursting in. No wind. And the world,  finally at a distance. A thing to be looked at, not felt. Houses wake with light by the mug-full – parades of underarmor and boots; cars backfire then shimmy to a start.  The second time we’re born they say will be of fire.  The third of snow.  But coaxing the boy’s arms through his sleeves, she knows this time he was born an elephant which is to say he is an obelisk and a rope.  Just last night, she woke to the radio looping a station’s jingle followed by militants dragging a foreign city by its spindly legs.  She turned on the lamp. Or she didn’t.  She swaddled her little elephant in wet darkness that branched like pines that ring the house.  These hours fray at the tips, peal or tip-toe, want what they want, if only bodies to knead the swollen mouth, massage from the pain a shape as she coaxes it through sleep.  Dali’s joke: the animal does not know where it ends nor begins.  And there is something swanlike about that. Isn’t there? A beauty that hurts so bad in its understanding of its own loneliness.  Once, she saw a cygnet spill across the confusion of a white lake.  At water’s center rested an island. On the island, black trunks blanching at the tips. The killing was in the corner of the room where it would be unobtrusive the killing was gaudy its colors brash and non complementary when we finally received it the killing was worn from use but rustic in charm its contours and fabrics pleasant on the fingertips at first dark and shortly before our alarms go off the killing begs to be fed and we oblige it the killing mewling about our legs our guests come for snacks they come for drinks and repartee and they are envious of the killing we might call it our killing but everything is ours only temporarily our children eye the killing and take comfort that the killing will one day be theirs an inheritance or something to remember us wherever we have gone the killing has been appraised it is valuable for a killing its features  are much larger than they seem outwardly in it we store rings trinkets important papers the killing caught a bird and let it free because we commanded it so obedient and precious this killing If for every action  there is an equal                        but opposite ,  then the question becomes how to define,  becomes what if nothing . Because  they brought me to the river, I knew what was meant  when they named it Brazos ,                 named it after God’s muddy arms.                  I knew what each canal  hid: the slivers of murk, the dead fish on the surface,  & because I knew the disappearance of the river’s mouth (each storm filling it with more silt),  I knew the disappearance of my own mouth, each year of forgetting, each  unwording of the past, & when I couldn’t remember anymore  I dived to the muddy bottom & tried to drown—  It was beautiful—                    the weightlessness, It was beautiful—                    the belief we can crush ourselves & never learn  regret , learn fear .  & when I realized my body wouldn’t stay, that the desire to float up to the light was too much,  I was relieved.                                    My mother said we call this the act of finding our Gods.  I call it the artistry of loss —  but with half-breath, & floating                    alone in the Texas heat  I want to call it the failure to turn ourselves into what we’ve tried so hard to be.  Grasping the bulkhead,                      climbing the pier, the sun above.  If nothing becomes the only way to say then .        Some lives are so twisted in the belly, throat blue & airless. Corset-bound,  I have no arms left in your repackaging to hold back cellophane, the walls. Boxed.  Your memory trails the way of an elephant, oversized for a single room. So I am strung out, hungry, awake.  Hunger is entropy—ever after. I swallow the night, I swallow the left side of the bed  & pull the pregnant covers over my eyes of biding with you. Because it is too much to swallow,  because yesterday’s special is today’s leftover. The tongue diagrams the taste.  I keep diagramming the same years: spoon & cup, ocean & blanket. We have no bones,  though I drag you with me. There is nothing to say now. I remember your hands  calloused & all want—the whole is a fractal of everything. I can see  the pieces. I see mine coming back together with arms.  little wekiva river  BY TANYA GRAE  I want no evidence I am dirty.  All the fruit I picked, a dress full, I let drop—  heavy shoes on the heart pine floor. Purpling under the skin, all I thought I wanted:  the house with its backyard river, swing set & sundial. Enough wild bougainvillea sprang to be kept overlooking the gate. Until now. Sun falling behind the live oak, gnomon pointing—  me, stepping out of the dress.         When you told me about swimming at night I thought of your naked body covered carefully or not covered in moonwater,  how little I know about your body. The dark flowers, ripples parting  from white shoulders, parentheses around you diving down and deeper down to the dark in dark. It was three AM. I’d slept.  And turning, I still missed you in the way we miss the disembodied.  I don’t understand how I ought to love you, so we talked silverware, arched arrangement, position—as if the body  were only an old spoon. A ladle. Silver heirloom bestowed  but bloody. To hunt – to cut the stag open, to wear the color hidden there like rouge. Pale girl, fat carcass; boy uncut, unhooved. The combination of girl and boy in flowering desert. Girl and boy in flood, brackish water. For the sake of children. Her brain like cauliflower, cheesecake in dark rooms; girl and boy: conscience between two mothers. The upper half of body, the lower depth of honey, rough beast, dark brass—burnt tokens from home, remnants, chrysanthemums in a gale. Their olio of limbs. Here then, new habitat: his forehead in early sunlight where cold scarlet and opaline mind, her cilia her sinew, mole underfoot. Here then, her false-thorned earrings and sycamore skins, wind white with petals wild from a week alone. Alone, undone—like a father and a feather whose forecast: breath, oil, fossil. Pharmakon: a cure as well as a poison. In open grave, her hands deep in the pockets of. The voice of a crane. I go looking for you in the street. I say to the crab apple tree, You are Frances .   I say to asbestos shingles, What keeps you in place ? A car with new Firestones  stops at the light, rumbling, We will never die ,  though your hands could do more work . I remember you  wringing starched sheets between rollers, hanging them on the line to dry. I’ve never been  that clean in all my life. God will never reward me in the way I hope. Frances, you polished  the baby’s shoes. You made silver shine. You pinned prayers to your head and shook  floor mats free of stones. The street can’t hold my desires. Who painted those white lines?  Where does the horizon go when we reach it Frances, there’s a dog in the road. Whatever stones I’d turn over, Frances made me put them back. When I’d unravel the hose,  I never could restore the stack of coils. If I laughed, I’d see her study my open mouth. Sometimes,  I’d stay quiet beside her, her fingers working leaf or vine or soil.  There’s nothing that grows greater than silence.  She never said, Listen . Never said, This dirt lines your lungs . I breathed and breathed and the sleeves  of her work-blouse wore thin. I didn’t know  where my knuckles sprung from or the freckled legacy of my arm.         First, let me admit I am a counterfeit. A sleek composite. The fourth meal of the day is paraphernalia. Which is another way to say, I learned how to man , and I worry when I’m not careful, I drown out the seven parts of me with one abominable baritone. Should sounds so much like shove , doesn’t it? It gutters the cold rain and dumps it on your head. The soil grows whatever it’s fed. Everything entering the ear takes root. And speaking of dirt, think of the dandelion weed—those little puffs blundering the backyard. Their furry spray lifting to flight. All it takes is a weak fiasco of wind. But first, the bulb must bloom yellow— and pretty even—from a knot as tight as solitude. And still it scatters like a fist of warm dice. You too began curled and cooed awake, then some blue lung began to chant  a boy should this and a boy should that , and you shouldn’t listen, little corn-shuck, it’s a strange song, mostly sad and hard to dance to.      dead man float  BY KEITH LEONARD    was a game, was the back humped and limb stiff hover until something inside the body said enough . Then it was time to watch. To count aloud what might be the last seconds of living. His body, underwater, blurred. In the distance, the ocean flattened like a lifeline. There was an unspoken rule not to help. To need help was a weakness. We were boys. It was a game we thought we made ourselves. One channel reruns the show whose talking horse was magic.  Popular. Likable, with a common name. The name makes me want to be alive  in the 50s, cooking from boxes. Watching ketchup commercials, my wrist  limp over an ashtray, smoke going over my ring, a friend  stopping by to gossip, to say her refrigerator is on the fritz.  In my sad dreams, everyone is there, wearing cardboard and glitter  tiara headbands for the year about to be born. A band plays.  These days I fold into poses with animal names, pulling  pretend rain toward the ceiling. Textured yard eight feet away.  Acres of snow and one red bird so far away I can’t fix my eyes on it.  At that range, the bird may be a branch. Have I tried calling anyone. Has anyone  tried gently shaking the groundhog like a Magic Eight Ball to achieve  a better forecast, a shorter winter. As I see it. Outlook good. Without  a doubt. Concentrate and ask again. Ask another way. Be the blue water  between question and answer or the plastic orb in the warm hand. Dear Francis, Every story you want to be about you will not be about you. I get a feel for your discomfort.  You bring me breakfast in bed with your fixed teeth and love like the desk the movers brought in through a window.  I worried the window would break, the whole apartment would splinter.  I don’t always look for a reason to leave, but when I look I find one.  We empty the floors of dust. We shed more to clean.  If the water comes back I am prepared with a six-pack of blue sponges.  Either you get a checkup and no bill or you fall into the shadows on the X-ray and do not come out of there. A green sound in your back.  Make me look like healthy wood on a table of unhealthy wood. Make me an enormous ceramic.  This green sound in my back.  I tear through a field like it’s my last, the last for at least one hundred miles. This looks less lovely than it feels.  My hair prepared with flowers.  I scrape my knees and say, “Sunset.” My knees look worse in mercurochrome. Orange-red stain, rusting the skin.  Easily mistaken for a wound, a blood.         If I get anything from the lightless it’s less space, the world crowding in to touch and breath. Right now in a plot of north  Canada, exposure alone is sufficient to strip a drunk down to a body, but here I’m frayed far from mine by the scrabble  of sheets on sleeplessness. Not much as problems go, when people are dying just outside my language, and try  as I might there are so many that elude still the word for comfort as I stretch it over the page like a hand, feel into the gut  beyond the human, groping down to dumb mammal warmth. The distant country across the mattress answers me in absence like  the quiet behind the door that yawns for you: cold, it tells me, and I shiver out from under snow of sleep and no matter  how I churn, blink the frost from my eyes, press my heart beyond me into things, still this word, still this small word. 1.  Even ending was animal. A tide pulled back over mudflat. Softening interstice. Little definitions  lighting upon the scene from the easy tongues of air, image teased here  and there apart.  This early light wholes things. Wet bursts of presence: ghost shrimp in their consistent burrows, goby, eelgrass.  The insistence of a dragonfly’s compound eye. No shapes but signs  of life.  A worm avoids  a plover’s stab. Pools wash themselves with wind.                 Instance assured  by a recurrence of greater waves. Lineations of salt mark what has drawn back into itself; a paper-white permits all colour.  Leaving asks something to remain.    2.  When I allow a lake a shape, it too goes loveless. The slicked black leg  of an egret out-bends the body. When I loved you, it was baby’s ear small:  impossible empire. Even still. It permitted flowering. Her body clotting  against mine. Waves have folded the siltplane with their far weather.  To the left, not far, a gravel run of river overspills.  A sandpiper creases the water with its beak.     Nothing tears    3.  like boyhood. Even a wave hates the headland that bears it. What change  is unremarkable. Like the end of love, lighting there in the doorway leaving so much space,  devastating brilliance.  Stones standing themselves for salt, white astonishment of barnacle on a crab’s brick back.        I’ve known to come apart  like this: hands standing themselves from the heart, baring their lines to the sun.  An estuary of only afternoon. This closed house holds too little air. An emptied sound swells  against the ear. Whatever might have been said leaves room, invertebrate, loose in their fine fabrics.  Insistence of recovering tide redistributes what wealth remains, sediment letting go its hard-won histories.    It smooths,  again, blown brittlely singular.    4.  When the door closes behind you— siltplane palm loosing its lines— the edges are slit with sunlight.  Not enough to name, just enough to see by.        Zahle, Lebanon  He is the names of the missing or dead. Smokeless fire, a bell with its tongue cut out,  bloodseed in the foothills, the funnel of a thousand flies.  Habibi , he’ll say, you have a home  here in the barracks here with me .  My love, you’ll meet jinn more times than you know  but to the mountains that whisper and shake,  to the man who places bullets in your hand, you’re only blood. Blood that spills.      gulls  BY RUTH AWAD    Tripoli, Lebanon  Smoke clots. Fire rushes back to the earth,  back to minutes before, back to a man on his balcony and the missile’s pointing finger and the body blistered.  Gulls drag themselves like a dagger on the waterline.  Men can run— what else? What else will save them from the world they’ve burned? If we don’t know 7 times 7, the nuns hit our fingers with meter-sticks. 49 answers Chimol, who dropped out when Mother Superior beat him for comparing La Odisea’s nymphs to the town’s whore. It’s our tradition to name men we’ve seen exit La Salivosa’s door. Today, Chimol tests us on anatomy, this pier can’t cool our bodies at 3 pm. He asks ¿what’s a pupusa? Our national dish we say.  ¿What’s a pupusa? You know, dough filled with cheese. He’s older, wiser, his laughter fills the boat. Caracól means she’s four years younger than Chimol. ¿Should we ask her to join us? She has a pupusa, I’ll show you , he says. She wears shells in her hair, sweat beneath her breasts. Caracól we say. There’s something nervous inside us, except Chimol, he’s not stuttering. Her eyes sit still, wondering if it’s colder inside. There’s so much room Chimol says. Enter . He begins. Her shells rattle. The rattle, rattling. At least she is safe. At least her body of wood rounds at bottom. And if she breaks, as she must, thrust into hands happiest if they hurt her, if she splits or shatters or goes fine, at least she grows smaller and smaller with each dose of the other’s pleasure, as sparrows narrow their numbed bodies to burrow into holes carved from cold. And if she is all hole, opening always as sky opens to take in the wound of snow, at least— cut her paint of patterned petals six times, she holds, at core, a kernel of girl, a seed of soul garnered in snugly screaming. I feel most alone when I am cold. Winter is not a blister, a pulse and press of white suspended in the skin. It’s a fever  and I wait for it to sweat into sweeter things: fragrance and footfalls, purple petals puddling on the street. When  the cold loneliness settles in and steeps, there are places that make me feel safer. I walk through the statues at Vyšehrad and stare at Libuše,  mythical princess who prophesized the rise of Prague. Her gray frame stands stark against the branches, against  the sky blanched to bone. She sweeps her arm towards a vision that towers only in her sight. She named it Praha. She named it Threshold, trying to find  a word for all that can be endured. Snow floats slowly before her stone face. I try to hold her like a map in my mind,  even though she is looking forward while I am reaching back. Once again, my daughter wakes up late in the moment of creation. The window renders everything combustible. Contact is promised but the very act of touching  furthers the distance between us. We trade hearts awhile, we’re digging the new subjectivity. Equally pressing is the whole concept of meanwhile. At the next table, a gun is drawn early  in the first act and never heard from again. The senator came back down the stairs and apologized, talking mostly to himself and for all mankind. The children ran their fingers over the cracked canvas  of the earth. I ducked out for a moment, had a thought or two about the stars and, totally by accident, stepped in the same river twice. Now every day is a dress rehearsal  for Armageddon but nobody dies while I’m talking. I am tired of trees, of birds, of things meaning. All these thees & thous in the distant hum of a rusting ship, drydocked, understandable from one vantage. I put them on a little spit & tie both ends.  *  *  *  The life so short, the craft so long to learn. Floating, sinking, naked of waist.  Who likes the photo crying for help? the temples? the bows? the service of story? the touch of avalanche?  I sit at the end of a chapter, waiting for something older, nobler, to rot out from the inside.  For in my heart I am carving a bird out of muscle & fat.  All these words we drop like coins into the slots, keying in the code, watching the bag of skittles drop . Massachusetts and the remains of winter dissolve like cream  into grey lawn, snarled alders, and Rogers Brook. Two birdcalls  compete between the branches: one fluent, descending, the other shrill.  While the water is so flexible, effortlessly skirting rooted stones—  footage of a helicopter rising in a widening helix above St Peter’s  was broadcast this morning: I was told and would later read  that the Pope soared, in it, away, as Romans thronged their balconies to watch.  Blank azure vaulted the immortal city; here, ghostly brightness broke through, ten minutes at a time,  painted weird shadows, quickened the water; a kiss for the fat vines, the spindly trunks.  Then dusk fumed from the lawn, and soon two coin eyes glittered there, as if casing me—  my house, that is—I was invisible behind the blind, wrapped in my thick blue robe.  2.28.2013  Benedict XVI  Wavering, changing  BY NOAH WARREN  All around itself the crepe myrtle unfolds ten thousand leaves simultaneously.  That pain : each blade slicing out through the stiff vein  for a week. And crowds, as now  ponderous Arab governments are toppling left then right.  My ancestors are seeping from their graves;  the gods of cause, the gods of effect, scrap in the shadows;  hot blood floods my lips, my fingertips—a prickling—  Two destroyers, a trireme, a brigantine, lost, sea anchor in darkness: they let out gossamer ten miles long, wind comes, the cords foul, the hulls shiver together, black tonnages, grinding, grinding, and the ribs open, men breathe ocean—  Our shadows fall on the esplanade. Evening, you murmur to the passersby.  Two promenading citizens.  Your sunglasses glint red, you secure them in the massed coils of your hair. Overhead  the window of a condominium is drawn up.  In my back, the nerve tree tightens its roots.  I can sense the razed temple, it must be near. Weren’t we made to wander on? Weren’t we told to roof it well? Fat, tame, turbid, the river ripples brightly. Upstream the rain droned on, so these willows are sunk neck-deep and chunks of dirt are torn from the bank.  The infrastructure holds: the crest has passed.  This is accommodation.  *  In another month I begin to teach again. I remember the Ethics when I can’t fall back to sleep, then over pho with my sister as she dissects her breakup, her demi banh-mi.  A year since I worked. I don’t think I am worse, but have determined that I can’t know. A post-Catholic remorse lingers: aftertaste.  Whenever I regard my past at middle distance— specifically, the little, grandiloquent myths I nurtured and (saving grace) hid— my perception, thus judgment, darkens to an irony so dense it admits no freer hatch.  I hate that I can’t get past the dreadful naïveté of those selves, can’t forgive them their bundles of earnest expectation, their stubborn attempts to distill  the quotidian into meaning .  Poor things, proud as Huck, drifting downriver, getting smaller.  *  At twenty-two I wanted to see purely. (I knew less and less, even then, what that meant.) But by exertion or hunger or sex or abject failure I could arrive at a state in which my body was hollowed out, leaving a skin which lived and seemed to see.  I wanted not to need other people: I needed a platform that I would build from my experience, my silence.  Chasing that, I neared Cathedral Mountain— its gloomy strata loomed above the clearing spotted with house-sized erratics, past the icebound saddle and the arête.  Slowly, the forests I loved resisted me. The rock flared white in the sun, and that blankness spread through my mind.  Tore through it.  Now I can remember just laboring through deadfall, a sourceless smoke smell, fistfuls of ibuprofen.  And I remember when an August storm strewed my gear a mile down the bed of Joseph Canyon.  I saw the lack rising toward me through the surface of each thing— I turned.  *  Whatever logic shadows this form of thinking forces me to claim for the present, if not triumphant synthesis, the growth of knowledge—  But uncertainty is my new way, it was found, then sought, and now on a weekday afternoon I can lounge by a river in mild flood failing to identify the intermittently hidden and fast-passing fragments of flotsam.  *  I came here, and sensation for three months held me up—  the fan-palm striped the blue stucco wall in a chilly afternoon which continued until suddenly wet warmth filled the wind, the Japanese magnolias popped big magenta fists on their bare branches and the thrushes were floating back and forth across the city, at the center of their piercing cryings-out—  Even when my moods came over me, when I had to huddle over a desk and work desperately at thought, at that proving, there was still enough of it in me to sustain me. Elsewhere too, winter held.  *  But as that ebbed the person I had made and worked to make for twenty-four years resurfaced: the self-impatience that bled over onto others, the useful guilt, and its black, corrosive parent.  I fought it: I wanted to save this new uselessness, to make it useful— to make it moral .  (Such an awkward, powerful word— which I use to hope that if I strain long enough I may be able to justify that part of my life to me.)  *  Carnival built, struck, faded— It was an afternoon in March.  I walked streets, then the louche park. It flowered madly. Braced on my roof in the sun, I read a novel, then came down and fell into the daybed—  I can discover no line between my dreams. There I am often a rain of glass tinkling on the cobbles. Flanked by tugs and a pilot boat, I am a laden tanker creaking down the Mississippi’s final sigmas, and I think I am the flood itself—  I awoke in unexpected dark. I began to walk— night began to end, which meant  that in loose bands the disappointed bachelors were marching home through the Quarter.  Good evening, one said. Good morning, I said, heavily—  my sadness was absolute.  I could smell the early jasmine blooming on both sides of Royal Street, and I could see, beneath its tangle, the wrought iron screens gorgeously excluding, the jagged glass that topped a wall.  *  This, though, is the levee. When wind fans the willows’ leaves they whisper.  Then the breeze abates, leaving an enormous silence, the silence in which the river lives. Jealously I conceive of its power—  and I remember my house at my back, three blocks, a cheery pastel purple.  The crest has passed into the Gulf.  *  I will be meeting children, charming parents. I will take shelter in the world’s idea of worth.  I need to save this year, I will need to return here.  So lightly, in this indolent heat,  I let myself break the word that sticks: de , cadence .  If my life is sad rich music, very well— may it fall upon the ear drop by drop.  If I am tumbling from a high place, may it last.                                                                                                                   There was a time we knew with certainty what we would go and do.  We called it  landing , we saw it promised , and dipped  our noses toward the bay, readied our wheels above the waves’ pacific commas, bright-cresting delays—  and we trusted the ground to reveal itself for our touching down at the last second, never questioning  our own deaths. How tenuous they’d be. This peninsula-city has no graves left, buries dead in unknown places. Unfazed,  we embraced gravity, made our way down the coast’s arm to where you lay, and took twenty questions to ascertain  your latitudes of ache. Head shaking, tube raking along your parched throat—we can’t screen agonies closest to us—  where yeast has colonized the tongue in a crust preventing speech. No bottle brush tree can brush it off, nor we,  the need to have direction, be some remedy—the dog has a blazon of burrs on her chest, and we go home to pull  them off, find the fruit-of-the-month sunk to counters, its scales a maze of rot. We hold the knife as we hold  our lives: to the basket of pineapples, not having cut one before. We twist a crown, kitchen drowns in its manna  smell and slicing the scales we go for the core, mangle it with our stubborn torque, mostly throw them away. It’s knives  we use for shredding and to do the spreading, too. We stroke your hand all afternoon— ambrosia that we’re making; these days  we stomach canned fruit. When I was beginning to understand The things I might be forced into, a swarm Of U-boats came for me.  Gun cocked cold against an avalanche, I plead guilty. Denied my body.  Whenever I end up surviving, I don’t know.  What I know: my school pictures are left best In their negatives, how I’ll always have a fondness For the people I can’t remember.  Soon, I will be glass.  There is something wolf in me.  If I were anything more In this life, I’d let myself forget.  The white of my hand, every boat flagged down. When the machine that kept us safe Broke at its fulcrum,  The lovely noise came.  I’m not sure if I want God Remembering himself inside me.  I’d rather be penned a map Of all the miracles not called for:  The one in which the fox, decoyed by hunger, Went lovingly into the trap.  Battered and bleeding, he still Showed his teeth.  I want to know what it is I have left.       Man, we’ll never know what’s real. It’s just gonna be a head banger’s ball until the end of eternity . – Guy in sweatpants, MUFON meeting, Portland, Oregon  Like a Pyrex pan soaring across my grandmother’s kitchen, making a bee-line for the steaming galumpkis. Like the dainty  saucer beneath my Aunt Joe’s favorite Royal Albert teacup, the fine bone China I was cautioned not to touch: these and others  on the loose with nine sound-barrier-breaking croissants arranged in a geese’s V. Blade thin, blindingly glowing.  They saw it from the capsule, thought it might be the final stage of a Saturn V, but when they radioed Houston, learned  it was 6,000 nautical miles away, and anyways their conundrum shaped like a dumbbell. Or was it a dome, burst of light and whoosh,  more like daylight but red light – planets with Christmas lights on , over California, over Russia, over San Juan. Large-eyed and molten,  as in this is not a prank phone call! I got three of ‘em : yellow , green ,  and blue , a shiny horizontal silver dollar but we couldn’t , you know ,  blurt it out . Skipping over water, and they decide what’s real , so recant or cover up, call it a weather balloon, strike from the record the words  I saw it , call it Project Grudge, don a thought-screen helmet ( only two failures since 1958 ). Transparent, acrid insectoid clinging to his trousers. Or was it  belladonna? Departing spaceship, or Citroen on the M8 motorway? We have a red-eyed sperm critter; we are being escorted, dragged  to the ground. Like the lid on the pot of my grandmother kielbasa. The never-to-be known, whirring and secret. All of it sizzling, crackling. The domestic is … the stuff about cooking dinner, how you go about your day. And I guess the extreme of it is—I can’t even think of who the perpetrator is, but—the poems about the backyard. – Matthew Rohrer  In which the moles are taking over. Also, some kind of crookneck blighter,  critter that squishes the buds, liquidizing like a spider does to an ant; and the Brussels,  poor Brussels, though an admirable mauve, though prolific in the production of leaves,  I do not think they will yield. How ‘bout them aphids, this garden their butter, lamb chop, 1⁄4 cow.  Bleak parsley, keeling kale. And did I mention moles? Twelve years of this tufting, this nighttime  carousing like a pack of Tonka-truck-loving toddlers. Meanwhile, the lawnmower insists I am beautiful,  wear my cojones well, but is really a dirty, noisy liar spitting sticks of untruths. A no-good, gas-guzzling hussy  with his orange cord like a neon noose; he, missing the tighter spots, the cat’s ear by the fence, is the lowest,  lower than a rodent with a penchant for lawns, though I am the stupid one because Task Force  comes with a warning, DANGER on its black lapel. The yard a weed yard, but I will make Nebraskas  of the hills, and I will Safer Soap, peace out with the grubs, the lace they make of the basil. The blind dog, the black ink, the boldly silly sort of hope I’d have as a child, the silly bold energy, then exhaustion, as on a holiday, so happily spent  I forgot to fear abandonment & abandoned myself beautifully to sleep, to black night gleaming with my father’s eyes, his hands  & strange labor, an alchemy of stone to river, black stone to black black ink, his nimble brush, the bold leaping words, I dreamt happily, I still dream  of it, though it’s been years since I’ve seen it, & perhaps, it never happened, was simply & always, a blind gift of the black night, a “memory”  I cherish like a pet, a small guardian to help banish the day, the fear that my father will be abandoned & no alchemy will reach him. The birds insist on pecking the wooded dark. The wooded dark pecks back. It is time to show the universe what you are capable of , says my horoscope, increasingly insistent this month. But what I am capable of this month  is staring at the salt accident on the coffee table & thinking, What sad salt . I admire my horoscope for its conviction. I envy its consistency. Every day. Every day, there is a future to be aggressively vaguer about.  Earlier today, outside the cabin, the sudden deer were a supreme headache of beauty. Don’t they know I am trying to be alone & at peace? In theory I am alone & really I am hidden, which is a fine temporary substitute for peace, except I still  have email, which is how I receive my horoscope, & even here in the wooded dark I receive yet another email mistaking me for another Chen. I add this to a folder, which also includes emails sent to my address but addressed to Chang,  Chin, Cheung. Once, in a Starbucks, the cashier was convinced I was Chad. Once, in a Starbucks, the cashier did not quite finish the n on my Chen, & when my order was ready, they called out for Cher. I preferred this by far, but began to think  the problem was Starbucks, when probably the problem is human error, casual racism, the history of imperialism, & Starbucks. Why can’t you see me? I want to say. Why can’t I stop needing you to see me? For someone who looks like you  to look at me, even as the ketchup accident is happening to my second favorite shirt? I’d like to live to my wildest humanity, humanmost wild, to be, at the grocery, unhinged by pineapples, the aperture of my mouth opened crazy  to the color, the startle, yes, I want to grow tall, post- apocalyptic pineapples right out of my skull, to erupt without you confirming such erupting is possible, acceptable in someone who looks like me. I try to insist on this someone  & a future dark with so many shades of luscious. But every kind of someone needs someone else to insist with. I need. If not the you I have memorized & recited & mistaken for the universe—another you  I am slowly becoming capable of needing. After another man’s name  found your mouth, after  the bodies laid down  until they couldn’t rise, after  I began to see men  as streets and mountains  and moving skies—I starved  just enough to stay  hungry. Not to kneel  before deep voices, reaching  for any word that didn’t  force its way into my mouth. Why  is my body still empty  with another inside? I used to think  I’d go thirsty to see you  break like a highway’s bones  under the winter snow. Maybe  mornings you forget braiding  thick bundles of hair over  old bruises. But I’ve forgiven  how your whispers sound  like regret. How a mother leaves  when the night is long. My belly brims  with someone, slight and soundless,  who I can’t refuse. I know now  how briefly we are beautiful. How the first  death, for women, is our own. Sian’s taking two klonopin so she can quit flipping and face our friends. But the white, white asteroid is crashing, black fossil fire like a crowd making way. You never heard such silence. Satellites explode like harbor lights, busses grinding their gears through car alarms all over town. Sian says, Here comes midnight with the dead moon in its jaws. I wish I didn’t love her or loved her much more. She has no idea how hard I try to eat her cooking. We take our heads down off the shelf, and ride elevators into the earth and space sickness; seal the doors, hope for warm bodies. Barricaded because we could live, we could live compartmented for a year, then more. First thing on our emergence action list, secure the lines, tour the debris, the stray dogs, find a pharmacy. People who crave the jaw & not the fox’s gentle tail—  his land mine  of teeth; a temporary exit for those who yearn to return to the coyote’s  tent to reclaim their belongings— the chopped head, the neck before it was plucked from the rest of the body like a hen’s for dinner. Antique shops  for raccoons’ clawed feet;  a necklace for a woman in labor. After the snow melts the dead return to their natural habitats— eyes barely shut under the charcoal, whiskers  trapped in the pinecones. Some secrets are better rolled into the mouths  of strangers  when they sleep. A father can make up suffering’s seasons: leave in the afternoon, then sneak in through a windowless frame—  though these, too, can be called winter & fall  & held by a child’s contemptuous hands in a garden where only the wind can be torn from branches.  Did they really mean to leave us shipwrecked—those sailors who recognized flesh but not what the flesh  can camouflage? People covet  the mandible as it’s handed down  for all to drink from. In his hands I appear dead— but here, here in my chest, is where my father  finds the new continent  of directions measured in forgiveness. I sleep in the wilderness, like a fox loitering in a frozen meadow,  & I’ll feed him forgiveness  if he asks. Together, we     drove them to panic.  Saliva soaped    their fine mouths their precise chests.   What is the horse except  a softer autumn    the human except  a luckier set of teeth?   Mother unsung  & elsewhere    whose was the first hand that curled your churchgirl     hand to a fist?  When the neighbors    licensed in injury  stalked the almond-   tipped & shatterable  does of our forest    what reckless mercy sent you unarmed    to chase the men out  your own kind-eyed      ponies trussed  & bitted?      Here (my half-  life) now      (without) defend the day you taught me    to whip mares     to force-wean  foals   They were more  innocent    than we gave them credit for  (hurt earth, hot-   & hurt-hearted) Mother undone    their kindness was  they could not     speak against us. When it rains in Boston, from each street rises the smell of sea. So do the faces of the dead. For my father, I will someday write: On this day endeth this man, who did all he could to craft the most intricate fears, this man whose waking dreams were of breaking the small bones in the feet of all the world’s birds. Father. You know the stories. You were raised on them. To end a world, a god dances. To kill a demon, a goddess turns into one. Almanacs of annihilation are chronicled in cosmic time. Go on. Batter everything of mine that you can find. Find my roe deer with the single antler. Kill him. Find a girl, or a woman. Display to me her remains on some unpaved expanse, like road kill on Kentucky highways, turning from flesh to a fine sand made of ground bone, under a sun whose surface reaches temperatures six times hotter than the finest crematory. On the surface of the earth, our remains are in unholy concert with the remains of all who have gone before and all who will follow, and with all who live. In this way, our ground resembles a bone house. Search in my body for my heart, find it doesn’t sit gently where you learned it to be. Thieve in my armory. Take my saws, take my torches, and drown my phalanx of bees. Carve into me the words of the chronicler of hell. Make your very best catastrophe. My piano plays loud and fast although my hands are nowhere to be found. Father, as you well know, I am but a woman. I believe in neither gods nor goddesses. I have left my voice up and down the seam of this country. I, unlike you, need no saws, or torches. The bees you drowned will come to me again. Each time you bear your weapons, I, no more than a woman, grow a new limb. Each time you use a weapon, my sinews grow like vines that devour a maple tree. When I cry, my face becomes the inescapable sea, and when you drain blood from a creature, I drink it. On this day this man died, having always eaten the good food amid the angry ghosts, having always made the most overwrought hells. On this day the moon waxes gibbous and the moths breed in the old carpets. On this day from a slit in the ground rises a girl who does not live long. On this day to me a lover turns his back and will not meet my eye. On this day the faces of the death-marked are part-willow, part-lion. On this day has died an artist of ugly tapestries, and his wares burst into flame. On this day endeth this man upon who I hurl the harvest of this ghostly piano, and on the surface of this exceptional world the birds have all come to our thresholds, our windows and our doors, our floorboards, our attic crannies and underground storerooms, wires and railroads, tarmacs, highways, cliffs and oceans, and have all begun to laugh, a sound like an orange and glittering fire that originates from places unseen.         No girl-tongue in the mouth. No street of magnolias. Domed white. No father ambling around the cul-de-sac, no. Circles. No decoupage planets, neon stars named for the birth year. Year of the snake, snake, snake. No mirror with a mother. Brushing off a daughter’s pretty bones. No confessions. Like bright jewelry on throats. No name but litany. Suburban and chilled.  Build me a paper shrine. I was a girl before I was anything else. My name means daughter . Means loyal . I can be a secret. I can be a twig-woman in the grass. Small in a man’s yard. But there’s no air under the magnolia.  No name for the dark inside a tree.      The sky is half-wrecked, the sun a bright pothole dipping into the Guadalupe. A porcupine quill hangs  from my lips, still smoking as my fingertips cut  through the water. The banks are overgrown  with bearded cypress and mesquite. A boy slaps his guitar, plays simple songs, hands callused  from switching chords. I am the girl I never dreamed of  being—the girl sitting in the lap of a shaggy-haired  boy with fingers like wheat, long and sleek. I think it’s childish the way we sneak out at night, start a fire  somewhere, smoke and drink around it like old men.  But I am a child—one who believes that I should give  in to the bed like a girl in love. It hurts and I feel nothing except pressure, no pleasure in the boy  heavy on my chest. The bonfire dwindles. I curl  up under the sheets and try to sleep. I dream  of my mother, who tells me to head home, tells me I’ll survive this like every girl that’s come before. In the last letter you wrote me, sealed with castor wax, mailed from somewhere in Hungary I couldn’t make out, the last page yellowed and signed in your blood, as you always did then, from the side of your thumb or the pale stretch under your thigh, you wrote, Love  is  a  distance,  failed  by  time , and went on to describe how the Gaudi cathedral was melting, how the human statues that lined the streets of Las Ramblas could hold so perfectly still there was no way to know they were breathing.  Nothing is  permanent  here , you wrote, but  nothing  is  lost . In the bleached light of those Red River winters I drove to my weekend job at the parks department, clearing the sidewalks in front of the depot, shoveling entryways, salting the roads. How purely the cold made a claim on the body. How slowly the gold in the hoarfrost fell to the landlines and bent stalks of corn. If telling you made any difference. If hearing your name in the high-liner fences, jaw-harp harmonicas, moans of the train. I think of the night you did acid in Dennison, frozen and throwing up vitamins, dragging the mud from your boots on the bed. Or the night we went driving around on the service roads, finding the bones of a wolf in the ditch. How quietly the skull sat shining in the moonlight. And how quietly I held you then, watching the tree-shadows rise on the downed blinds, talking of floodlights and wolf eyes and what a strange gift it would be to be dead. Those moments are silence inside me now. Lost in the snow-piles north of the yard. And what can I call them? A phony rose? A frozen carnation? A thing to keep sealed in a clear plastic box in the fridge? It could have been anyone, taking me down to the train-bridge, pouring the India ink on my shin. Walking the deer trails back to the spillway, climbing the guardrail, touching our tongues to the bars. Not  to  love , you wrote, but  to  learn not to  trust  the  deception. For it’s this life or nothing. To die  with  intention.  To  leave  something blue  in  your  skin . of rosettes and rotting majesty, her throat as slim  as stem and poised to snapping. How she rattles  with each spook. She sneezes and a white feather  coffin sets to drift. Tinker bones on the shattering end.  But glass is glass. Someone made her. Inflated her shy  pouch with cheap pinks. One day loving up a worker bee  and the next, pricked. Death follows her to the milkweed  edge where hand shreds root. Singing all the while  Love me , love me until the sky tips over. Death loves.  When she spills, the forest is coated white and all across  the grass, each one daggers. Someone loses a mirror  and a tooth. Someone dances a spindle song that skips  on record twice. To a Molly fish, a hollow says:  I want to belong to someone, to anyone, but only half a night. since the older boys agreed to watch over me for the night my mother, who says, girls no girls will allow me to sleep over at my cousin’s house, where the boys in their loose shorts, will take turns standing above the air vent. The fabric billowing & rising above their thighs leg hairs thickening in summer. I was an ordinary magician: pulling something red-eyed & shaking from ordinary cloth, while the boys whose bodies were buoyant in darkness peeled back their skin & showed me how to drain the blood from a limb how to borrow a palm from the air to drag a hand, thick with static under a waistband. They taught me how to haunt my own body—turns out boys scare easily when softened. Okay. I get it. There are rules you have to follow if you want to survive. So maybe I believed the briefs decorating the floor were white flags I could tuck into my pocket. Okay. So my eyes lingered a little too long on the oldest boy whose body became a knot in my throat who smiled in my direction when he emptied himself—I know. I know you’re not supposed to smile back. Would I be a decent exorcist running a braid of copper wires along my mother’s teeth, to see the flames change colors? Her hands sometimes small as coins, reach for me, even when the moths make up most of my body. I know she’s sorry for the bad years: I packed my bags once. I slept in a neighbor’s car once. I know it’s cruel to make her wear the same dress in every memory to say forgive yet stitch a mask on her while she sleeps. I always knew guilt would keep her from noticing the money missing from under her mattress. I could get away being clumsy with knives. Every surface punctured. Every curtain drawn. The house still sinking when no one is on board. It beckons me from the highway to watch the one lit room slowly go dark. I want to break its windows with my face. Today I want a city. Today I want sugared almonds in a city, strange almonds, a strange city. Today  I want the diesel smell of a strange city, its strange pigeons, its strange buildings casting shadows like sculpture,  like scepters. Today I want a strange city to crown me, I want to wear a strange city like a diadem,  I want to hold the word diadem in my mouth and know it will never dissolve. I want to break  my teeth on that word and I want to know my teeth will never break no matter how hard I bite down.  Today I want a jeweled diadem, real jewels and rare, I want my jeweled head high and heavy, and I want, too,  oxblood boots and late October and a letter that opens Dear planet , dear smokescreen , and today  I want to be tall, tall in a strange city, tall and stalking down strange pavements surrounded  by strange pigeons and shadow, today I want to be a stranger in my own story, heroine  of my strange story, booted and diademed, unashamed of all this greed, I want my shadow strange  against the sidewalk, so tall, so quick, and though I almost wrote for the end of this poem  that I’m not even sure I know her , here is my greed again, and here the right ending: I know her ,  I know her , and I hold it in my mouth like gold. We crammed in McAlpine’s Pulse and drove west out of Fargo to see the train wreck. Late summer and the heat moaning from the radiator, smoke gushing from the seams in the hood, all of us snake-biting McAlpine’s neck when he admitted he’d thinned the coolant to try to make it stretch. We passed Whale-O-Wash where the volleyball girls held up cardboard signs, did barefoot high kicks in bikinis, offering five-dollar specials to raise funds for their team. We passed M&H Gas. Ironclad. Rickert’s Bar. The Hardee’s parking lot where the Mexicans lounged on the hoods of their cars, but we didn’t flick them off because we knew about Garcia, who’d just hung himself in his father’s closet with a belt. Skateland. Hebron Brick. The church on Division boarded up and watermarked at the windows, signed by the height of the flood in the spring. Indian Triumph. Curt’s Lock and Key. Ameristeel where McApline worked with his uncle on weekends. The bums asleep on layers of newspaper in the bushes beside Bell State Bank. Tintmasters. Dakota Electric. The rubble and brick where last winter a lady carved a swastika into her wrist before burning down her fortuneteller business. The old folks home where wheelchaired vets waved out the windows at whoever came by. Bozak flicked them off and we all laughed. We passed the last trees on the edge of town and gunned down a county road through the ripening beets, cranking up the windows and blasting the heat as McAlpine pushed the Pulse above 90. We called this Operation Desert Storm–– the North Dakota roads so flat and straight you could hit 95 before the car started to quiver, McAlpine screaming into the windshield:  Oppy Desy! Oppy Desy! All of us peeling off our shirts and wearing them like turbans. As we hit 99 I dug a onesy from the glovebox and packed it and held it to McAlpine’s trembling lips. This one’s for Garcia , he said. We passed 100. Out in the fields the heat- lifted kinks of cargo came into view. It was the wreck we were looking for–– a junker from Wolf Point, Williston, Minot, Grand Forks. A local. Low priority. Loaded with hoppers, tankers, Canadian grainers, gondolas hauling scrap-metal to Duluth. Somehow the clay and rain had fucked up the rails and caused the freight to buckle at the couplers, but nobody had died. The conductor and his crew rolled on down the line, drifting in the engine unit, watching in the rearview as the mile-long train turtled into the sugar beets and began to pile. The three-quarter moon is tipped in the sky, still sleeping. Sea grass bristles, fulfilling its duty to the wind.  I tip my head to match the angle of the moon, As though my ear could pull a tide from myself.  The inner wave is calm, but broils below With a gratitude I’m careful not to drown in.  What to do with it – wind, weeds, water, Earth – now I know why they call you mother.  How the tall grass waves in all of our languages:  Goodbye , hello , help us , help .  How even when we go, the earth keeps us here. How living is nothing but a flutter of wings.  *  The wind’s one note catches In the branches of the great Sitka spruce  With an effortless acceptance that opens Some bowl in me to that sound.  *  How can I walk away from this place That traces sky, mountain, water, wind, in one seamless line?  How can I walk away when I’m choked with the voice of the mother, Parched from reciting the list of the dead?  How can I walk away when the perfect horizon Is killing me with a crazed love – let me stay, let me stay.  *  Let the cougar stalk, let the black bear roam. Come, come, beasts of the earth in your armies of fur and horn.  Let your bodies be automatic weapons to rage us down. Make your nests in the abandoned house by the bay.  Raid the fridge, ruffle up the beds, let the land grab begin. We are not sorry, we are over, come gorge on the carcasses.  *  Let me stay, let me go, I’m the earth’s, I am wild from the future’s howl.  Cry, cry, crows on the shore. What have you heard? What have you seen?  Tell me what the bay said when you insisted. Tell me where you’ve hidden the bones in the field. The sky is smudged by a finger dipped in pink.  Mountains hold their purple tightly to themselves like secrets.  Under heron’s wings a shifting blue swoops in.  The artists can’t keep up with its names: cobalt, cerulean, turquoise, cyan.  While they talk, the bay keeps bluing and re-bluing, the moon widening  into its whiteness like a growling mouth.  A million-year-old croak lines the sky of the heron’s flight  as though it had been boiling all that time in its belly.  We watch the blues blacken and the pinks dissipate  like gowns dragged across the sky. We flick on our flashlights,  step onto the path, poised for black bears and snakes,  too late to settle on the color’s proper name, folded as it is into the forest’s throat. At first, we thought the air compressor had sprung its last gasket or a fan belt was chewed to tatters. The pump was the iron lung for the business, we joked, how it infused the water with oxygen, kept our trout  belly-down and our algae python-green, enviable, even. A fix, no doubt, that’d require gobs of elbow grease, some keen mechanic from North Platte, and way more cash than was on hand. Imagine our relief  when we finally placed the madcap crash and fluster, pinpointed the chilling shriek. It wasn’t a hart, exactly, but a yearling fawn who’d fallen into the empty tank behind the hatchery building. Bleating  for dear life, stock-still in place where he’d sank into six inches of mud and bluegill carcasses, sharpening his newfound voice on the whetstone of June air. A cry shrill and unanswered,  if not unheard. No choice in the matter, we concluded—we’d have to climb down to lift him up, wade the muck and mire knock-kneed and unbalanced to save him before he starved. Between the snap  and buck of his gently coiled neck, I held him close to my chest and felt his blood coursing wild. When he leapt free of me and cleared the vile pit, my stomach lifted with him. Who knows where life’s logic comes from—the once-broke  machine, fixed without repair, the fawn, spotted like light below a stand of pines, who spoke only the wordless tongue of loss, the knotted muscle in the chest that undoes itself. The chest that must fall in order to rise. The girl is trying to say she’s not a body as he bites into the scoop of tender meat behind her knee. There is evidence the body is real:  lilac vein protruding at wrist, lamp’s light chasing skin. It’s said the spirit can travel at night — her dress: an illusion  of sky slumped on floorboards. On days when the earth’s laid claim, she ticks off how many clouds can be eaten in place of bread, pulling cotton  from ceiling while he parts her legs, flooding with the damp flush of blood. Proof she is real, he says, taking iron to tongue like Sunday wine.  She is the wine. She is a faucet, a river, an ocean on which to craft a boat, a dream — a dream! Remember decorating her Bougainvillea toes?  Back porch door unhinged, grass wet, chasing boys whose smiles broke the girls like yolk, broke under dress, then laughter, then the silence of stones.  The tentacle-tail aches when winds change, stiffens up: a bad limb. At night the monstrous thing unravels from its curl in her underpants,  she rubs it with butter, soaks, spreads out each scale across the tub like lily pads, holds it like a baby or heaves, spits, tries to wrench it from skin, leaves it in the gutter.  Inside: she is escaping form. Inside: a wall of rain. Inside: sloshing tide as he searches for the bottom, which is endless, not knowing that she is also the sail. Back before the season of pills and grill smoke, before my youngest brother’s head  gets beat through drywall and into a stud. Before the framework of that house is even up,  half-built lumber ribcage, the beams dampened red in the morning fog and one bending  slightly when my mother pushes into it hard with her whole body, saying it’s got to be  tested . Before the digging, the foundation carved into the plot cleared of all the kissing  trees—great oak, white cedar—beheaded and eaten by the jaw of a dozer. Before the comb  of saws splitting the harvested trunks, the harvester and his truck, his cigarette long lit.  I can go hours like this, putting plants back in the ground. Hard to recall my little brother’s failed attempt without the moon’s white ash  through pinholes in the wind-drift tissue of pitch pine needles, porous,  alien as a netting of gills overhead. I’ve followed our night path back to the abandoned  living room set, where he’s already swallowed the bottle of ibuprofen, extinguished  his flashlight, capsized belly-down, groaning incoherent as mist  on the wet couch cushions. He doesn’t recognize me. He doesn’t jerk his leg when I grip  above his knee and clamp. I’m shouting his name in circles. I’m shouting his name years later  still a child shaking my brother alive in these woods, needing his sneaker-prints  in the damp ground, needing the padding of needles cut loose, haphazard between the scale-bark trunks  and ghosts hidden from sight—squirrel skull, dead syringe—needing a way out or deeper through,  asking questions I already know the answers to. She works in a red house, sells rice and beans and chicken curry. Stirs pots  pours coffee all day. Men  came and went. Men in their wooden boats going to the next island not  further. The beating of the summer rains is a kind of beating too. Likewise  a love for the heavy palms. The dirt road  under her bare feet. The taste of coconut water  from the man who walks around town splitting them with a machete  for less than a dollar. Easy  to swallow. Into the mouth of the bull and  out of sight.         I met a young girl today. Just the touch of her elbow as I explained the DC metro was soft enough to be worthwhile. I kept her there, speaking. She had plans to visit Ghana, my home country.  She stepped on the red line after I acquired her number. I know these young types. I called her to throw hues across her eyes. The blue-green in every palm frond which swayed across the skies that I told her a young Black ancestor of hers once stood beneath. I told her about a black dog that used to follow me home from secondary school who lived for the taste of kenke. I told her that the chartreuse avocado bodies are soft as a stick of butter left out under the Accra sun. She isn’t the first girl I have done this to. We met for lunch, and I glowed for her under lucent lights. We cooked dinner together that same day. She tensed when I wrapped my arms around her for too long, feeling the way my body responded to the smell of her scalp. She would understand if she knew how we both had a love for words, their nuance, their malleability. We never die, we pass; we have not slaved, we have served; and I wasn’t forceful , never forced myself on a woman. I am convincing . I am dynamic . I am persuasive with every organ of my body hard with wanting a body half my age. I was giving the moon a break in my mouth. No pressure to shine off that glaring sun, just my slick tongue discovering her craters. A cream square framed by a white border stamped DEC • 73. Perspective as flat as a Grandma Moses painting, my older sister’s head in lower left inaccurately small—  the honey blond grain of one long wing of hair curtaining the vertical line of her profile, with outsized right hand crabbed in foreground, the tip of her ring finger obscured by her lips.  When Carol Burnett tugs her ear ,  she’s telling her grandmother she’s okay , my sister said. My grandmother’s legs enter the frame mid-left,  the pink and cream circle of her knee in floral pajamas superimposed on the grid of red and green squares behind. Tentatively reaching into the frame just above,  a lone Christmas tree branch, red ball hanging at the tip. Against a field of silver lace, gray wallpaper, and beige door, I’m curled impossibly into a lavender upholstered rocker,  which I almost swear I bought secondhand twenty years later as the first piece for my apartment in a different city. Center frame is my younger brother, his arms around the dog.  We all stare off frame to the right at an implied screen, perhaps at Mary Tyler Moore’s name multiplying, my mother laughing, Doesn’t she remind you of me?  Or even better, the crescendo of horns and drums of a CBS Special Presentation, as a rainbow spirals out at me from a field of black. Even seashells hold the hum moan of dial tone— That voice. If I could only let go of what echoes  in the ear’s oval window. Are you still there? Every time I cradle a phone, I hear your new wife,  say your heart is failing or falling apart. The arteries are always constricting.  The plastic receiver, hard as a hammer between my neck and shoulder. Ringing off walls,  the lingering call I never meant to answer. Because once, I called at too late an hour,  the ringtone shattered your eighth nerve, sent the message to your brain to beat her.  You work in the mornings and can’t be disturbed by midnight light. I never mean to  remember. The phone is always back in my palm; I walk the echoing hallway alone.  I am the daughter who gave her father away the night I pressed my face to the phone  and told them, He’s going to kill her .  ***  Is he there right now? Your hand on her collar twisting her body over basement stairs,  ready to drop her. The arteries are hard. Her body in a moment will be a hard seed  dropped from a high tree and whirling toward disaster, a wall. I thought when the call came  I wouldn’t answer. Her face cradling concrete while I choked on the answers: He’s here .  Send someone . Anyone . The telephone catching half word, half sob. They said I was hard to hear ,  could I speak more clearly , could I calm my nerves and repeat where we lived. It was nowhere,  some suburb. You’re still there. She calls from your bedroom, walls dented by the same shoulders.  I answer because I need to know if it’s over, the moan—the dial tone living under my life.  People call every day, their lilts nothing like your grates turned groans. Your failing heart.  The hammer on my shoulder. I never meant to answer. “She slammed down the lid, and his head flew off, falling among the red apples.” – Th e Juniper Tree , Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm  Picture him pressed and tucked beside the kitchen sink, reaching for the fruit bowl. Picture the room unfathomable: clock  of ivory, red floor, antiqued oak table, and his head rolling off of its trunk, clicking open like a lock, in its seventy-  eighth month, in which she blanched his pieces into nothings as spilled flour haunted the window, the table. This is  the yard untillable. The ground pushed up fathoms of stinging weed-flowers. What if all mothers came out of the red-hot earth  like iron? What if all fathers devoured their young? What if we could sing to children like precious stones through holes in the  dirt? What of the Mother Under the Table, the Mother of Blunders? She who lifted him from silt, who stuck his mouth full  of glue, as only a mother is able? There goes the oft-fabled stepchild now, mind wandering, directionless as pollen,  top lopped off like a dandelion, tumbled under and thither, rolling among the crab- apples, past the blue-feathered hills. Rust-eaten shears. Oak stool. Floorboards worn and cracked. I am thinking of that shed  full of hornets. It leaned its stack beside the creek, ornery and bent. In cool Octobers, dreadful  ornaments grew in its corners, story-fed, born through wood-grit, horned and humming. Who  would get the wood there, fetch the rake, wet from the leaking rain? Stray cats collided. My  youngest uncle’s Marlboro hack. His hair was red, not jet-black. The hornets burrowed,  then rose above the stacks of firewood, unfurling like a cloud. Burn it. Scuttling back, blue-black  almost, purring on the pile of boards. This is the red welt on my leg. Mourn it almost,  the stinging hive-bed. Another memory to tuck into your sack. But not the worst, the one  the one for which you will pack bags, shut the tool shed door, let the latch turn, spurn it  like a fool, go off angrier than the roaring branches in the storm, its sack of cold wind,  its scorn, its mules unfed. Even if you could return, where would you look for your cracked palms,  your old southern drawl? What would you bet against the coming clouds? Would you even bet? And the loss takes your neck in its teeth and splits the skin.  And the loss shakes and shakes you, leaves your spent body on the pavement.  And the loss returns quietly, as if to forgive you: his fountain pens  in the chipped clay mug. His bourbon softened with water.  And the loss finds you months later, blissful until you realize, on vacation  in San Francisco; the loss climbs the palm- lined hills with you as penance for your happiness.  And the loss bares its teeth. And the loss gnaws the window latch.  And the loss sees you sleep with an arm outstretched, longing for him—sees your body of bet-hedged love.  And the loss takes your neck in its teeth and it splits the skin.  And the loss shakes and shakes you, leaves you where it drops you.  And today the sky decides to cover you in snow instead of rain,  the new year begun without your permission.  Those pens still splayed in the chipped clay mug. The bourbon closing your eyes.  And the loss pulls you close— for there’s nothing else left for the loss to do. It nuzzles you, retracts  its snarl; it sleeps like the dead at the foot of your bed.  And you lie awake and stare at the loss, rubbing the soft spot at your throat  that misses the shape of its mouth. The creature I made has feet too soft for the ground.  The creature has my feet, perhaps, my feet once too soft  for the ground, a puzzle my mother solved, or grew stronger  on my weakness, lifting me up, up. I feed this creature  and she grows— you and I had known the secret  of this simple impossible work all along—we lift her  and lift her and she sings somewhere above us, gravity  and what saves us from gravity—she survives  and we feed on her survival, this sour-mouth and this  hot-skin, this warden of our light.         It was the age of paper. You slipped me in your wallet, a crease of attention, a string of numbers. Sex is mathematics ,  or so said your favorite slasher novel, but you weren’t either one, you were product placement,  a business-class-lounge lizard, little hors d’ouevre, ambition a red ribbon curled on your chest.  You drunkenly rated your hotel rooms by the strength of the jets in the hot tub. Or the absence of said tub.  (One felt for the concierge.)  I need to hit the 9/11 for snacks , you joshed on the phone, meaning 7-Eleven, meaning  an escort must have been on his way. We laughed together but I knew at that point you were too soon.  Between benders, you were Captain Rehab, riding a wave of white chips. You held your fancy water against the entire party.  Don’t get it twisted , you told me, with a snap, leaving it undefined. Your grand carelessness seducing one or two of the uninitiated.  Back in the cul-de-sac, you swung me in the crook of your arm like a Birkin bag—  and you insisted on the Birkin. You were the overheard whimper (you loved it), the reluctant capitulation (loved it),  your industry a form of resentment (loved). You were fashion—not fashionable, fashion . Your jeans double-cuffed: you practiced.  You should have kept your flowered ties and ACT UP tees from the nineties, you lamented, they’re so fashion.  You never followed through on Silence=Death :  The Musical , which is almost too bad, really. Your inflection, another story.  You had exquisite taste, for a time, but one differentiates the real from paste. Your idea of slumming it was eating pho  in the inner Richmond, every noodle. You were a circular of circular facts  you were gobsmacked (your word) I didn’t know. You squeezed the life out of everything  you had been given, or not given, like a cock ring.      fiscal  BY RANDALL MANN    I hear it, the neighbor’s kid discovering notes on her recorder—repetitive, tortured, like the onset of disappointment.  Or Art. Hear the 24, its groan up the hill. This is Castro & Hill. The governor five governors ago is governor again;  our shiny former mayor, his lieutenant. Now comes the old man in a Segway, his bag of groceries, sensible white helmet:  He’s the closest thing I have to an angel. He doesn’t break a sweat, though it’s hot— September, Indian Summer, if it’s all right  to call it that. It’s not. The day laborers have taken a break; one eats a sack-lunch packed  nightly by his wife in her outer-Mission life. Poetry has the luxury of mythology.  This fiscal downturn is like Orpheus. The twisted little boy-fucker. Like Orpheus, I hear it, a voice receding, calling out,  the sound weak, infected—you choose, doomed to the shades of the preempted world. Turn around.  There is a sickness that is us.                                                                                                           meaning bridled, although  my gown in this rawhide desire  tulled above the knee  wounds. Soft scrape, the bruises,  a brush of hay. I barefoot toward my lover  turned groom  turned handler.  Bridled: how I raise my head, a bucket  full of salt. How I bite cheeks  of pears to jerk  fallacy from my mouth. Debridement: the harness  snaps in your fist,  eschar violets before  the kiss. Fallacy: my gums  gleam in moonlight.  The milked-out stars  swoon at my flank, hiplatched  gate swinging.  Letter to Body Made Shadow  BY CARLY JOY MILLER  or criminal framed transparent in the belly of a sunlit beast.  What to steal with your scuffed  mouth and lopsided tongue? There are no teeth to you.  Silent as carvers’ knives on the table—hush, listener,  this is a sacrificial act. Always reduced to feet, my hooligan  shroud. Quiver beneath the brow, your tongue tipped  with arrowheads for sour blood. What spree—a lone bulb  you wish to bite. There are no knives in your back, thank  goodness. What keeps you tacked to me, my lone  saint of weeds? Maggot— I mean, may we get  comfortable as suspects or each other. May we slink  and croon across shrines with our soft bodies. Our shoes, stones. Is your mouth a crater in this country too? And do you smell medicinal as you pry  hemlock apart in your study of nerves? When you spring  nettles in a puddle of water, do they point towards the god you  should pine over next? Tell me you sway like molasses in summer. Tell me how  you dropped to your knees as if to pray when the gun ricocheted in your hands.  Isn’t the bullet just a magnet for iron in blood? Who are the ghosts  falling beside you and are they yours for haunting? Who straightjackets  your arms to your small back so you grovel less alone? Is your mother  overbearing with all her white dresses? Do you agree tongues grate like saws when  spitting truths every hour? Noiseful burden. How do you contour your afternoons  so they lay flat on your stomach as you practice sacrificing yourself  to wolves and doves alike? What were you aiming at  with that gun in your hands? When we fall, we fall like gravel Born hellish, hooves and tress.  To be slick, I jellied my insides out.  My heart plummish to enamor rot.  To be your other.  Ever brief.  Accept me—your strange shadow.  Tenet of the tramp dress.  Shiner.  Loose me to a field  and place a mirror beside me.  Loose me to a field  and scythe my chest open  to three crestfallen horses,  to opal,  to evening  varnished in skein.  To plum-reek.  To hooked  bones purled. 
Another dream of you, fig leaf. The same almost
                 every night: I’m naked. And cold.

Underbrush, thorn brambles, pine trees, hanging
moss, the mist of early morning
                        streaming all the green veins.

Beneath the canopy, I lose my sense of direction.
            I thirst for no one,
fig leaf, but you. But you’re too difficult to find.

Your branches don’t bend like they used to.

           I take sinew and a bone needle,
sew you to you. But you don’t hold together. You

never hold, and I have to start again:—
           here, the fig leaf;
             here, the covering with the fig leaf.

The Lord made me naked but I don’t want to be the way
           the Lord made me.

My eyes have been opened. I know good and evil and you
are good.
                 For the first time in years, I’m ready to live
the rest of my life. But it has gotten harder to hide.

I’m naked and afraid. I need your covering, fig leaf.
           I need you to hold me,
as your branch held you,
                          forever in future tense.

Don’t leave me alone with the Lord. Because
I can’t take you with me. I’m awake.

I awoke. I still wake up each morning.
           Cold and afraid. Kicking off the sheets.      Collage of memories that forms a box  BY WILLIAM FARGASON    after Joseph Cornell  I forgot the things I kept: the ball dropping on New Year’s,
           the diesel trucks humming
                                the name of a sad old love song
my grandmother played me once but now I can’t remember
                       how it goes...

circling the city for an hour looking for a parking spot,
                                                                    your body spread out
across polyester bed sheets, a footprint
            in the mud that says Hey, I’m up ahead, I’ll meet you there,

the birthday cake with your name spelled wrong, the vanilla candles
            you smell in the store but don’t buy,
                                                    the largemouth bass we released
                                into your swimming pool that died an hour later

because we didn’t know it couldn’t breathe chlorine,
                                               the furniture we assembled together
on the living room carpet, the fertilizer tossed in the backyard
            that caught the light
                           like tiny emeralds, the bus with empty seats
but still we both had to stand,
                                         the woman who took down
our order wrong but we ate it anyway, you taking the first bite,

            you tripping on the cobblestone street, the tape you pulled
off the cassette spools,
                          the suitcases that took years to unpack,
                                                  a yoga mat tucked under your arm,
            the chum bag dragged behind the boat
to draw fish to our bait, to whisper Come closer, it’s safe.

Once the pine trees grew tall enough,
                            we cut a trail, walked barely under their branches,
the bed of pine needles soft under our feet, the machete sheath
            bouncing against my thigh.

And the year we planted the seedlings, each a foot long:—
                                       pulled one from a tarp bundle, pressed it
              into the soil, your hand covering then uncovering.

And that time walking you home in the first snow,
           the wine bottle you grabbed
                                                    when you said it was your turn,
the DC zoo in mid-summer when none of the lions
                         would come out from their plaster rock caves,
box after cardboard box of your things
                 I carried and loaded into your trunk
                                                    when it was space you wanted,
the flatbread you rolled up and dipped in olive oil, said Here, try this.

            Your bed we had to push against the window overlooking
the street—its intersection we could barely see,
                                       its light playing off the wet asphalt—
because the air-conditioning was broken
                                                 and it was too hot upstairs.

That was one I kept. The forgotten staircase,
                                                                 the forgotten box
            hidden underneath one of the forgotten stairs in the staircase,

you prying up the stair with a hammer,
                                                    pulling out the cigar box I hid
when I was a child—filled with bottle caps, plastic coins,
                                                                baseball cards, a water gun.

Let’s make a new map. Let’s put the box back, but pick
           a new stair, one we’ll both remember, one I won’t forget.

I’ll let you pick: the ocean still cold in April, the red bird
            flying into his reflection on my kitchen window
                                                                        and doing it again,
the bike you bought me that I never rode,
                                       the rock ledge you jumped into
the lake from because you knew there were no rocks
                                                                             underwater
                             that you couldn’t see from above,
the letterbox on my front door, the sidewalk covered in salt,
             all that I was waiting for, the letterbox on my front door. Prague  Churches full of dark chatter and rain, dripstone, padlocked fence, the river  rising above the street. Think always of the shoes the warm feet  of everything that wants to be loved, the cemetery buried twelve layers deep, the names  murmuring across drywall. Chainmail coats hang silent in the museum,  throats lined with gold. Open a cabinet and find a staircase.  Ascend a staircase and find a map, mirrors that seem to be everywhere  and all at once. Death turns his hourglass  and it becomes a cask of wine. A man drags paintings under a bridge,  crooked little teeth scavenge for something edible in the mud.  Matchstick, bloated rat, iridescent pink of an empty vodka bottle.  Wind blows wild in the canal a music of goblets thrown to cobbles.  The city at night and all its ghosts, baroque furniture left in an orchard,  a monk asleep in a ticketed car. Wrought faces of fighters and saints  peer from third-story porticos, gesture of wings before the exodus,  last haze before the pitch, and the priests  having fled the monasteries prayed secretly in empty wine cellars  under the same coal black bowl of sky. First, that we all lived in convertibles, tucked our certain pink or blue genders in like pushpins and sprung our lives in the highway’s metaphor, and what could go wrong too was tidy, portioned out in the acceptable idea of what could go wrong, a lost job or car accident that would be statistically rebounded by climbing Mt. Everest or the family horse winning derby. We collected mates, again certain our pink or blue choices; to get married was to open the passenger door, though sometimes I moved the peg of me over then so my blue man could drive. And children were spawned shortly after without pregnancy or labor, just dropped into one of the available holes from the sky. If you had more kids than holes, the directions suggested crowding them in as you would in real life . Real life we knew little about but took Milton Bradley’s word for it traversing small mountain ranges meant to symbolize law school, taking out various insurance policies, collecting promissory notes; promissory a new word I thought sounded religious. And that we were trying to win at this, move through it faster than the other eight year olds, arrive first at our retirement nursing homes so we could secure a room with a window at Millionaire Acres and finally begin what then, real life? Sitting on shag carpet with processed cheese, we did not know that blue could abuse pink, that pink would earn less than blue on Pay Day, that pink could fall in love with pink, or blue with blue, and that if you were pink or blue and also black you would live under the suspicious gaze of those who were not. Rooting for our dice to fall only on the good, we were indoctrinated again and again into goodness, we did not know what an art messing up a life could be, how you could dent it, drain it dry in a full flung collapse and somehow rasp a weary breath in and watch it eventually take hold. There was no mental illness, no notion of the spectrum, no sons in drug rehab, no sleeping with your high school teacher and getting pregnant, there were no swinger parties where everyone swapped cars in the Game of Life yet there were spaces neatly reserved every eighth of the journey where you could take revenge on any of your mates for no good reason priming us for opportunism, for ruthless neighborly cheer. Rooting for the high spin, racing to the End where “happy old age” beckoned in the corner opposite infancy, to park at the Day of Reckoning where the last tapered years forked into millionaire or bankruptcy , nothing in between what could be measured in polarity, the game of mockery in a final yes or no, and we wanted that greedy yes, that glittery good finish, to have slipped through the whole ruck unscathed, unravaged by any veer or rupture in the safe story, we were at the clean beginnings of our devastation, pre-failure, heading out toward the mild hills hoping for nothing special but to park at the unlit horizon. I. Where You Are (vii)  Everything begins and ends here. Still, the girls are sleeping in the narrow bunks. Still, in their sleep, they call out.  Hey, Beloved…  Hey, Brother…  Hey, Back of Beyond…  Hey, Girl I once was long ago…  They tell you that it takes ten years of being blind before your body gives up dreaming about sight.  Outside, the summer starts to cool. When the trees flame into matches the girls put their hands out of the windows, litter the floor with leaves, call it a map.  The birch tree’s sharp leaves make one continent. the dogwood’s make another.  At night, before inspection, they gather them up in armfuls, and throw the whole world out the window.  II. Oxygen  One woman brings her baby to work, walks with him between the aisles of beds to be sure we are sleeping. She holds him close to her chest. Sometimes, if the night is calm, she will reach down, touch my hand as she passes, as if she has forgotten she does not believe I can sense it, forgotten I was never anyone’s child.  Wrist : small flawless place on my body;  second home of my heartbeat  Infant : planet of heat; flawless animal;  what I was meant to become  Air : thing that changes temperature,  tells you when another body is near Blips of human heat suspended on a bomber’s screen— red hands kneading skin into flame,  and what’s left is something ancient, a hovel covered in dust with a high ringing  like a horseshoe pitched in the ear and driven down the body,  something that slips through a keyhole  and peels back the feet, unlocks the joints and stacks the self  at the window without so much as a boot print leading to the bombed.  The unmanned drone lifts in Kandahar, an albino dragonfly rising  in the light. Hundreds of miles away, archaeologists uncover the hunter-gatherers’ last  movements, eating terrapin, placing a berry on outstretched tongue. The dead  have known this feeling: the breaking apart like grain with stone, the crumbling  of bread for millennia. And what do any of them say? The reanimated skull in a bog  grows back in pixels on a screen,  here again if only to repeat, there’s more below the parking lot . The child vanishes  from the aisles of clothes, the girl with packed bags climbs into a truck on a highway  and what they tell us is simple. We disappear. A weed had grown through his shirt by the time they found him. He disappeared in winter, last seen  closing the door of his college apartment. The Carson boy, as they’d come to call him, drove two hours south  through the night and walked the train tracks and fields that run along our town. He let his truck idle off a back road,  puffing exhaust to snow, melting it, until the engine, too, grew tired and died there. That same night,  on Country Route 67, two cars would collide head-on. Joe Woodard, headlights on farm houses, road signs  and electric fence, on his way home from the night shift at Dresser Rand, drinking cheap coffee, rubbing sleep  from his eyes— the other, a blue van full of teenagers with a booze-soaked backseat, and a cranked up radio.  The course investigators later mapped found the Carson boy must have walked the field above the crash that night,  a fist of pines, ragged trees behind him. He may have seen the two fans of light collapse into each other,  sat on the crumbled curve in the new black silence, the moon silvered grass, and threw stones  at the wreckage. He may have kicked the windows out and laid beside Tonya, the volleyball captain, under stars  spread like salt across a table, climbed down the embankment, trudged farm runoff past grain silos  and wind turbines into the knee-deep river, hands steadied by stone, saw the sky in shards, and the bass  ripple through dark water. And it was blamed on hypothermia.  The brain does strange things when afflicted .  That night, red and white lights turned on snowy fields and twisted metal. That night the water moccasin  weaved, silent through a crag of rock. Buzzards, mothers woke in the middle of the night  not knowing why, and how the mothers, the town itself would come to that question, why , again, and again. I was a warm live thing that wanted  to be loved above all others. Seer. With my father’s playing cards spread semi-circle around me. A hand  hovering over each for an answer.  O. Hot hand. Current buzzing in my palm. Currant, blue and bitter in my mouth. Some song  from childhood. Song wearing beaded bonnet.  Kalinka! Kalinka! So close to my own name—forget it. Someone I love  someone I love, burst berry in the mouth  hand on fire, open circuit. Circle broken. It’s all up and given.  Photo of the moon. It’s barely a moon  some hole ripped out of black paper. She didn’t expect her guest to be so unimpressed, so languid, so bored by her nakedness.  The bathwater has dried, but she has not dressed. Her black towel pools on the tile like oil returning to bedrock.  This artist, her guest, who wears his pressed white shirt unbuttoned like a thesis,  sits somewhere between the woman and the wall, hemispheres of memory he modulates like juggling balls.  He is uninterested in his own reflection in the high mirror, omits it, unhinges the triangle between his eyes, the mirror’s,  and the nude’s, who cups her breast as if performing an illusion. He invites her to dress, as if inviting the fur  coat draped on her chair to curdle back into its animal form. A memory doesn’t strike him, but finds him:  another room, another green, another facsimile of light and a different set of golden shutters, the year of a different lover.  He’ll have to mix this color himself. A long, cool, furrow of brown meeting lavender. Distant blue terrifying absence— the highest pitch of that color.  Motionless white fog of the woods, but a cabin floats to space.  My I was impossible & so was the turmeric taste of your reincarnation.  You’re alive. That’s crazy enough. Circle of the same worries:  coming is coming through the cream of moonlight sliced.  The unexpected routes won’t spoil a destination.  Crystal thoughts while the weather drops; frigid, yet also serene.  Dare I say, offer no smarmy hello to consternating information?  Simply greet. Thus live it down to the toes  & never retire in the valley or the vines. The story told:  a massive plaster storm, frozen cells & the broom standing in  for your spine. The wild meat of animals replacing tainted crops.  The search. This is the year the dead come back in blazing headdresses. J. Edgar sports a spoiled diaper. Faubus blows smoke off his index finger. LBJ flaps his ears for the camera. This is the year the shock jocks take a vow of silence. This is the year they learn a gag reflex. This is the year they slip off the cowls to reveal their delicate pates. This is the year I take them on a wild goose chase. They watch me touch the pullets swaying on gallows strings. They watch me touch pig brains with the tip of my pinkie. Of course, I’m doing this for pleasure. Of course, I confess a little contempt. Joe McCarthy plays with his ear while he’s speaking into the microphone. Jolting Joe touches Marilyn’s elbow. This is the year I cease counting teeth. All indices insist this is the year of abundance. This is the year my feet begin moving. I vault two stairs at a time in ashen light. The citrine points predict the end of longing. The lapis lazuli laps up the oceans of sorrow. This is the year of elation, the lungs lifting. I’ve trashed my uncomfortable shoes. I’ve turned in my scowl. Enough broken mirrors. I’ve turned in all my coupons, confetti, confetti. I slip and spike my tailbone, each step separate, one forward, one back, not exactly folk dancing.  I won’t wait for the remembering to start. I won’t wait for the ceremonies to begin. I’m swimming in the midst of unhurried otters. The slicked-back fur and small black claws steer me through cathedrals of algae. I’m not against they’re drawing me over underwater cameras. I’m not against anything anymore. Once I reach the beach, I will lie on my back and breathe. Then I will pull my left knee to my chest, fingers clasping inflexible muscle cord and fat. I’m starting over, starting with the number zero. So much for citations and manifestoes, so much for triumph and satisfaction. I’ve turned in my trimmed syllables. This is the year of bountiful commodities. I strike a match to the marsh punk and reeds. It’s about time cars coast the new causeway and watch me dance among tunnels of smoke. Maybe I should shave my head and grow a beard. I could get used to baggy trousers tied with rope. I could trap the lizards and cook them on sticks, eventually become inconspicuous, even to the trees.  Ted Kennedy kisses Mary Jo’s terse lips. My buzzing mind still bends me at the knees, checks my gait, tick, tock, and reaches up to pluck fruit just out of reach, peach or plum. Maybe as I reach up to a bulb on a string and the filament clicks and blinks out, I remember the doctor taking my immobilized index finger and saying “This is the light bulb” and tapping my C-6, “But this is the switch.” I couldn’t make a fist for months. Call it fear or deliberation or animal instinct— it doesn’t care what it’s called. Before this, I wouldn’t have given you a cent for talismans. Now I have so many, my place looks like a crypt: a jade horse for pageantry, a rabbit for luck, a boat carved from lapis for passage to the underworld, even a mummified gazelle I cut from a National Geographic . I’m trying not to feel the bird inside my ribs. I’m going over the irretrievable years. Lazarus is mumbling not this again . I can’t taste the lips of those who’ve stayed behind. I don’t blame my passage on the wind or the waters. Suddenly the skies recede like bamboo fans. There will be no need for excitement or music. There will be no thirst, no ants on the march. Thelonious Monk will cease brooding, the left hand across the right to hobble every last key. Once I surprised the catcher’s mask and guitar picks scattered on the chest guard at the bottom of my parents’ closet, my mother’s hat that looks like a delicate bird nest singed in hell. But I can’t put my finger on any of these things now.  Talk about crazy, I blew a chance to hear Mingus in sweltering Greenwich Village, 1979. The cabbie deposited us at the best club in town, since we’d asked for it. I hadn’t learned patience. I still haven’t. We did something else. We were young. I can’t say what I was doing when Mingus lifted like a spoonbill looking like a roseate spit off the sun. I’ve memorized every fantasia he ever dreamt before his nerves finally betrayed him the same year. I can’t say which is my favorite. My favorite is “Fables of Faubus” or “The Haitian Fight Song.” “Prayer for Passive Resistance” knocks me out. This is the year I’ll kiss my mother’s wedding ring for the luck of the Irish, the crazy Irish. What will a year of forgiveness do for my body? I give you my tired lips, my limp arms. Maybe scarcity will cease to hold sway. This is the year I fold my shirts, flip the sleeves across the buttons, and stack them in drawers, the threadbare corduroys and the bold Hawaiians. So what if I speak in falsetto to the cat? So what if the synapses between my nerves burn hot? Can I cease planning the next assignation? Do I empty the roof of my mouth? Do the backs of my eyes turn white? I’m ready for love to take over my body. I will have to rewire my nerves, teach my hands to swoop and dive like sparrows. I will practice silence on the fig tree and rotted fence. The spider lilies take root where they can. One step, and a bird crashes from brush, an affronted queen. It took me years to admit the nuptials of pride and desire. And once I did, what then, what next? I will have to wait and see about beauty and grace. I will have to wait and see about the body’s resilience. The sunflowers drop their heads, old mannequins with broken necks. The blackberries abscess all at once, as if each one has to prove its absentmindedness. I can repeat the furtive gesture of fingertips to tongue, fingertips to tongue like a squirrel or chipmunk. I’m not boasting, I’m barely breathing, one lung kindling, one lung accelerant, the kiss of incandescence. I am always waving, and sometimes clear.  Sometimes in the slick at the bottom of a frying  pan, a cloud of fat. All this evening under  the sofa I have lain untwisting embroidery,  un-plaiting plaids. And the brown back of it I have  faded, to strained tea, arms polished as a tooth.  Your carelessness is love to me—as I crease  the newspaper into its new fallen shape,  a disrupted bird, print rubbing until the names  are something only I can read, just as only I  hear the water standing in the pipes, gallons of it,  pressing—the only sign the drips, surprisingly  articulate, a Braille inside the wall.  I wish you could notice the careful attention  I have given to your bread—only the fairest  flowers, the green marvel growing on the heel,  white and dusty. Like marble, both light  and dark. One antique spore, and all  can bloom—you say you cannot eat it,  but I think mold feeds you more—I want  to give you the silence of its planet, its heart—  a center which like mine, is nowhere,  yet increasing all the time. I fish for angle iron in the scrap, slag clotted along the seams of all but one piece clean enough to make it worth the work ahead. I lock it in the vice, jaws closed down with the rubber mallet’s prodding, and the grinder whines on in my hands, works the rusted metal to a sheen, swirling Q’s left in wake until I take the piece to the belt and let the rough tongue lick it smooth.  The whole room smells hot, it smells of origin, of soot, and the band saw screeches as the blade sinks through.  The shape I want is marked on the metal and what I can’t take out quickly and with power must be worked by hand.  A rat-tail file finds the mouth of the almost-plane and works a bevel smooth.  The blade is an old file I’ve ground the teeth off of.  I give it an edge and it stays.  It gives me an edge, the smell of the metal shop, a cutting bitter scent that belongs inside the earth.  I turn the idea of the tool over in my hands. That it works makes me want to work. The work, it carves that want away. I Have No Empire to offer you, my son, only the song  a fool travels with, on the back of the wrong thought.  Forego the knife in the pocket for a stone.  The only protection from the inevitable  is patience.  What better teacher than stone?  Carry the weight well and you’ll hardly notice  how much the road agrees with each step.  Son, the world erupts and so grows.  When it cools, and trust me, it does,  the crust is a tomb to the living, though the dead call it womb . i.  there lives a weather vane            cooper salt green  pitched roof       above the racking hull rafters & scaffolding        dirt floor under floor  of every shaving yet made from the work  ii.  the men oiled     worked   to a sheen in their heavy clothes  tattered as the wind        as the wind worked over the dusty yard and who  was there to claim such derelict caskets    propped upon iii.  jack stands          stripped and abandoned  with every kind of name for hope              or luck     or pleasure  lettered darkly on each transom I come from a long line of Miriams. Let line be a footpath out of thickets.  The words sea and bitter make up my name. Someone says, good morning, Miriam and  the bitter in me turns its pulsing head, the sea in me turns—  ∞  What would you bury / plant here?  the box of milk teeth  or quiet ashes  or quiet hatchets  for a line of lustral trees  What plants are native to your area?  afraid love wakefulness ashamed sorry  Terrace? Greenhouse? Backyard garden? Window?  I learned of the woman who plants flowers  in tear gas canisters, hanging gardens  ∞  In my girlhood, I was afraid of the divine calling, that I would be called, and that the call would trek closer among the other night noises—  ∞  Look up. Traje de luces night / Gold threads. See? / The fighter skewers his own glinting torso upon the bull / bulwark /  blood work.  Describe nightfall in terminologies of water / the liters of it /  in waves, the copper ewers of it / night measured  in bayous and in glacial lakes / night streams in from under / the door / glittering I can hardly look / no never was an age dark.      scripts for the future  BY CAROLINA EBEID    once more the chatter around town will be of blindness  all the ghosts are Russian ghosts at this party  the law here is to sing  take comfort in believing no thought-bubble tarries above  your head for all the brethren to read  streaming a documentary on the history of the sun  since eyes evolved to see underwater  do you prefer photos of landscapes or photos of people  you choose the figure for god among the lavish  descriptions of polar deserts  information clouds known as the neobeautiful  watching a four minute video on how to draw blood  samples with a butterfly needle  you’ll all have gone ancestral  say to them you were changed into a heliotropic plant  then back to a woman then a plant again  the unlucky women carry too much yellow bile  what was paleozoic sunlight like  that soul begins in the liver  take the vexing thought to the anagram machine  net worth will metamorphose into a wet thorn  there’s a cherry tree at the center of puberty  I’ll tell you what your “about” shall be  a chlorine hand wash before entering the airport  love’s written all over your face, love  see the incredible footage that has emerged  Morning arrives in the Gila Valley. The sky is unresponsive, pale, made of memory, mussels broke open in the sink before dawn, a father sees his little girl in reflection, a dark window. The knife slips inside, the sea keens, a little lemon, a little wine.  To the outside world, what looks like desolation is the succulent life of secrets. The lush unspoken grows quietly wild. In the dawn of the new year, a cottonmouth yawns its dangerous yawn. Trumpets open their throats to any drifter any rain any sky. A lesser goldfinch alerts the naturalist to our presence.  To the outside world, it’s easy to see Tonya Carter as a recluse. But Carter, 32, a former shadow of a statue, is better known to locals as the Desert Doctor. This is my island in the sky, Carter said, as I accompanied her on her morning rounds, poking her head in on a family of saguaros. How are you feeling today, Pete?  I wanted to know. What do you say to those people, your mother and father, for instance, who accuse you of turning your back on the world? I never had a mother, Carter said sharply, before recovering her characteristic smile.  It sounds like you’re saying home. Home, yes. I long ago abandoned the notion as one unmovable place. I live in the procession of shadows of clouds across the desert floor.  They know where to find me. And they do. All matter of animal shows up at her door with twisted tails, missing talons, still-born babies. Anyplace is good for a grave, she said. The matter of factness endemic to desert life can be unsettling to outsiders. I wouldn’t say I’m healing the desert, no, the desert is healing me.  It’s the ultimate irony, says the Desert M.D., as a kid I was always afraid of needles.  We’re a long way from the ocean aren’t we?  Out here in the modern nowhere it’s easy to feel you’ve gotten to the bottom of something. The weight of everything above, the speed of the descent, drums beat till bursting, cold water fills the canal, the shape of the tornado forms and pulls on its coat and turns up its collar and takes the kids with him. Away is a long way.  That’s not uncommon given the unusually harsh conditions atop the mesa, Carter assures me. I see it every day.  The only thing that survives is what, over time, over generations of not getting it right, greedily keeps its tiny bit of everything inside.  She pauses for a moment to look up at the sky.  We love what’s too tall for us. We love too far, from too far away. Silence falls, surrenders. Limb to limb, Green Devils hang from trees like the first figs of the season.  This is the mystery of hunger. Under a cave’s blue arch, a girl squats by a woman  who cradles cloth in her arms. Cradles and talks and talks. The girl watches the woman  chew and spit bread to the lips of the small still flesh now pressed against her dry breast. The girl  shoves dirt into her doll’s mouth. Someone chants prayers or shouts of artillery chime outside. Oh God  the girl hides her eyes, and a sweet scent rises in the heat. She curls into her butter dress. Loose  in the thievery of a dream the woman opens her arms to reach a branch where an olive still clings,  beckoning to be. She rents the garments of the tree. The pit slides down the globe of her fist  to the parched and naked earth. Nature is desperate with the weight of so many men. And the girl  wakes the woman. She remembers the sound of ripe fruit pruned by the evening, the sound of the mountain receiving them. 1890: Ardèche, France  Then I practice frozen lips, tongue of lead. I shed cravings, peel away the encumbrances  and greeds of the body. The monks eat without sound, soften the swish of robes, step with feet that feather  the earth. My spoon clatters. Phlegm rattles my lungs. I pray that prayer can tether me, be the cool  gray stone that dulls my rough edges and burrs. After high mass, I turn to chores: I pull thistles, rub the brass,  gather kindling, twine wreathes, thresh and bundle the hay. Each small interruption, I savor.  The yipping fox. The blue rock-thrush who pipes the same six notes. In my free hour, I read the breviary,  nurse my sore feet, dig my thumb between the long bones and tendons, and remember that I am foul matter.          This is a poem of a painting stuck in summer, of a boy stuck in the tight fist of a reservoir, and the gold sun stuck in its crooked display. The Colorado boys and all the walking they do to unstick their minds from adventure. Red dirt stuck in their soles from the time they were stuck in worship, dancing on the cliffs. The stuck-upness of their chests as they dove from a ledge higher than the last. Water stuck in their ears in a much different way than the smell of pine in their hair. I was stuck in the promise of forgetting that comes with Autumn. A bad cover of The Boys of Summer stuck in my head as if another generation of teenagers needs to be stuck in that narrative. I can see you your brown skin shining in the sun. You got the top pulled down and the radio on. I suppose Don Henley was stuck in his own nostalgia, stuck in the same three note loop of the synthesizer. I was stuck in a forward motion away from one of the boys— the one stuck with the story to tell. It wasn’t the jump that killed him , he said when he called, but an otherwise strong heart stuck on a beat as he swam across the lake. He told me the details that stuck with him— how he turned around to find the lake’s surface where his friend should have been barely pinched with movement; the way time changed, knowing when the sun set the search was over; the warped primary colors of the scuba gear underwater after he dove back in with the rescue team to search for something that stuck out, something unlike murky water and the slimy rock bed and more like the familiar shape of his friend’s body, more like his red swim trunks tied at his thin waist. I was stuck in the repetition of, I’m sorry, I’m so sorry , not for the things I should have been sorry for but in that sticky way you have nothing else to say but take the blame for someone’s sorrow.  Nobody on the road, nobody on the beach. I feel it in the air, the summers out of reach. Empty lake, empty street, the sun goes down alone . This is a poem of a painting stuck in summer, of a lake stuck in its unforgivable stillness, of a body of water stuck inside a much larger body of water. This is how I have come to know grief since I left that boy in all his sadness— to try to unstick oneself from approaching nightfall, and to remain with a body lost at the bottom of you. Run. The earthquake trapped in my skull  has cracked bone, & I’ve been stuck inside Wall #4, watching  roaches big as babies sticking their legs  in the sink, still cars as I speed by on the highway.  I’ve found my bones in the lake in my old neighborhood,  my ribs like hands reaching to test the surface,  leaves like empty gondolas, drowning when full.  All of the seats are taken. Even the ghosts have to look  over each other’s shoulder to see the atom bomb  that’ll never blow because everyone secretly  loves the taste of wind— & at least gasoline  tastes like it smells, is not deceptive like the mirrors  too slow to catch a man so ancient he doesn’t need to drink water.  I reach my hand in the lake & pull out my hand,  all bone but alive, shaking the one attached to me  like it were the fat end of a man stretched by steaks  & cocktails. I pull the hand & the rest of me rises  from the water, perfectly put- together like the found fossils  of a dinosaur whose teeth sell tickets to toddlers. But I’m alone  with me, & both of us want to switch skins like color-coated plastic surgeons.  But then he falls apart, shattering like a light bulb against  the concrete, leaving only his hand, floating over him, gripping mine  like the hand of a child that needs to be disciplined in public. Not my era, my sex. Not wanting the things I did. Not hours of radio static and waiting, the ocean’s yawn, this whole huge sky. Noise in my ears. Not having it. The wasted fireworks of flares after the propellers’ song quit, though they were nice at the time. The emergency flotation device. How I didn’t think of it first. Hours on the ground after a takeoff went sour. The time I thought a cloud was a stork and the time it was—that shadow geography . Not the cold coat of clouds. Not a single beaten record. The sky’s greed against my own, though. That knowledge. That lack. Rattlesnake Creek, FL  At first, you said no when I told you I found taillights, halves of soda cans, weathered glass in the creek—how one time  I kicked a water moccasin out of a sunken car radiator, as if this were a surefire way of convincing you to come. I thought it would  never happen, until you asked me if I was free. It was June, I was jobless, and you were the one asking. From the car door to the river,  we were the kind of quiet that stutters inside an idling engine. We dragged our feet upstream through braids of water,  ankles like fallen branches carving rifts in the flow. We stopped at deposits, shallow gradients where we could read the stream  over a pillow, where the shark teeth collect. Our knees dug into the riverbed, mosquitoes latched onto arms, our hands pleasure curled calices.  We lifted fistfuls of sediment, fingers sweeping, straining, and sifting sieves picking out teeth: fossilized ray, serrated edges of prehistoric tiger sharks—  remnants of a time when this whole state was a hidden landmass, rising up from the sea. When the sun folded over the canopy line,  I lifted a white shark’s tooth from the bottom— tall as a thumb, crown from wet shale, broad chevron decorating the base with a stripe  of Miocene perfection. We ran our fingertips over ridges, a primal texture like nothing I’d ever touched before. Feet sunk  in the mud of that afternoon, our nerves shed like wet clothes, you spilled over me like silt. I held what felt like millions of years  converging in one place—your right hand an open bloom. I set the fossil in your palm like it was fate, this hollow space only I could fill. got brought up from mud & pond scum  tadpole girl but drop girl & just say “fledgling” / no flight  yet / too patient to be boy but lost ones roost here  call me close enough to pocket knife that I join the circle  in service of claws & in service of pulling at the scruff of a neck  & in service of the nest I dream from / only blade away from Roman candle  they’ve called the cops on our devolution from civilized to tinderbox / light me  at the ankles / here comes the show / think lovely knots in the hardwood  think sewing needle in the pads of our fingers / blood brothers because we insist  & in service of the star we’ve stolen I’ve got a crow sewn in my throat sounding out a new husk  & in service of cake & kill & the cave flooded with never when you believe It wasn’t yet despair.  As if returning, they ducked beneath branches, strolled toward a cabin, a lake, heard the complaint  of rope as a small boat knocked against a dock.  These must have been what earlier generations called copses, fens,  rutting bucks, spotted does. The powdered light parsed by grasses fabled that plot as history.  Had they the patience of ruin, of the soil’s humid seeds, they might have found the land less  a scribble of roots, less painted or posed, found their sweating sex less  its edict than the curled and dotted punctuation turning sense to query—  Within that tableau, the canopy diffusing into its crowned distinctions.  The clouds silvering in the noon’s cobalt inclinations.  A hawk pinwheeling. A field mouse or vole.  And the sky palpable, like a question they had failed to ask. We believe that blood is thicker than milk, that our mothers know when to send us thirsty  out into the restless, changeable world. Infants, some say, weaned in late autumn  experience the seasonal waning of daylight, departing their mothers’ breasts into a period  of acute loss. By autumn, all the magpies flee. They surge across the sky, blur of little wings.  Because lakes glisten and ripple below, the flock looks down and sees itself. They can’t help  their own beauty, which is only an idea of beauty. They fly toward it, all dumb-luck and thirsty  for the shiny reflection. It is almost child-like how they recognize their own face,  caught off-guard then inexplicably greedy for more of themselves. If only all of us  when we were once young and suckling, our first tooth budding through, bit and broke  our mother’s skin to taste the warmth of where we came from. If only we could recognize  this moment as our daylight fading, our own bitter reflection disguised as migration  in which we journey no where but into a shiny lake, diving into ourselves until we drown. rainy days recall other rainy days with their dark smell—my moon, standing behind me  in the mirror. the sand i now &nnbsp             resent—snake tracks leading  away. this must be  the anticlimax. i wait for things to let up. i wait so long the ocean becomes its own festooning  violence. mist shifts & shimmies over a dim creek bed. everything looks blue & the christmas song that matches,  to boot, plays from a beat-up stereo.  you’ll be doing alright with your memories of light —but look: here is my body becoming  an island. here is my body becoming itself. The music we like is half carousel, half villain. I cut my hair myself because asking for help is harder. The feeling was of being beyond speaking. Your hand on my neck, the dark mountains receding. Of course, they’ll come back in the morning. Of course, the Pittsburgh sky holds nothing, or everything, the trouble of noticing milk clouds, or clouds like white curtains. On the radio, a blind man speaks about seeing in the dark using sound. His world my clouded peripheral. The problem is mainly one of listening. You gave me a tiny deck of cards, a blue doll with a red heart. I was jealous of the me who could dream of you all night, the world not whole but mapped, at least. The hard permanence of mountains. But the last thing my father did for me was become the ocean. And when to say it: when to reveal that inside the black felt hat is not a rabbit, but nothing. My heart a box of string. I keep ordering my father’s favorite meals and refusing to explain the significance of each tuna fish sandwich. How many sentences can exist without context? How to link one thing to the next without becoming a toy train circling a blue foam mountain? Dear Horoscope. Dear Horror. If I face the window head-on, snow glitters like craft store felt. The sun surprises and tiny spots of blood become constellations on the rug. I could make anything a star, the shape of a bear, a bird, a woman. Whatever you wanted, as far as information, the dead’s measurements, what color eyes, hair, shoe size, from here out I was refusing. My mother becomes a black bird in a dream because she has wings. How much depends upon my father’s blue wheelbarrow my mother set out on the curb. Very little is worth keeping tied to a wrist, becoming attached to via strings and zippers. A girl flies a kite in the picture behind the weather report of negative three degrees. It’s all an ice storm in my heart and no laughter at thunder. What happens to pages left to face sun for a season of misplaced commas, mis- remembered addresses? The music will creak floorboards whoever is listening. Or not listening. That’s the point of imagining yourself instead like furniture, arms open and chenille, lint gathering. On a magic string I pull forth my fate: I was molten panther when they scalped me, put on platter, said, Serve. Queen  turned me over like a thimble, looked inside, let me out where creams spin her money, on fire & white. Everyone  here is an orphan orbiting. I sip milk, run through the fields like a baby, touching stalks. At birth, they couldnst  remove the elf tusk from my brain. I lurk into the Tower where vultures pick black buttons on their coats & spit  them out. Everyone here is an orphan, webbed fingers collecting foyer dinge. I perceive my smallness in a telescope,  fall in love with the tippling. Everyone here is orbiting a knowing. My beard has, for years, been seed-size. Keep going,  says the wind… All night I stir mare soup: I, standing in my best breeches alone. Her hand a country where women are fools in harrowing bonnets, only dreams can pursue them.  Winter bullied her, forced a finger in her, made her  his wife, so that nobody could touch her. When crowned, she magnified her wand  into a mirror, caught what wind & wired it shut. Her nature ballooned in a cave of iniquity,  so beautiful windows closed at her arrival & true became truest just by looking at her.  Her her a burr, the burr of her .  The waiting & bleeding trembled her over, the monster of her & her might—Origin Unknown.  A man with no business wearing a hat got lost in the woods, & took her:  Her names were Luxury, Glory, Little Worm. She carved a carriage & suffocated in sated sleep.  What a dull, what a little dull, what a dull little being she was. It is not up to us, who lives in the window. Her mongrel’s puddled drool a portal  to nowhere. Afraid to move, afraid of her body with its bells & chambers, echoing. Maybe it’s time to celebrate the hideous. Not  to confess with some hope for absolution,  but to gather all the terrible selves and minutes  and show them the trees, and the way the rain  has just abated so the air has ocean in it  though we’re dry and waiting. Part of me died here  so another could go on. The body I raised  and abandoned still walking the path on the hill  where I became larger than myself and the day  could no longer contain me. Turns out, dust  can also recompose itself, a starfish arm</span?  or lizard tail. What I cut off kept walking  without me, remembering the fireflies</span?  on the broad lawn and plastic cups  in dormitory basements, the tea house  and everything I made sure to forget  or shamelessly left in pursuit of the shining next. I wish I could say everything I’ve done  and still be loved. I believe it is possible,  if I could remember it all and give it mouth, neglected teeth, tongue, the ways  I’ve learned to breathe as if I were always  singing. I feel this enormous debt to the world  for letting me exist and do all the damage  my living requires. I’m hungry  and the tea is cold, the hill is a hill  no matter who I am. It will take a long time  to say the everything, and already  some are turning away. It’s hard  work, witnessing at a birth. Blood  everywhere, and the awful quiet  between the screaming. You can bring  your everything too, we’re making  the dirt arable again, we’re burying  our shit like animals do and tomorrow  there will be a garden ringed  with lemon trees though by then  we’ll be on our way gone. For luck,  afterbirth under the single poplar.  All the stopping and starting, interruptions  of prayer. Language as vehicle  and impediment. All the lives  before this one, practice. Is that a castle  in your elbow? My clavicle’s made  of mud. I’m trying to tell you  about my fear. A door opening  in another room. The way light changes  after rain, the air around a body after sweat.  I’m not finished yet. Somebody  kiss me now, right on the garden.  Everything’s coming up green.                                                                                                            and a bullet feels a fresh itch in its spine. the morning after the name in the headline does not belong to anyone I have loved, the sun pulls my eyes back and I see the world for the first time. the clock returns. its shadow hangs over my bed and the numbers count down again. i live 28 hours at a time and am born anew each undead day. no one calls the murdered boy a boy and so i imagine i, too, have always been a man. never anyone’s child. even when I was small and knew nothing of this violence that ransacks our eternal youth. somewhere along the line, a boat arrived, lined with sweaty and swollen black skin. a white man gave a black man a name. a black man gave a black man a name. a black man gave a black man a name. this is how i was given a father. i imagine anything we own is borrowed. i imagine my own blood is borrowed. i do not know which summer will chose it as bright paint along its demanding night. i hear it hum a song of escape at the mouth of each full moon. i will one day suffer some unimaginable death and grow wings that will also not be my own. in the corner of heaven that belongs to us, we are called only by whatever our families passed down. we look up, and the trees have no history. no one will worship what carried us to the afterlife. until then, a mother rocks a boy in her arms and whispers my baby is getting so big . the ground cracks. a fresh grave begins to rise from the earth.         I’m palming the air for the four-seam  fastball, the miscarried crack of the pitch  hurtling toward the stands at the bottom  of the first inning, and its not June’s  unseasonable clutch that’s unfocused me,  not heat suturing my t-shirt  to the vale between my breasts  that’s caused the ball to ricochet past  my head. It’s the man whose eyes are  an eroded coastline, his irises radiating rip currents,  spindrifts, the man who grasps the tan  thigh of the brunette leaning into him,  though she’s easily half his age. I’m watching  her teeth slide through the bratwurst  he’s bought her, its mustard lacquer radiant  in the light. I’m watching her tongue  the thick moons of meat, swallow each  like a hallowed stone. Are we drawn to love  by the mysterious transparency of the human  body? Rather, does the body lapse into metaphor,  divulge itself in tangible terms? In my metal-  backed seat at Coors Field, I’m trying not to think  of the fan that died laying hands on a foul, how fear  forced his six-year-old child to watch.  I’m trying not to think of the Texas Rangers out-fielder  tossing the souvenir foul to the stands  that forgone summer, or the fan, an off-duty  firefighter, trying to catch the ball for his son.  But isn’t this the nature of desire?  The ball’s force tethering his hold and slip,  the boy standing afterwards in the country  of lost words, hand seizing the rail that  couldn’t stop his father’s fall. Tell me, isn’t this  desire—how the child stood, replaying  his father’s twenty-foot dive into the scoreboard,  how long he traced the dead body  with his eyes? As the sliders, strikeouts,  and benders unveil their soliloquys before us,  I’m back to the brunette, how she presses  her Blue Moon to her jugular notch, her flushed  skin winding inward like the lobes  of a rose petal before she drinks. I know this  barehanded way of literalizing oneself, as if to say  my body is the suicide squeeze at the bottom  of the last inning, as if to say desire modifies us .  I watch her skirt ride up as they sidle out  of their seats, her thighs marked by the scorching  metal. I watch her body as the scoreboard pulses  images into the sun’s dusky arousal and he  follows, the glare eclipsed by the mountains.  I’m watching her calves, jealous of how  the muscles rise and fall as she climbs the bleacher  steps like a throat, undulant, swallows a necessary water. Their sons grow suicidally beautiful At the beginning of October  — James Wright, “Autumn Begins in Martins Ferry, Ohio ”    On nights hawk moths cyclone  and plunge into my car’s low beams,  I’m convinced they are bodies in love—  forewings ricochet against parabolic  reflector in cadence, thoraxes pelt the cool  whelm of glass. Because spring thaw  suffers them into the crosswind’s whirl  and dirge, the din of the suicidally beautiful  becomes a ruthless bell. When I learn  that celestial routing contrives their spiral  flight paths, not longing, that my light’s  brutal ploy is only deception, I think  of my uncle, knees down in wild violets,  the day my mother broke his arm.  I imagine the clash over a blue ukulele,  his ulna hewn by its cheap,  laminate wood, the way the nylon strings  feathered his skin. I want to touch his cast’s  exhausted foxhole as he secrets his pain inside of it,  to curl into its raw cotton.  I want to close my eyes over nights  their father forced them into the cellar,  urged him onto his sister with joint locks  and vital point strikes to teach  her a lesson , his body thrust forward  by their father’s slurs. Years later, grinding  his thighs into boot-marked bleachers at the rodeo,  my uncle watches cowboys  launch toward steer bolting from spring  -loaded chutes, watches for hands full of horns,  man given over to adrenaline and dust. He’ll gaze as man  seizes beast like a child  held between another child’s palms,  the clutch a lapsed intimacy. Before my uncle  leaves for boot camp, he’ll grip his sister’s wrist  until she vines her fingers around  his plush thenar eminence, his thumb  like blunt cut sage. It is the last time his hands  will plot her vein’s smooth tributaries, trail  the map of scars to her pulse.  Next winter, a bullet will sing its way  into his skin. But for now, like honey  -suckle helixing hardest at the root  it betrays, she won’t let go. Let all the different bodies fall where they may, ringing round the rosie,  ashes to ashes et cetera—  Time stops for no man but it will pause for three, nothing metaphysical about it ,  just a trick of being touched  in every place at once, landing Lucky Pierre style in the center  of attention. To be vied for, divided at last  between two persons: technique on the one hand, content on the other.  To be the means  of your camaraderie, latest point in a line passing between friends.  A pastime. You’ve got nostalgia  for the infinite and I’ve got a finger on your nerve, evoking overtones of love  without destroying the mood.  Now you are speaking to each other through me— quicker and surer —  a game of telephone , names misremembered  and mispronounced. It’s like Frank says: Nobody should experience  anything they don’t need to  so I had to invent a life to write, equal parts “ yearning ” and vulgarity ,  half tears , half refreshment .  Better than the movies, a day in which I was in love and between it.  What can we expect?  Everything, but  we won’t. Above all, what I have feared is love. I have been afraid of my body, of its weakness, its need that feels like a pail filling slowly with milk. I have watched kids at the teat,  how their mouths are formed to pull every sweetness towards them, to suck the body tired, the nipple raw and jewel-like. Who would choose such a bitter ornament?  Who could understand a creature that gladly admits anything that arrives at its gates? I have put my hand to the soft stomach of a doe, and I have heard her throat  bleating in the labor. I prefer to let the rod do my speaking. I prefer to let them call my name. Roses, you said, are ruthless in their desire under so many lids  to be no one’s sleep.  So you left Ruth & went walking  barefoot through empty castles to feel around you the silence  grow wider.  But there’s always an upbeat. Always the strung readiness  of knowing that someone might cry out & who will hear it  if not us.  When I saw his new torso suffused with purple light  as though not our son after all but an organ—a heart  I’d sung into each night before they cut him out looking big & angry—  I knew I must change my life.  How badly you wanted to feel your own death  to account cell by cell for your own body’s passing.  Is that so different from enduring the most menial of tasks, the grind  & counterweight, the tedium & vigilance of seeming to be a god?  Isn’t the preparation to be abandoned also the prick of the bodied life  first the left arm swelling, then the right, finally the body  reduced to a bell? It is dark and I am trying to tell you why all my poems are about weapons.  In the space between us, my voice is a heart-skin hemorrhage: the color  of savagery. I can’t bring myself to look beyond your face so I imagine a hawk  on your shoulder. Imagine its talons closing around something softer  than the oil spill of my tongue, which is even now undoing itself  onto the table. This is how I hunt: I step into the open, undress  my arrows, will the wind into song.  Severance is a clean word.  It is the only clean thing I know how to make. Your hands fall  out of mine. Outside , the moon waits for sinew to grow. There are no true  synonyms for loneliness. You are so pretty once your eyes are dry  and the night is baying for your blood. Then I called on Mr. Babbage, to ask whether any of his calculating machines are to be had.  I find they are not. —Lewis Carroll, journal entry dated July 24, 1867  When the two of you survey all that never was, the enormity of the world made known in everything left behind, it is enough to gesture to the four walls  of the echoing chamber plastered in sheets of paper, each a portal framed in fine letters and lines.  Nowhere the bodied machine.  Not even its shadow.  You confess, it may have been little more than a dream, a vapor in the night, something pale and swift that darts at the edge of sight, disappearing  into a realm where nothing is quite as it seems.  Your companion nods, saddened by what the eye cannot gather in.  Still, you would pass it on,  the idea of it at least, a puzzle too large to piece together in one life, too grand to leave alone.  Here is a cipher, you say, an unsolved mystery  I have pondered for years, turned on a lathe, fashioned in the likeness of a mind. Listen and you will hear it, slow as thunder after the lightning washes the sky.  It calls me, perhaps to you too?  Something moves in the dark folds of time, something stirs in the thoughts, wants me to call it by name, to give it life.         The president's fave is not like mine. In small ways I’ve been hated, loved, bruised by  burden. But the President’s face is everywhere  and nowhere like the moon, always and never someone’s  aphrodisiac, night terror, escape  valve, excuse to howl. We watch him  age in four years a decade, a quarter century  in eight, and after simply fade. When everyone’s asleep  I count dependents on one hand, tweeze grays  with the other. Imagine his lips on his daughter’s forehead  or cheek when he puts her to bed, clean, fed, and for another day  safe. Maybe America’s like the one who hasn’t come home yet,  two hours past curfew and still no phone call, no text.  Every house tents its own weather. In his it is always  November. Elsewhere the lightning bugged lawns of June  under a half-mast haiku moon. The cherry blossoms  either an almost divine kind of shade or pulp beneath the millipede  feet of the crowd- machine. He watches our lever-fists  insist on ignition. When you roll back the petals of every decision,  what’s left? A bud, naked of revision. Its inaugural  gasp. A lifetime. Then its last.    A train fused to track and night this Andean plateau, once inland  sea. Marooned salt ghosts white at sunset, then sops up the colors like bread. Where did all that water go?  And how did it swamp the lungs of a boy skipping  stones in a dry creek, a woman too weak to climb her stairs? We sylph  the same darkness that spills into valleys. Up here it is sheen  between stars. The moon-joint swivels in its spent socket  and that feather-lashed cast still winks as if to lure ships off the edges of maps.  **  Bright moments of sound burst upward with smoke  from outdoor kitchens. I surface rough alpaca blankets into the news from home,  eight days late on a grainy TV screen.  Rooftop arms have already ceased their desert-island reaching. My destination  is another city in standoff with stars. I’ll buy a hot shower  in The Salt Hotel, stand in the steam until I disappear. May you live long. – Sinhalese Greeting  Let there be more Mars in your diet, more dry tea bags, cosmic dust. Let there be horse carts Phaeton forgot to hobble stashed near Cassiopeia, near Jupiter’s micro-solar system.  Let there be more gods:  god of toothpicking, god of summer dresses risen against the thigh, god of humidity. Let your inner Egypt trammel you with Cessna-dropped leaflets  ranting against the way lotion calcifies near the lid. Let your inner Egypt possess many nameless mutts scampering away from Martian debris, destined for international  acclaim. Let your inner Little Curly not melt upon take-off but find its way back to some back street in Moscow, back to training, back to just another Laika-licensed quadroped who,  against great odds and odd politics, goes on living forever. Let your inner Egypt and your inner Little Curly meet up one evening on your inner dance floor—all hard polish  and mahogany counters—let your inner DJ play all the right records, only couples’ songs, roller-rinking the two through the salted business of Motown, and let them fall in  a desperate, shuttle-deployed kind of love. Let your inner parachute fold so many times together you defy physics. After too many  grappos , may your inner social barometer  malfunction. May you marry indiscriminately and always in a rush. May you handle poorly some nuance no one informed you of beforehand, and may you laugh it off. Please  understand that praying in the new century vacuums your inner Egypt and, once done, discovers your inner Atlantis, and may God bless your inner Atlantis. Let there be another  afternoon so close in temperament and degree to your favorite one, your Tahitian evening. May you stand tall in a shower not your own and declare the soap unrighteous, because  your stink is holy and so is theirs, because today feels like the kind of day where body odor came from the gods. God of the armpit, god of the noon showering. God of morning  breath. Let your inner Egypt declare you holy without sacrifice, though sacrificial lambs will be found, catalogued, and released near rye fields. Let your inner Laika mate  with your inner Nakhla, and may you bark long, without a lozenge, without a shuttle. Let there be another day in your pipeline. Let there be someone waiting for you at home  who also enjoys women’s golf and talk radio, who also pretends to sleep when you pretend to sleep, who also wakes up early because coffee wins over the hope of another  dream. Let all of this be true, but more than that, let the flies surrounding your porch fall for you one night, and let you remember that the gods these days are mighty small, that they  have a billion eyes all pointed at you, that they have wings and grow from maggot sex, that they do not mind what you’ve done because, to them, it’s all a bit confusing anyway, with  your two feet, your thumbs, your inability to land on shit and find sustenance. Let your inner Egypt catch one and hold it until its buzz quits, and may you let that god live long. Don’t tell me your name is a measure for smallness. If you leave this way,  let it be like an accidental catnap in the bathrobe of your love, closer than ever  to the plains’ greatness, and maybe I will be there, holding open your loneliness  like a door. And unlike those blazing lanterns set windward on the big sky  of your affliction, bound by the arms of night, I will never unlive you. My love won’t leave  with the fabrics of the season— an always-cloak, shrooming my shoulders.  And should you remain, I’ll never forget the heart’s preparation, this feeling,  like holding my breath at the gas pump, gripped by the potential of our static;  how our hair stood on end at the science center, and now we’re here.  Should this life allow you to discover a new language, one that will carry you  inside the soft vowel of your favorite collie’s one blue eye, unbound by the arms, the night—  forgive yourself. not quite a block away from yours you notice  the boarded-up house as you navigate  ice / the fire and the young woman went up  / that same early morning you woke  just after the image / a woman in a nightgown  clutching an ice pick / but now you  carry garlic / shallots / salmon in a brown paper bag  in sleet / the gap between want and  need narrows / her neighbors in sleet tote cardboard  boxes to a U-Haul / to the ashen road  / the rattle of dishes / your sheltered question  memory-fatigue / but you’re too  impatient to gather / bury / wait / wait even longer / exhume and  bleed the lesser toxic gingko seeds /  their human-like sick stink sickens you / so you ingest onions and garlic  instead / in awe of anything under-  ground you find root and salt cellars reassuring / also cemetery grounds /  but their churches have an inverse  effect / the image of them will return / return to you ablaze in the middle  of the night / and you will be helpless  outside / afar / unable to reach any of the icons inside / why you must  continue to find faith in mirrors Am a ladder of ravens. Am blazon and bloom. Bones in a stem: your mother’s bones.  Not a face, a knife, a sanctuary—  but leaf, and pantomime of leaf. Dawn’s ice like a glass doll’s dress, its hem of snow. And you here, in your basket’s shadow.  Want your sleep’s thick castle of bones, its fruit-weight to fill me.  Will tell you a story if you’ll just lie down.  Not the oven-song your mother sang. (Weren’t her lips fine?) Not the ghosts her pockets could not feed, tipping out  bits of heart, the apple’s meat.  Have made a black soup for your singing mouth. Let the stars slip in, your buckles and comb. Stir  to shine. Drink the world you won’t admit you want—  sleep’s your jewel, sleep’s not what the villagers say, but these black wings flapping at your own heart’s floor.  You’ll find her there, her breath in the loam: ground lashes, ground collar. Once she was like you—bloom  in a wolf’s gold eye. Once her body grew from me. This is the story: to wake  you must claim it, crow-close in the telling. Climb in. Lid to root. Am singing you down. After too many drinks I draw a tarot card  to see you clearly— The Moon: light that’s safe  to stare at, knowing its source, which is not you,  but your image. Last night, I dreamt my therapist  would not speak to me. We were at a party,  eating meat. She wiped her hands and walked  to the window where the raw light  swallowed her up. Then, another dream:  you, demanding sex, but only if another  man would join us. Desire, you explained,  is like a see-saw, and we were on the same side,  my back against your chest. This morning, I believed  I heard a voice in the hall— the low, satisfied tone of  someone who has just fucked and woken to return  to his own life. Only absence is real to me now:  the swift astringency of spirits. This summer, I watched  my grandmother die. Her lips were dark purple,  a new shade of lipstick my aunt had applied.  She sat upright in bed, apologized for looking  behind me, but, she explained, she couldn’t help but see  anonymous shadows pass. I told her I understood.  From the kitchen, the smell of green beans in butter,  my aunt turning the faucet on then off. A week later,  I wrote to you, told you she was gone. You wrote  back, asking for my mothers’ address so you could send her  your condolences. I let you have it. I almost wrote something else  but didn’t. For years, each poem I wrote was a letter to a man that had fucked me over. Oh, all those boys, now they are little dominos and my finger is posed next to their shiny upright bodies in a gesture of threat. Like some sort of storybook god, whatever I touch rinses itself of sadness: knife, sheets, alarm. I want to say there is a stretch of flesh that trails behind each word but that is not quite right. No, the sun is only the sun, wallowing in its mess of light. I want to say everything around me is caught in a posture of departure: water from the faucet, brightness from the bulb, an automated voice from the receiver telling me my bill is overdue—even the rain relishes its abandonment from the sky. I have tried to speak and I have tried again but am only a drunken eulogist, my thoughts calling to themselves through wet concrete. And finally I can see the little staples of grief that hold things together, the way they shiver and shift as a siren collapses into the dark, an emergency I mistake for my own. Tonight, the city is a symphony of cement, a pot of sugar boiled to a hard crack, and I can’t help but think of all my old lovers, how they are asleep on the West Coast, each of their bodies a sealed envelope I can only hold up to the light. My new body: a path between hedges,  a riot of glass.  Have I hurt you?  I drew your face and erased it.  We say forget . We say as if  as if metaphor could protect us.  Last night you died  in my dream—  I put my hand in your hair.  The small round stones were not small round stones.  I remember a feeling of blue sparks.  We got tired of the sparks.  I know now any wild chance  would have come apart. All the empire of nostalgia needs is another person who cares  too much about birds.  In order to achieve a certain American version of dignity,  I pull the hood over my head because I don’t even know  whose falcon I am  or what hunting  today is, today is  a tunnel, a tunnel  for following my breath around.  White sky like  the voice of our hoarse Lord.  Skinny trees like  some ribs the wind discarded.  I think all I want and then some. I don’t know what I want  is the most honest thing I can say  to no one, moving around the neighborhood  trying but failing to outflank the divine.  At the top of the list of things I’m not going to do today,  I’m not going to lie down  in this or that dead garden like a child,  parrot the word grave a couple hundred times. It’s a rented strobe light, not the harvest moon. The posters promised  Gates of Heaven , but the tulle and garden arches where pairs pose for formal shots, the dj’s earnest crooning through his set can’t disguise the lunchroom smell and so the girls slip off  their Payless heels, dyed to match their dresses, and sway against their dates. Suddenly you’re down a dim hallway, quiet inside the lone unlocked classroom, Mrs. Klein’s conjugations still carved into chalk and board like God’s own words.  They’re the earliest lessons, and you learned them years ago: How to conjugate a regular verb. How to pair the gender, case, and number of the noun to adjective so that all their pieces lock in place. The boy’s  beside the point. His hands circle the satin and corseting of the dress you bought last spring on sale at Macy’s, dreaming of a night like this. His hands flare like wings around your waist, meeting at your sacrum, as if to split you open  and find you what – gooey-middled as a pie? rippling with individual beads of sweetness, like segmented citrus? He leans in as if to finally learn a secret you didn’t know you’d kept. Below, the dj plays the last slow song  before the fluorescent lights kick back on. You rest your head against the chalkboard and whisper the simplest lesson: will love, love, loved, will have loved.    Sister, when you wake the world won’t know you.  Like all the dangerous dead you’re buried at the crossroads so death won’t know how to claim you  or whose you are. In the first moon beyond your passing we burn fires in the four fields and the men  keep watch all night. Though the horses shriek, nothing rises from the spot where you lay sleeping. The roots of maples  tangle in your hair. I’m sorry, sister. Before they bound your body, father broke your legs so you can’t rise  or run. Before they filled your grave I placed an orange between your teeth, thick skin a flare against the earth. “All I remember is a gush of wind, and then the sound. Leo, who was standing next to me, wasn’t standing next to me. He was off to the side,”  –Mark McNitt reporting what he remembers after Adacia Chambers crashed her car into a crowd of people at Oklahoma State University’s Homecoming Parade on October 24, 2015, killing four and injuring forty-four.  Do you know that people died? As a child, I believed a floating pinpoint of dust was so relative I cried  and kicked when it faded. Close as possible, my eye  must have seemed to the mote’s microscopic lives like a blinking satellite reentering at night.  Do you understand what you’ve done? Her answer is not  a house but its doors. (The distance between beginning and end is a formless, unpredictable matter.)  Do you understand what has happened? Her chest fills  with baths burning to white. A family dog sleeps through the day, and the moon in a hungry haze opens  the fridge for some milk. The moon, the dog,  and the family who won’t come home tonight huddle closer and closer in aperture like an exit wound.  Do you understand you hurt a lot of people? Her hand  is a bandaged bomb. A burst fist gripped by little dolls, stuffed bears in chairs, the mutt in his rescuing kingdom.  Do you understand why you’re here? Her answer is not  a room but its walls blown down, the air-born rubble elided with light and twinkling as though America  from space. If I move close enough now to the lit image  of my country in that arrested moment of orbit, I see only its beginning and ending.  Do you understand what you’ve done? Her answer is not  a place but its entity trying to find a word for time when dropped as though ink into that inevitable proximity. Feathered thing            un-pinable, un-  cageable, when I say You are many-sided  as a cut diamond ,           I mean  Your hands for doing, your        wide wingspan, your  always open mouth. Stippled pond     half-frozen over,  little bead of sea          glass, when I say The daffodils  are foolish , I mean           Late frost—sheathed in ice,  brittle as glass. You know        these things already,  I’m an easy        tell. I can’t help I’m the kind of boy  born with his heart        on the outside, hard  for me to help         what you can and cannot see.  This poem references the song “Mouth” by the experimental rock band Fear Before. I could show you pictures of the other girl, the one who sits quietly, cleans her room, who doesn’t shoot heroine between her toes or steal needles from the diabetic neighbor lady. I’ve got pictures of her on my iPad. Lean in. Let me tell you a story: there’s a barn in Amherst County the town left to rot, its blanched planks the flanks of every old woman you can’t picture naked and drunk in the glory of her youth, radical hope her hurt seems so inflammatory your mind pukes to think of her that way, like a rotund artist with her kitty-cat handle and landscapes. The barn must’ve been something great— it’s ceiling like a whale’s beached and vaulted carcass, its slanted stalls, still filled with hay where the thunder horses did their stamping, and oddest of all, a room full of desks, maybe where the threshing was done, whatever that is, all lined up, facing the same way as if in some rustic classroom where she, the girl you could’ve been, learned about space, and I’m talking the pyrotechnic cosmos. It’s a sobering scene, to think what was and what could’ve been. So picture this barn— from first blush at farmer’s touch to storage for some bland girls’ college—see the chairs, filing cabinets, old pull-down projection screens, the warp and woof of education, chalk spiders and the iridescent beetles we once called slides , those thumb-sized, concrete renditions of the ephemera we decided to pin down and miniaturize. Walk among her disintegrating views on circumference, France, and jazz then pause to remember her goodness, how it ended as suddenly as print news, the twisted wood, the door-less openings onto pitiless rooms whose original purposes we can’t see for our own wickedness. Look and despair oh you mighty, drug-addled and unloved daughter of the beloved community, so wanted you were first to come and first to sit quietly in the Quaker meeting, your hands shaking from the silence, needing to speak, to say something for Christ’s sake, please.         flowers in darkness     trout in sunlight      the basement in  ruins      blue clouds in the night     inside the bedroom      bright hair  in sunlight      wrists in silk gloves, and dancing      in lines    black mirrors in  rainstorms      inside the heart      still leaves in the gutters in-   vaded his heart  in the mind a warm breeze     the lovers en-        shrouded        bring in the gods, and silk  gloves in tatters      still leaves in rainstorms      incense in lines       wrists in the gutters  the music inside      ruins in bedrooms        trout in the night       disrobing in  orchards       the woman alight      black mirrors invaded        in storms a man  blue clouds in the dancing      bright hair in his hands        bring in the gods  the lovers in sunlight       still leaves in black mirrors       silk gloves in  the gutters      the music’s in tatters it      flowers inside. I awoke to call     in midwinter in the white  of the morning the moon     in the white of a finger-  nail dwindled and thinned to the fringe  of your photograph       the whites of your eyes  wild looking back askance      held over this candle  your paradisiacal flesh waning but luster-  less under the fruit trees      under dark Maenefa  the mountain I pushed your barrow        your grave dirt up out of the dark  Maenefa the mountain fanged with icicles  and into a moon-      stunned clearing in which lies  our one and only bed       silver-sheeted  its bodies our ghost bodies     dwindled and thinned  in the white of the morning in mid-     copulation entangled  eyelid and eye-      lid I prized open  the desirable sight unsought finally     there you are  held over this candle wild     looking back askance  leaf and leaf divided      from the fringe  of your photo-       graph a page of your flesh  divided     I awoke to call       in flames          As a stranger, you glanced over my shoulder on the train. I was reading about twenty-four sunflowers set in ponds near Chernobyl after the plume. Attention to the sky, roots hungry for earth, inhaling blight and metal into themselves, any two blossoms touching only once. They had no mouths for each other, no hands. Only faces with one dark eye dimming even as the water clarified. Like the fading smell of dry rain in soil, your hair, what we meant to say and will not remember. What we should have done in the husk of this life.         The arrhythmic pulse of jazz makes my back arch as I strike a match against the curved edge of your jaw; the thought of you is like stepping outside after a movie when the light  is too sharp. I never thought I’d keep a collection of our sins, organized by a God who loves hooks and cherry tobacco. How easily you touch my hair  beneath the low pull of the sun, make the bed where all the small shudders and eager deaths lie still and waiting. I want to steal what your lungs do so well; lock breaths in a box hidden  under a city of rust. Withheld tongues sigh the names found behind a door I cannot open. I love you most when you’re leaving. In one, ashes fill the engine’s bursting lungs. In another, a skein of geese clouds the cockpit.  The tonic water trembles in its plastic cup, or lightning strikes, and a child won’t stop  howling. “Look out the window,” the mother coos. Most emptiness is blue  and open. I gain some awareness of my own ribcage, empty, tightly webbed  with tendons. Each body flickers. First is an egg poised on the edge of a bowl,  then carbon is arranged in a diamond. I read this thriller, say, the newlyweds die  in an air crash over Phuket, but in the end both step out of the plane like a trick, fully whole.  There is a universe where each person is calming the snarl of a tiger by reaching past its tiger-teeth  to study the gape of its tiger-throat. If something frightening happens today, it means the earth moves in circles.  On the screen a woman hung from a window and the bearer of fire was in the shape of a black dog. She let popcorn dissolve in her mouth as a man died by the cross, as a woman fell from the stairs.  And the words, “The child is dead,” echoed through the theater. Somewhere, swans swim on a river and a comet fills the sky. And here, outside the theater, she walks on a sea of knives. The night thorn dark, heavy with the sound of leaves.  Here is our hope: the star of Bethlehem will destroy all the sons of tumult.  You are one day closer.  We found a garden in its wild state. We ate bedrock and moved amid rivers. The first sounds were a dying car wheezing against winter, plastic bag window shivering. We played at life on the move. The summers reinvented oceans. We stayed in a succession of sleeping bags. We practiced legends about cities near which we lived. The birds were ones we had always known. Only the trees would change. We expressed variant selves in a calligraphy of nerves. We discovered all we thought good mattered less than we thought. In a rain of conversation, we nested in the gaps, took draughts of air. The measures, we know, were what questions we made. We met knowing and made possibility. We found each other in the grasses, in the gravel at roadside, in the country. How to catalog the strangers who claimed you, how to claim I am not one of them—that list grows longer and you stay dead and I don’t know  how to hold you here. So let me say I remember you at seventeen, telling a tanned boy you were older. I remember your sanded arm,  his August fingers, you pretending you didn’t care what he thought of you. The song you wrote for him, your practiced irony. And I’m sorry,  I am every sorry excuse.  Everything I have for you is only mine. That’s the truth of me, the not enough which is all I can give you now and is no choice.  I make do, wear a pendant that used to warm at your sternum but I never saw you wear. In the picture it is your last birthday. Maybe you knew.  I am not very good at this, or at a lot of things. A friend tells me you live in me and I want to punch a window. I didn’t know I would have to  keep you in the world. You are finished with me. I cannot begin. I am legless, wicked, the gratified snick of the latch beyond my hand the instant I recall  the key smug and useless inside on the dresser. And what name would you choose for me? I would ask, but then would have to speak it. You hear your son—your first grader who will help a classmate put on her coat  and not yet be troubled by the teasing of other boys, who’s so afraid of ghosts  he needs his sister’s jokes so not to quail at Casper, who still labializes all his r’s,  who has eyelashes of upswept gossamer— as he plays with his plastic dinosaurs  in the back of your pick up, wail a siren sound over and over. And it is this noise  that nudges you from a din of sports radio to ask him what game he is playing.  He tells you he’s playing Lockdown. Your ribs heave with a sudden breath,  fissures tear across your chest, as if ripping out a line of stitches. We practice at school ,  he says. When you ask him if it’s scary he says, No, but it can be uncomfortable  when we all have to crouch in that dark corner. The teacher puts colored paper  on the door window , he says. You ask why.  So the robber in the hall cannot see inside . I cannot offer you a sky & an egret or a small marsh & thirty turtles gathered & sunning all in a row.  You are not an airboat. Or a steeple from which I hang my white sails. Perhaps you are a window, or a vessel  tailored for the soul & the quiet  tinks of rain on a car-hood—for my voice that said, I grabbed the blanket from the bed  of my truck , when I really wanted to grab the rain & sea. There is a sea at the back of my eyes.  In it, a dock & your bow bobbing in waves disjointed by wind. You are not a houseboat, or a journey-boat.  The hand with which I bless you knows no god—is not so proud to prevent me from falling to my knees  & huddling there with childless murmuring. Your pity like the dark lull of the marsh.  The shipping channel is dredged & deep, dredged & deep. I’ve seen you gather the sea  around your face like a mask. Help me mask me. I cannot find mine. It is somewhere here—  I’ve felt its sleep for years beating its fists against the dark in my eyes. The belief that we may finally encounter glory. A child screaming our only language for pain. The talk turns to heaven: two of them waiting for news, another trying to breathe & the wait  long. The lit tunnel of my eyes like lightning bugs low in a summer field, so the sounds amplify: the heaven they discuss, throbbing my ears, underwater heartbeat. A painting Tanguy named  The Lovers , whose salt bones, mineral deposits, curve-lined wishbones like so many parabolas on a piece of ocean-colored graph paper nearly puzzling together but not quite. Like anchors  above the lovers, smaller pieces of bone floating in chaos, unconnected to any larger bodies. One perched like a woman’s torso, another the head & horns of a white-skulled horse, & then  one dancer’s lithe arabesque, or grand finale. If heaven were a curtain, it’d be rising. For months the phone’s been ringing for Jeffrey. There’s no Jeffrey here, I say. No diabetic either. When they call again searching for his sugar-levels I worry he’s not getting his insulin  shots. I once knew a boy named Jeffrey. He became a lackluster car thief or an ultimate fighting underdog. He rode me on the back of his motorcycle, the wind making red vines of my hair,  colorful sugar granules of fearful laughter. You know how sometimes you’ve been lost or broken down on the side of a road you didn’t know existed until the phone rings for someone  you’ve never met. I’m unstable for you, Jeffrey. I mean I love you, and your diabetes. Even as I suspect you must not exert yourself without your diabetic socks, your compact glucose  monitor. I don’t tell them this when they call. I don’t say Give Jeffrey my love and a slice of sugar-free cake when you finally reach him, if it’s not too late. If he exists outside this strange  coma I’ve made for us, Jeffrey, amputated from reality. Summer storms—in the kitchen I’m at work flensing strawberries, split and slice, trimming off tops,  glass of sémillon at hand, my music outside  rain like a piece of  fabric tearing, thunder having its way with windowpanes. The chopping block’s soaked through, so red,  saturated with juice, as though I’d cut off  a fingertip or  peeled gauze from a wound. This fruit’s for the deep freeze,  for a winter I won’t see, this my second summer  spent in Marta’s apartment in Üsküdar,  thanks to her summer  off from teaching basic English to teenage  punks and scholars at the school where we once met.  But also this is Zeynep’s house, although no more—  couch or coffee-maker,  everything in this house reminds me of my ex, even the chestnut tree that in the wind pounds  eaves, as though besieging with medieval weapons  bitternesses held  on to long after the expiration of their intent. This was a bad idea, I know, to stay so  long where I’ve already been excavated from.  Memory of fire  keeps no one warm. Flesh is not easily stuck from  nor reduced to silence. (Zeynep knows this well,  colic a better teacher than my insufferable  philosophizing.)  If I’m cold now she’d tell me to cuddle to  my religion and she’d be right. I dreamt of her  one night: I was for her wedding vows a şahit ,  witness in a memory that isn’t, can’t be, mine.  I couldn’t figure out  where to sign the form. I saw more and more, more  than I wanted to, newspapers and TV  filled with crimes and curses: A divorcée shot  for honor. A woman  burned to hide her rape from the coroner.  Another freed her rapist’s head and threw it down right smack in the middle of the village square:  Here is my honor , she said.  So many men I saw who cut their brides and called it  mercy—No, none of this I saw. Just headshots  of the murdered in the corner store lining news racks  washing over me like  turbid floodwaters—doused but never drowned.  More than once I’d seen Zeynep, Yatağan girl,  sharpen like a pasha’s sword for a night out.  There was a song she  liked to quote: Elimi kana bulama —  Tempt me not to wet my hands with thy blood!—  which is how I liked to fancy it up,  turn threat into plea,  but the words trickle back in as the rain falls,  and I wonder again why men must shed blood  to bond in ritual, must like a pelican vuln,  must embrace such easy  uncertainties on damp summer evenings.  Well, I can bite anything I want, even if  Ramadan falls this time in full July. Last year  when protests broke and women banged pots ’n’ pans  every night at nine  o’clock and we rinsed our eyes with ayran  for the gas, the moment labile, the moment  rapt with longing, the moment presented itself,  and I fled straight home  with an ex-student of mine. Don’t judge, Marta,  yes, we broke your bed, but only since you had  first with what-his-name. (Sorry, Zeynep, that couch  had become too much  like a shrine.) I remember when she came  over the second time, waiting for her beside  Ahmed’s fountain, the afternoon was a listless  anchorage, lapping  at the ferry quay, and I watched as stormclouds  clashed together like prows of ancient warships,  as the delicate tendrils of a waterspout  caressed the shoreline,  sewage gushed from the gutter pipe’s overflow,  desire surged like a god striving for its end,  current crackling through our welcome kiss  like a ligature  both of us meant to throttle. For that violence, let me,  too, take the fall. And also for this poem, now,  blame me, like that classic rhetor stabbed with hairpins  in his decapitated  tongue, uxorial justice for a man squeamish  about seduction sleeping with dialectic. There’s  a flub, I’ve gone and botched the timeline.  There’s more I remember,  sure, about how Zeynep secured her purity,  baptism by baptism, scouring what was  left of me away each night, careful and solemn,  or about how the fridge,  end of that long summer, failed and my work,  all those frozen strawberries, in one weekend’s  heat deliquesced instantly into rank sludge.  How to make good on  what we’ve inherited is the question, but first clean the fridge, sop up the bilge and try not  forgetting that anatomy is theology,  that language sluices through  culverts of betrayal. Close the spigot tight.  Make a rite of it. Call it a bloodless sacrifice,  if you want. Remember that because of her  in Antioch  that one night you were first called enişte ,  brother-in-law, by Adil Hayyam, a random  stranger, elderly, who took you to his shoe shop  and sealed you with moonshine  and a dash of rose-water. Remember you  remember, each day, what has yet to come.  Remember when the axe comes to the forest,  one of us is the handle.                                                                                                           Dear S— They told me again today that I was not Black: Allison says Even though you are Black and what I know she is saying is  I can’t believe I have to call you that . A friend says Just be glad you can walk through the world and be free . A friend says You tan well and I want to ask what he is defending. In Marrakesh a man fell down today and I did not know why no one saw. I lifted him to his feet. He smiled a two-tooth smile—plainly an Arab To my eyes—and asked me where I was from. He welcomed me:  Obama! Obama!  We have the same color — Our mothers tell us we are not like them: les Africains sont là-bas ! Our mothers defend what oppresses them. Often I ask, But if I am American and my mother, wherever she’s from, is Black,  Does that not make me —Always I stop, knowing both answers. In Rabat my mother’s friend—they have not seen each other in 28 years—helps me find An apartment. She has a friend with an apartment I should see.  Ok.  The friend arrives In a BMW with a slave in the back. They speak in French. My mother’s friend, describing My mother, says, C’etait vraiment une belle noire: She was really a beautiful Black. In the backseat, I am quiet, but inside, I am saying: She is still beautiful. She is not dead —  Or was she, to you, never living? The purist says our stain is not Blackness and I say what is it then Our mothers defend an idea of self that is not their own.  What is it then In the slow transition from light to dark and what do we call it When we are from halfway there?: In our homes We say asmar asmar —a chant of shame they cannot hear— As the body changed with the earth and to contain it we must name it—  Asmar meaning dark , Meaning Black , Meaning Nigger (sand), meaning Nigger , meaning Noir , Meaning less Arab , meaning not fit for this life , meaning less , Meaning how could you wed such a beast , Meaning it is myself that I hate , meaning please do not  Shame me , meaning please continue to cleanse , meaning Insha’Allah I will not be on this earth to see your children , meaning  But your tongue is clean the only trace is in your lip and hair And it is subtle you fool , meaning your sisters are not your sisters here , Meaning I did all I could to free you why do you look back .  When I need some space from the beginning, I look  to the end, but it has the same players: the little boy who thinks about filling his mouth with green marbles, and the  girl combing the rainbow mane of her toy pony and you’re here—a bee in a black bonnet no one’s worn in a very long time. I have  a condition where angry, confused cells lash out at the wrong  enemy. My knuckles turn red, but not all at once. When I need some space from the beginning, I try to remember  what came before that—stars, their mouths shot through with bright gasses. Or at least this is the story I’m telling you. No one is old enough  to watch a star age, so I’m grateful for time-lapse photography but  it’s not the same as experiencing something’s slow progress. It’s not the same as being there. I take pills that tell my cells to behave. They go  to sleep. And this is how the end looks: language getting as far away from itself as possible. The words have boundaries, bodies,  muscle and tendon—like you, like the bees, with their hearts and  brains fucked up by chemicals. Tourists flock to Usagi jima—the island containing the defunct Japanese poison gas factory from WWII, now surrounded  by rabbits. They built a museum, which shows visitors how the gas affects the body—the lungs, the eyes, the skin, the heart.  But you can make your own sickness sometimes.  When I need some space from the beginning, I plan our dream vacation to this place. We feed the rabbits. We feed what lives  among the wreckage, what forgets easily, what enjoys the ease of sustenance offered, cupped gently in our palms. lately, i’ve been opening doors in slow motion & find myself often wearing loose white silks in rooms packed with wind machines & dusk I have a tendency to be sad near windows thinking of all the problems i have with my man with his trifflin yellow ass my man is more a concept than anything at dinner i watch red pepper soup spill onto his power blue button down shirt & ask why don’t you love me anymore? i sit on the couch with a wine glass full of milk, cry in a way that makes me gorgeous & fuckable. my girls come over & we burn his suits to light our spliffs. my best friend tells me I need to get over him, he doesn’t even exist, but what she know? i have all this house to walk through, all these gowns to cry on, all these windows to watch the rain through there must be a man in this house who loves me too much to do it well. there’s a room in my basement filled with water & gold & that’s it. water up to my well managed waist gold link chains that curl around my ankles like boa constrictor or the hands of a man around a neck he once loved to bite & call for god into. i dip my head in, let even my hair get wet & rise out the water hood Venus Afrodite, bitch god with iced out ropes draped from my head & arms & covering my nipples & ill nana just so. I could be a trophy for some award show only niggas know, every rapper’s favorite ex, 1996 given a body & he don’t love this? I walk into my foyer cause i have a foyer & say who is she, nigga? I swear the hydrangeas flinch. my man is so fake he doesn’t exist. my girl was right – all those suits were mine, my man is all in my head & it’s a bad head. tomorrow, after I run & spend some time studying the mirror’s wisdom, i’ll burn this motherfucker down like Left Eye would, like any good wife. whatever survives the blaze will be my kingdom. i hope i make it.  j  j  23 positions in a one-night stand  BY DANEZ SMITH    after Prince  Facing the TV, we do it missionary with my head hanging over the bed so we can both watch The Color Purple on BET. When Shug Avery sings “God is Tryna Tell You Something” we both start to cry, your tears falling on my face and into my hair.  //  We sit cross legged on my floor on a Space Jam comforter. We take turns smacking each other saying rabbit season, duck season, rabbit season, duck season.  //  I say eat me and you pull a bottle of ranch out of nowhere. I say nah nan nigga , but you grunt and devour.  //  Doggie Style & we both eat ribs.  //  You take my last bone and I get mad, so I pull a rib out of your chest. It grows a woman around it. She makes us lick her boots.  //  I suck you with a lot of gusto and don’t stop until it’s too late & you’re all gone. It takes me 3 hours to pass you. you kick the whole time.  //  I’m smoking a blunt and watching Love & Hip Hop LA while you suck my toes. You make it all the way to the knee before you suggest a gag.  //  you put one of my legs on your shoulder and mount the other to the wall. you make car noises and ride reckless, I make my eyes look like a deer’s, my body a road.  //  I sit on your face and I read you Sula .  //  We do the Dirty Sanchez while discussing the racial politics of intimacy.  //  You make me a sandwich. You slice and slice and slide until I am thin and piled and topped with tomatoes.  //  Reverse-Reverse Cowgirl aka Someone get that horse off that woman! We kill the horse. We ride its ghost into the sunset.  //  you stand on one side of the room and I stand on the other. We run toward each other at full speed and become a singular sad man playing with himself.  //  You go into a phone booth and come out Superman. I go into a phone booth and come out a slightly smaller phone booth. you go into me.  //  You throw grapes at me while I dance around naked singing Purple Rain.  //  You run out of grapes and start throwing whatever you can grab: the coffee table, my phone charger, rib tips, the dog, my copy of Sula, shade, and a bird cage filled with the saddest dove alive.  //  How bout up in the library on top of books, but you can’t be too loud.  //  The woman who grew from your rib (you forgot about her, huh?) is picking greens in the corner. When she’s done, she stuff me full of collards the wrong way, stuffs you full of corn bread.  //  Tired, I lay on my side and lift one leg in the air. You drill and drill and drill, I watch New Girl and check my email.  //  Doggy Style again. This time, extra ribs.  //  You finish finally and lay on top of me out of breath. Slowly, you turn to into ribs. The ribs slowly turn into 11 better women.  //  You go to take a shower while I stay in bed. When you come back, I’m gone, the window is busted, & there’s a pile of bones where I was. You cry out for God and I turn on the lights.  //  You ask me to marry you for the night and I say I guess . you slick your ring finger into me. I turn to gold. Before I had to live in an enormous body in a miniscule world,  I took my round existence         with no ledges to perch on.  Want was a matter of perpetual suspension, a liquid cot  That gave me       dreams of having holes.  Rats were beloved in their brutal habits. I had no trouble  Clearing out the attic of a nerve.          Nothing was gentle  Or faintly gracious. The sound of pocketknives carving  The cochlea.   The wet reminder of an eye.  Then you came, littering space        raising your solar finger  To flush each fold with a pink and orange fever.  When you were cold and out of color       you could not stop  Hanging the world with yourself           in cheap restless strips. We sit side by side at a round table impossibly smoking from one orifice in the wall.  As you can see we are leaning forward on our chair legs, pressing our faces to the faucet  we practiced kissing when we were young. Then we are practicing empathy for our future  infants—for me I am her past mouth— sucking the mammal so strenuously love gives  rise to a sense of hollowness, of outpouring, of energetic stealth. The pillow has no give,  like silence. We did not practice on that. But I still rock my body between two pillows placed  the long way to prove I am easy to bear and too protected to console—  It gets late and mother doesn’t remember how to address me, as doctor or Mrs. or clock.  I cannot tell mother from the numbers on her face. I cannot tell time without her winding around,  and misreading needs me brave and naked and dead. When mother asks what time it is now,  I ask her to turn down her death, my dial, and tuck me in.  All night some critter roots gold teeth from the shrubbery, phalanx of uncut corn covers the field in waves,  & the rain barrel duplicates  the moon’s white face, mold growth  in standing water. You wake to pain registered in every limb’s synapse,  each lit terminal, which I can do nothing against & tell you so.  My St. Francis of the Wild, of the Cloak of Birds chunked full with an enema,  you chain the pasture gate, though the horse is gone.  If I could hide you in my quiver—  If the stars punch holes in the dark—  Because I can’t, I practice forgetting  providing against  the question of heaven the dead call across the gap but go silent.  Because I can’t, I play the mad king  torching the orchard  before the blight as they search the cell’s inheritance, & come back with the same story in every retelling.  Night watch, night work:  knitting the skin works in the cut, what lays waiting in the cut.  My gasolined Daphne burns,  the peaches wrinkle in the heat, falling from the tree limbs,  the contrast liquid runs fractured through  the body’s endless hallways.  My woman feeds a wolf with her viscera & reads the pills by touch, their stamped indents.  She indexes the records & wakes late to the evacuation of ants  from every pore  of her skin.  She lies there & lets them leave. A whole colony that to move her arms she must convince  a million tiny pieces of herself  to cooperate, excite the particles into shifting. Beyond the window,  evergreens like steeples  sit watch in the middle-distance. My wolf places her cry among the elements.  My wolf spreads grief through song believing it  something finite & transferrable, an evil done of hunger and thus, forgivable.  Her song blossoms open the earth  where the body slots home. Trigger Locks – Rapist Approved! *  Got this itch to feel my kick, this sickness. Got this fever to pack heat, gunslinger.  Even gun shot but not shy. Kill switch  with a bullet, your rival’s second coming.  Divine verdict with a full clip.  Night after night, night night.  Shun me & you’re naked for I name you—  if strapped while black: a gangster. But white: a waver of the flag.  Not the trill of the trigger finger or the one behind the gun,  I’m the killer.  Taming sinners, I clear the path of righteousness beset by the selfish. Shoot first  shoot to kill kill shot they will know my name by the holes I leave in them:  O of a mouth blowing smoke, a ring of blood. If you plug  some drunk undergrad from the kegger next door,  who took cover from the cops on your three-season porch,  don’t recoil from my kick, this sickness. I’m risk you’re willing to admit. How this, sparkler in the night’s black field, lighting up my brain with love How did they do it before you ‐ survive Your elegance of salt, rock, & sleep, who invented How can such a small watchman keep safe all my hills & homes Why pink, your face ‐ not cobalt,  green, or just white Who thought you deserved your delicate hue What do my organs think of your soft arrival each day Who unlocks the door to let you in, like a wet cat How did you lift the heaviest season from my eyelids, sweeping away a whole cloud How do you  pollinate my blood so exactly with sanity Does my brain’s infinite heart burden you Why find my grandmother too late Why not kiss everyone who needs your fix Why leave some to their singed waves Who do you speak to in my body that listens  I watched you row us back, into the distance of human familiars. And the bees gathered as if to become more than one sound. In the city, when late, I want even the well-behaved strangers at boring parties. They exhaust me. All small talk and posture; (come here and exhaust me) and what is the mind? Even you. The leaves. In their temporary dying, give a rich background to people taking each other to bed. Why would I give up the physical world? Today, it is all I believe. And whatever addictions it sells me (the first open mouth on my own teenage mouth)— I am shy but impressed. I am living and badly. The oars hit the dock, the plates cling to their places, look at all that has come here and gladly to rot. A handful of flowers and vinegar. Leather and silk. Cancer and love. I don’t even need to be promised fidelity now. Someone’s lowered his hands to a place without speech. The pelting on the window is rain. My tongue, I have found, is warmer than any sentence I’ve wanted to feel. And what I have wanted, I should try to forget. So I stay; don’t you think so—where else would we go, what is open this late? I have waited all day just to see you. In the darkest part of the water. I see you in the darkest part of the water and swim. Saltillo, always and across:  no word for or even from yellowhammers, their like or their portent.  In your cradle on the wreckpan plain, they named you doubt—  with all their emblems of pain fastened outside,  your father’s father a patricide, at the nigh end of a pike.  It’s a long sweetening: severe,  riddled with seam squirrels, sego, and salt horse.  Bullbats overhead, rockchuck and taxel underfoot:  a ragged banner, extinct inside a cow path, a welt, and a draw.  The outlet upon the outlet of blood.  Who here isn’t a naked possessor—  the dry and baking track holding up a railroad without steam? Both knees purple where I scrambled after some elk teeth.  I had to think once or twice about you: nobody breaks like that forever.  One day you’ll jostle into town, dragging your hat rack behind you  your throat bright with snake head whiskey.  I’ll be sober in a field of praying cows: there’s no plaster in an end town.  Trade the rain inside the hat rack for a straight-colored horse,  turn your empty bottle, that old soothsayer, sideways, into a prow.  because if we are what we make of each other then we hardly have use for the light.         I did not opt early for grief over guilt. I did not hide under the kitchen table to eavesdrop on arguing parents. I did not yell the word divorce into my brother’s face until he cried so I could paint my parents with his tears, anything to speed the arrival of silence. I did not learn to hate the tractor, did not pour sugar in the gas tank because I’d read it would foul the engine and I was in no mood for chores. If I did, it did not work. Not everything we read is telling that kind of truth. There was no hurricane. No green-black sky sinking heavy over the hills. I am not necessary to this story. Without me, then: boy meets girl, etc. The usual mess of falling in love against the odds, and the usual outcome: the odds bear out. Everything I know about hunger did not come from sneak-reading the dirty parts of Clan of the Cave Bear . I did not find skin mags in a shed in the woods. Did not touch myself for years. Did not steal a neighbor boy’s bike and shove it off the old bridge in the spring-swelled Cahaba River. Did not then help him look for that bike in every driveway and open garage for three miles along Happy Hollow Road. Did not agree when he decided some black kids must have taken it though there were no black families for miles, and ours was a road unlikely to be seen as a welcome shortcut. I am not expecting forgiveness. I have never been erased from the plot. Never held a gun. Never climbed to the top of the rusting girders to stare down at the quiet water, the murking rocks. Never imagined I could change the world by disappearing. I did not pretend to find God because I did not believe this would persuade a girl to touch me. If I did, it did not work. This is not that kind of story. This is not a confession. This a heart growing wings and taking flight, up above the scrub pine and water oak, hurrying out ahead of the storm. What salt does to flesh, what water, what famine— the tales time tells about the body, & always the same ending. Our faith in storytelling is misplaced. I have not considered Brian King in years, until today when I learned across a vast distance that his corpse washed onto the wan sands of Gulf Shores, three weeks after he vanished while out fishing alone. There are so many kinds of distance. Three weeks of wind & soak & brine & bloat: such destruction wrought on the soft shell of a life. Brian King was 45, father of three, divorced, & in the obituary photo, jowly & bald, as if a middle-aged man had swallowed the second baseman from my Pony League team who was all whip-arm & wheels, a threat to steal on every pitch. I am 45. My body is not what it was. Nor, mercifully, what it will be. In the movie version of my life, I age like Redford, all close-up & soft focus & golden-hued wheat fields to halo my beauty lines. No room for drowning, no middle-age vacation derailed by death, this narrative destined for three full acts. I have a Brian King story, though perhaps not one I should be telling. There is no lesson in it. We are 15 & practice has ended for the Dodgers or maybe we are the Cubs that season. Sweaty & adrenaline-buzzed, we cross the wooden bridge that spans the river and divides the park into itself & he says, “Do you want me to suck your dick?” I’m not sure how honest I’m being if I say now that I was tempted then, or curious, consumed by the various cravings of skin, but what I say to him is, “No, I’m good,” & he says, “Shut up,” & calls me a name. We never speak of it again, nor of much else, & then we threw our flat hats into the humidity over the football field. I moved away, he became a cop in our hometown, & eventually, I now know, he divorced & died. How things turned out is the only way they ever will. Burning in his lungs, sudden stillness of his limbs; the heart, the heart, the heart holding on. Perhaps if I’d said yes on the bridge, he would have punched me until my nose bled. Perhaps it would’ve gone another way.         There is a circle around the fire & inside it is where I sleep.  The dark touches the circle’s edge & outside somewhere  the hyena is waiting. He is hungry & he is patient.  He is a clairvoyant bending backward, always  laughing up ghosts. At night he calls my name & his voice  is almost human. Some day one of us will have to die & if I am the one  then I am the one. If I am not, I will use a spoon to dig the stone  from his eye. I will place the stone beneath my tongue & look into the fire  & at its edge I will see nothing & at its center I will see nothing. Body of maps. Body of bones and blood. Body of bible verses, lullaby, and lace. Body of nerve  and the taste of cinnamon. Body of let’s begin again. Body of handcuff and steel-toe.  Galactic glow and extension ladders. Earthquakes. Fault-lines. Body of amphibious breath. Incense  and church bells, candle wax, time will tell, body of timpani drums and pterodactyl wings. Subway trains,  piano keys. Records rotating like Neptuned jazz. Body of Polaroids and alley cats. A pixilated  heart. Coral reefs, desert cars, oceans mopping the shores. Body of blackbirds in winter sky. Body of a billion  eyes, spacebars, fingerprints of tree rings, the Spanish word for everything. Body of rivers  and pocket knives, TV screens, silver, magenta. Body of rhymes and placenta, the enter key  and mud-brick walls. Body of brushstrokes and broken jaws. Memories of ostriches, the smells  of dirt, oil, monsters. Rusty song of industry. Clank of tanks, artillery. Drone strikes and sonar  echo, waxy green of needled pine. Body of pendulums, valentines, interstates, the word Iroquois  in the mouth’s cave. Puddles of orange juice in molars. Dark rooms with skeletons  sitting in circles, Kleenex boxes, rainbow necklaces of yarn. Body of nails and barns and nirvanas. Once-  upon-a-times of trauma. Headlines of evening news. Shark teeth and muddy shoes. Birthdays etched  into stone, volcanoes, lanterns. The hymn of numbers, repeating patterns. Plastic. 747 descending  through cloud. Cross left to rot in the rain. Body of midnight trains and sorrows. Body of the wild tomorrow.  Body of a breath so borrowed. Body of whistles and lime, stitches and kisses, the stoplight sublime, this  body of tissue and pockets. This body of turtle shell and flute. Skin like peach glass and sun  rising off a roof, the end of May and shifting dunes, beginning of Yes and strict pull of a moon—  craters, projection of face, a rabbit, I see you now—black sky, body of polka dot and firefly. Once  I was a suitcase on a bus. Now the calligraphy of a cornfield. Opening like an envelope.  I am genetic code recalling the first night years ago when I burned like a book  and the stars organized themselves like notes onto sheet music. I am searching for ordinary  language. Translating rain. This is a body of helicopter seeds. No one can tell them not to dance. Now there is no snow falling, no blue November road we traveled, no bowlegged  Saturday balcony we sat on watching traffic  pass, the traffic’s gone. No telegrams of smoke twisting from the city’s stacks, no river of firefly headlights inching down the distant hill, our chairs abandoned, our glasses drinking dust, toppled by the wind—  even the mailman’s vanished, though his cart remains, orange in the porch light, leaves like yellow letters choking its open throat.  *  Forgive me, darling, I’m putting it all in—  the bridge graffiti’s prayer for better seasons, the red brick perfect  abandoned chapel we touched our lips to each time driving by it, the lines like black and white piano keys  the light through blinds placed across your naked back—  But the bottle, too, the needle, our fingerprinted  necks—  and the worn  jean jacket, moon blue denim ripped across  the chest, mine before it was yours: the thread,  the stitches, the patch, the leavings—  *  Can you see me?  I’m that shadow on a North Dakota road.  I’m stuck in a dust-storm on a highway outside  Casper,  Idaho,  Riley,  Reno, Bone. I’m tracing the places, the unzipped  skin, the six- inch gashes  you laced across your ribs  with the pyramid tip  of a carpenter’s nail. I carry them with me.  *  Goodbye! Goodbye. The sky  an indecision. The sky a milky morning  brightness, flashing  its knives.  The sky like the longest letter ever written never sent—  I am trying to explain how the road can be a bandage.  *  A black one.  Unraveled. Tar-slicked like the black  slashes of a Motherwell abstract canvas.             When I last saw you  you were crying, you were  small, the missing part  of a chipped tooth, a spot of tarnish diminishing  in the rearview mirror—  In your black dress and sandals, white sky backdrop, standing on your knees in the center of the road.  Goodbye Friday street!  Goodbye Syracuse, cream brick churchtop flocked  with birds. Goodbye abandoned china factory, famous coffin maker, secret winter  ribbon cinched around my heart—  Goodbye Jessica, gold-locked daughter  of blizzards, stone girl splitting open—  I am passing  the last madhouse  outskirt smokestack,  I am crying.  *  You kept the rain jar.  I kept the thrift store  divinity medal, the ’67 penny in the heel of my sneaker.  You kept the dead  yellow flowers wrapped in a roadmap, a bottlecap  of sleeping bees. I kept the single moth wing sealed  in its envelope, your name  across the cover. You kept  the jacket, I the missing button, little tarnished mark  I carry always in my pocket.  *  Tonight I walk out into stars,  the everyday shotgun stars, dumb knucklebone  burnings, scattershot, trapped in the moon’s blue orbit.  The horizon’s on fire.  I know it is only the light  from port cranes, their night-lit tips, but I imagine a factory in flames  beneath it, withered back to its frame.  Once, from the front porch, in the snow,  I screamed your name so loudly into darkness  I woke the neighbors. I didn’t think I wanted you to turn. In your torn  jean jacket. Saturday at 3 a.m. Years ago. The black patch we sewed.  The crazy white stitching. At the hour the streetlamps come on, we turn translucent. The music, for a moment, silent. We drink whiskey on the porch & you speak  from a distance, language dissolving the years between us. After your mother died, you tell me, you met your first lover at a party. I imagine you,  seventeen, your teeth stained red with wine. Neighbors circle the dead-end in pairs, peering past the long shadows of pine. They fade from sight  as the bottle empties. And carefully, the way we sound a stream’s slick rocks, you ask me to loosen your neck’s tense cords. Perhaps, by lamplight,  in a room an ocean away, your wife waits for your call. The Danaids were ordered twice: first by Aegyptos to marry his sons,  then by Danaus, their own father, to murder the men on their wedding night. Not even their revenge was their own, though they were punished  for the crime. It’s how Rodin imagines his solitary sister, trying to fill a broken jar, her posture a child’s bottomless sleep. Half-formed, she rises  from marble the texture of split rock: heap of salt, new snow or sand, grainy & opaque, something soft, pliable as love, or the lack of it—  which is also love, as a cracked jar brims full for an instant before the level drops. Her knees drawn to her chest,  her body holds a hollow. You reach for my hands, press your mouth against each palm. What is it you whisper from deep in your throat, whiskey slur  half-laughed, chin lifted so your head rests against my chest? You said when she left you were betrayed. I don’t know which woman  Rodin intends, or if the sons were given a choice. They were already lovers when Claudel, the sculptor’s protege, bared her back’s still current  to unburden his mind of the image: another woman gone. I should have asked you then, as I asked of you everything, what you meant. I am giving you  my hand. The doorways gape black sockets down the upstairs hall. One light at the end. On the other side of the world, the sea calls back  the sun. Your children play with their cousins, not knowing where you are. The men drain the wine from their goblets. The women  wait in the dark, each gripping a knife. That cabbage moth fluttering like loose ends or an old itch in the vagus  nerve finds the underside of a spirea leaf to cling to  at the garden end of a windy day—and then? Long night.  Let’s not worry about plot. Restlessness carries you  from leaf to leaf, the moon shines on your deeds, good  and bad. To investigate what’s at stake for a moth scrawling its nervous  syllogism from porch light to candle and back, carrying the singe  of proximity with it, approximating the breadth of the material  world in its stark abandonment of principle, its even  underhandedness, requires no scapegoat, no backstory  of blindness and scorn to cut through to the inevitable  avalanche, the white-out conducive to moving through fog  to figure grounded in fog to disfigurement. Each time  I hold out my hand, you escape.         What’s the line? You can’t cross it, anyhow. Bells and snow, a church crying its love for— its love for— What Went Wrong. A moss-grown sentiment. You love someone but can’t edge a toe into that black river. Hooks leave their marks though, don’t they. Don’t they carry the blue dark. Leave you there wondering what made you. Evidence: your light turning into different light. You were waiting for something but the waiting killed you. If this applies, go forward. Take the broken hands of any clock. Build a new genesis. I.  Wine drunk, ham-faced on the duvet. Cue feelings talk.  Should I have been more detached? Should I not have draped myself on the heat vent wearing only my socks—like so?  Because he addressed me always by both names. Cooked for me when I wouldn’t eat.  Making Thanksgiving food for himself in October. Patron saint of the head start. With his dog who spoke English, possibly other languages.  Trailing a red robe in the kitchen like he was waiting for coronation.  If I loved someone like that. A figure of questionable authority figuring out which relics to preserve under cling wrap.  For the way he smelled like cedar. Mispronounced the names of plants.    II.  There’s an airport & then there’s The Airport From Which He Called Me On Our Second Anniversary To Say He Couldn’t Love Me & Would Never Marry Me Ever. At some gate there’s a specifically culpable airplane he was on for 12 hours, no contact.  There’s another woman & then there’s The Woman I Knew He Would Leave Me For, there in a hotel with him— there to soothe him, to believe, as I did, in redemptive sadness.  There’s regret & then there’s being so angry at myself that I drove all night until I found the water & walked into it, March lakewater  gray & stinging. Muscovy ducks in the shallows, their strange low muttering.    III.  What is this impulse in me to worship & crucify  anyone who leaves me—  I have tried to frame up the cavalry in gravel,  in rectangles, in an honor code  of stamping out the fire. I’m paying attention. Look.  There’s an exchange rate  for bad behavior. It begins with the word until .  I agreed to affirm small kindnesses  until disaster. A risk I could keep now & pay for eventually.  A contract that begets blame begets  guilt. I had to say at every stage I give permission to be hurt . Until.  Once he agreed to stay the night with me  & by morning a small ding in the glass had spidered over  his windshield. The cold shattering it completely.  It’s not anyone’s fault that this world is full of omens.  By all accounts, history is a practice  of ignoring things & hoping for the best. You can drive  yourself crazy with looking. You can expect  bad luck to mark you unfooled, fooled.  Light to mark you with light.    IV.  I know in this system I am not blameless.  I used to promise myself  that when we broke up I would tell him  I love you . I thought of it as a punishment.  I dreamed I let him look for me in the woods.  I stayed perfectly quiet. I was covered in rough scales  & my eyelashes dropped burrs when I blinked.  In the dirt below I watched him search for me.  He said Is it enough that I want to be different .  Maple seeds spun out from my hair.    V.  I divorce thee history of looking at him in the fog coming up over Scotland.  I divorce thee, North Sea longing by boat.  I divorce thee insomnia. I divorce me driving to him five hours over ice  & then picking a fight. I divorce him introducing himself  as my friend, never wanting to be on the phone; I divorce thee roasting pan & HGTV, I divorce  staying quiet willing him to speak. Music for saying things  I wanted to ignore. Anguish—I divorce thee. I divorce thee, I divorce thee whole heart:  from the wingbone of a vulture, I’ve made you a harp. Long ago a boy’s harp had the power to move stones, not far, but far enough,  to give the dull world the look of life. Or so say the myths of men, long dead,  who, for all we know, never lied, but played on their lyres and our desire to know.  Any rock will tell you, music blossoms from things until, it seems, they are its source.  Who is to say they aren’t, or one source among the many.  A harp asks a question,  and the stone’s reply is never the stone’s alone.  Nor the question.  Conversation.  All of it.  Tell me.  Why do questions rise at the end.  Death, for one, turns to question  the underworld with a song that lifts the frightened heart not far but far enough.  Some days music makes the better friend, without the tiresome platitudes,  the false praise, the cold breath of heaven that would tear the particular face  from grief.  Once there was a beautiful boy whose gift for song came from somewhere else.  True, we called his music his.  It was. And ours.  You hear it in the difficult  hours his mother spent gathering the pieces of his unconscious body.  Stories say,  she kept the head, that part we imagine was most his, that withered as hers alone.  Music is just one part of the story that keeps departing and arriving, keeps  loss alive like an unanswered call. The language before language, more quick  across the barricades of hell and nations, the sound of names filled with nameless air.  When a boy plays his harp, a vein opens, and while the harp does not understand,  it reveals.  It honors the stranger that is a lover or child, and so opens the puzzle  of embrace.  Whose body is not torn to pieces in time, whose time not the ardor  that music never masters but takes in like this world’s broken traveler or bread.  Who does not take their liberties.  Let me begin again, with her, the mother, whose name  some call immortal though we know better. Long ago a god knelt in tender horror.  Nothing moved.  Not far but far enough. On the wind the blood oranges in bloom. The island begins small  floating atop the surface of a postcard  opposite the greeting: wish you were here ,  miniature mountains  nestled in my palm like stray children without collar or curfew that huddle after dark  against the hull of the good old days,  listening to the sound of local fisherman  cutting nylon lines caught on  too many dead to hoist, appaloosa stars  stuck in the water like sunken light bulbs without a switch. To pass time  we would chew the scraggle of our hair  & think of getting old, make a net  out of whatever we could steal—  knotting cherry stems with our tongues  only to become distracted when we had to link them, mastering  the art of transformation  though I couldn’t stand  the bitter aftertaste. When we got caught  soaked in moonlight, mouths full of spit  & necks stiff as wolves mid-howl, we called the moon a liar  because you can’t believe a damn thing  unless it’s full & even then  it’s nothing more than the shiner  of a drunk-blind troubadour, belly up & half way  under-water by midnight because he knew too much. Ask me no questions  & I will tell the story of the sleepwalking  river that wrapped  around the valley’s throat, holding hands  with the empty-handed whose names  are now running water. Time & trespassing often go hand & hand, break & enter while we sleep,  quiet as the Lord’s flashlight  in the hands of a search party,  Miguel’s Father stiff as an oar, the seam of his uniform  creasing the mountainside. I helped my best friend  make an inventory of what was lost: a closet full of black coats, a magic kit,  Miguel, the boy who vanished and became a pallbearer  a man grown tired a fisherman  & the list goes on. This postcard is not so much  a postcard as it is a place to go  to be alone: I am here walking over mountains of garbage that litter the edge  of the sea, listening like a balcony  above a condemned theatre.  The wind is an invisible chandelier, swooning  like a jealous axe that has yet to catch me  cheating death, postcard in hand addressed to Miguel whose empty school desk  sat in the middle of the classroom  like a sun bleached skull,  pencils stuck in our fingers like fishing lures  as we tried to catch the right words in the shark  infested waters of get well cards that pried our eyes wide open. I didn’t know  what to say so I drew  a map to the edge of childhood,  the land that makes strangers of us all. Have you ever swallowed moonshine  Have you written out your desires  A man so handsome you don’t care what’s under his jeans  To be birdboned in a windstorm  Sometimes this is enough to exhaust yourself  Or thinking about the lake when you haven’t been in years  Granddad told me once it was God’s sycamore there on the shore  Always thought it belonged to the boys jumping from it  Nothing on but their jocks and their hoots in the sky  I swear you could see the sun cutting through them  How long have we ached for this  A belly fire and every light on your face  Knock me over Lord there’s no way to be readier  Because she wore cherries in her ears instead of gold or stone or silver.  Because hers were heavier than fruit. Because they made me want  milk we didn’t have. Because of want. Because I couldn’t fit  the word, zhem-choog, in my mouth and all that white reminded me too much  of teeth. Because we threw teeth behind the stove so new ones  would grow in. Because sometimes they didn’t. Because change is the only  certain beauty and strung-up side by side, things ceased to be  as beautiful. Because holding failed across continents and my mother’s  jewelry box stayed empty. Because leaving meant she could only take one  necklace. Because the pearls, like teeth, were left behind.         “Eating too much meat gives you indigestion and evil thoughts make you eat too much meat.” -Gertrude Stein, Wars I Have Seen  The boy was door after door  of misfortune:  He needed to talk  about his father: I did not shake him to tell  him there was no future: It was the summer  after the winter of Peter: He mistook me  for art. I wanted his touch in public places:  Art Institute & Addison Red Line,  backseat of Vienna’s Camry: I wanted  what I wanted. Men are not meat  but they are men. They name you  in the stories they publish online: tag Non-Fiction  & Relationships & Bicycles.  They name the city you live in  and reimagine your good sex.  Here is the thing about Cal. Cal’s the kind  of guy wearing a helmet when his bike-  brakes cut out on his ride home from work  as a Segway tour guide; who smashes his face  into a concrete pylon, rips his denim shorts  and his ballsack; who catches a flesh-eating  virus at the hospital, MRSA; who’s never seen you  laugh as hard as when he tells you  & you want to vomit, or jump into a vat  of hydrochloric acid; who says this is what happens  when bad things happen. People blame you.  Men are not meat. Meat doesn’t get sick.  The way he writes it, we kissed in Urgent Care  wearing surgical masks like Magritte’s lovers.  Here is the truth: I thought he was dying  so I held his hand. The darkness of a theater I hate it though I think of you when I’m there let me be honest I hate cinema all aspects of it    an unpopular notion and this is a love poem that begins with us watching Killer of Sheep because you love film and I wanted to exercise the greatest pleasure the French guy says about the movies which is leaving with you on my arm    see? Isn’t this better than that dancing cone of light of which you’d later write so beautifully and I’m stealing because theft is more intimate than respect? Exit sign metal push doors sky the everywhere-Drano smell then the tyranny of what I must take in leaches away with every step I feel purer baptized even whenever I’m done with a film and I can jump out of my chewing- gum seat but this happens whether you are with me or not and for a time you weren’t which is why I could think of you in that darkness when I was sitting in the grime of so many fantasies enacted in one dark room     mine too bumping and elbowing their way through the crowd until they appeared in the shape of a girl about to lose her organs I’m not kidding they take them away one by one until she drops dead   my decay the last ten years of good health spent without you when the next ten could be all biopsies and copays and why was our last movie  Killer of Sheep so terribly sad when we could have laughed through  Encounters at the End of the World where eighty kilometers from shore on a plain of ice Herzog asks a scientist if in the interior of that vast continent there’s such a thing as going plain crazy realizing one’s damned had enough and yes the answer is always absolutely yes. Who can resist Anna Netrebko in red jacquard, bird-of-paradise on a bone-plain stage singing,  Follie! Follie!  Her beauty like a tightened bow , as Yeats wrote in 1910, poems my mother read at the suggestion of her boyfriend, who  was no Paris, though she was a Helen of sorts: married but swept off to another house, where firelike she consumed Yeats and Tolstoy,  and, I assume, fancied herself a courtesan possessing a beauty dangerous indeed; but that Christmas we had her,  and while the opera played in our rag-rug apartment, by her shining eyes and yelps of approval I determined my mother longed to be  what she already was, and I’m scratching for simpler speech, to uncover the single word or phrase that names,  indicts, and forgives in a breath; or unearth the right myth to tell me what is not and therefore bearable. In trance, my tongue wraps around  you in ways I’m not allowed  to. I let you forget about the river  and the wetlands and our waiting fire.  There’s a boy  crouched beneath the kitchen  counter, monks dousing themselves  in gasoline to burn for peace. Bleach  scours the sink on principle.  This all happens  at the same time we aren’t at war,  we evaporate  into a choir of stars, their noisy light. Dad was standing by the shaking. I opened my eyes, but he shook like a fence post and he was testing it in the ground. All my life that’s the way he’d offer to set a glass of water by the mornings and wake me up. I shook my foot too. Sometimes, if he was thirsty, he’d drink the water. “You’re big enough to sleep past daylight,” he said. Down in the pasture, one of the scrawny heifers might have calved, so off he went, as usual. Dad was the only reason I’d let the ax slip and cut my foot nearly off. Every morning, by the time I could get the horses and milking done, he’d be back without so much as a memory. Dad and my sly friend Johnny worked on government time. That’s how the subsides went to purpose. The truck rusted in the drive gathering noise. There was the sun to account for, and only sometimes the rain. Johnny handled the tools. He called himself the Great User. But that’s not the only thing. Johnny took me behind the toolshed and told me my pants were to account for giving me the sweats. Johnny could always touch the shaking in that just-right way that nobody else could. That’s why we let him. One night, sneaking through the barn where he slept, I heard him sobbing nearly everything, his nowhere home, that everyone he charmed loved him without inquiry, all that he’d already unforgotten. Johnny had joined us during one hailstorm or another. Dad took a shine to him book-in-pages. That’s how they got to be their kind of glue. After the night comes the morning, and sure as water Johnny was up and gone, a hungry note stuck to Dad’s door. Dad held his arm to hard angles before breakfast and said did I sneak a read and if I snuck a read he’d shoot me, not that it’d matter, he said. That’s how much he loved Johnny. Well, I didn’t read it. I wasn’t the kind to hunt down the hurt. That’s what Johnny said he liked so much about me. And Mother, too.         Kansas takes many forms:  cottonmouth, copperhead, massasauga,  prairie, diamondback, timber.  Slit pupils, the extra pit between nostrils and mouth.  A mouth fitted for fangs. A single row of scales  laid like a brick garden border.  I stumble on the medusa head  neighborhood plains garter snakes tangle  into during the weeks near spring.  I show cautious children the photo  on my phone matching the snake. No poison.  The snakes are stubborn as cats. They wait  underneath the shadow of the neighbor’s tires. I coax  them in another direction. My first  snake was a pencil-sized garter pissing  itself in my hand, making my skin slick enough  to slip away.     I know there are no poisonous snakes  in Puerto Rico. It’s the pulse of something  that’s all spine. I fear that kind  of exposure, with nothing to protect me  but muscle and sun-drunk stillness. 5. Libinia Emarginata (Common Spider Crab)  We cranked him upward clinging to the hook, recognized the dead weight, absence of fin-jerk  and frustrated muscle of captive’s shock.  Distracted by fortune, excavating our ribbon of pleated  squid, he didn’t let go until his back broke the surface. Decades past  this instant, I remember my father too often, our bait intact and the ugly  crab dissolving as it sank like a doomed theory or dream, shaken, provisional, spindles  spread in the fathoms. Elation of contact with something from a world we couldn’t see  soon supplanted by disgust, relief: his self-liberation saving us from the business  of extracting that hook ourselves. They came out of the sky last night in droves black droves like birdsign. And placed me back in a house on the mountain forming erudite arguments for a future I don’t own yet and may never. This is how an old man losing sight still rises in the morning remembering the way he soaped the flanks of a horse he called Granada, a horse that didn’t belong to him. That same motion every Sunday. Circling and back to front. The fine dark hairs caught in the foam on his palm. How the creature shivered slightly sweat rising to the surface while its small and dogged brain thought about a diamond, a diamond. We are buying curtains to cover up my life. We are buying patterns to cover up my lethargia. My sadness is very adult. You can bring it to places in public and it will not make a scene. You will not be embarrassed by it. It will not act out, but only wander, slightly undisciplined. Look at the red inverted enteric shapes spit across the silk, endlessly unfolding into our arms. Six dollars for the uneven pieces. This should do the trick, the leftover cloth that promises to distort the incoming winter light into something bearable. Who buys fabric in January? Who makes curtains to give their sadness a perimeter?  The clerks speak Yiddish and look at us like pregnant dolls, and we are all here deciphering each other in the drowsy New York afternoon. Judith says we need to go. She needs to get to Mikveh by 5. Twenty dollars to be cleansed. The monthly baptism for women who bleed, for women who carry. Even now, inside her, the baby is stirring to the ring of our voices, the underwater radio where everyone sounds like they are choking.  I think she’ll be a tomboy and extend her childhood across the universe, a little gender deviant for the stars.  All that matters is if you’re Jewish , the owner says and I smile and press the yellow linen to my face. We need to go, Judith repeats. I need to be clean. I look at my treasures, neatly folded, and wonder if I am talented enough to do anything worthwhile with these hands. Pardon the black water in the sink, restless & tyrannical in its wading. The plate’s shellacked face folds into my own, reflects another face I have inherited these past few years. The faucet runs endlessly, so fluid with brisk pace, it seems to almost be entering the mouth of which it exits. I look into the water, now blackened from a series of elements like foam & foreign liquid making its home in this metal bowl, factory of carved ceramics & glass forms. I heard the spoon bends when we can deny its existence but of course you can’t deny this: race, so permanent upon ourselves, it becomes our own tombstone with names. I once tried to drown my skin & be human without it.  Jump in , said the knife & I did, through the soap, slick debris of white foam, glazing this fine black creek. I dived skin first, then the body, wading, wading, waiting for something to clean me. Summer came late.  My father died.  From the sky, Delhi glittered the way only undesirable things do. I still cannot eat oranges, the raw brace of blood, the pinpricked dimples.  Mangoes and plums sweltered and fell from the sky till October. My mother said, do not come back.  I buried the body like a seed.  I wished to be a child again. Everything felt plagiarized, a bad dream.  Onions, squash, tomatoes split their seams by rain, insects. After, I could not stop dreaming about her small hands.  I loathed every infant I saw.  The ways in which we knew, and didn’t.  In this dream, you’re driving and I’m watching the swallows paint the sky black.  The sky moves in the wrong direction, the highway ahead of us erupting and folding back into itself.  You stand barefoot in the kitchen and gut a papaya, seeds spilling out like fish eggs.  You’re writing a novel about death and God.  You say, this has got to end eventually. This is the moment before the snow begins. In this dream, I cut the telephone cord. We get put on house arrest.  I make coffee, black, while you fry whole eggs in an inch of butter. In this dream, you leave me at a gas station.  I still cannot walk past playgrounds.  In this dream, we name her Caroline.  She has one blue eye and one brown. I have wanted to tell you this for weeks. The last text my father sent said Hugs, Dad. On the way back from the hospital, the light devours one side of your face.  You open your mouth— only crickets emerge, a swarm.  We’re swimming and you slide upwards chin first, the way a child does. You take the baby clothes and put them all in a brown box, tape it shut and say, look. That night, I wake up shaking.  I do not know what to say and so you cover my mouth. The lights along the Minnesota River are golden nails fastening shut the horizon. The bus floats home, West across the plains, over this dark thread of road, past snow covered fields reflecting the moon’s wet light, until we can no longer tell what is land or water or sky and we cannot tell which our brother rests in now. As we cross the final bridge into Saint Paul everything to the east darkens and the whole country closes around the heart of the Midwest, around its churches and its silos, its pilgrims journeying before death to kneel and kiss its winding fingers, to kiss its noble silence spreading between the Mississippi and the Rust Belt like a woolen and moth-torn quilt, a fresh coat of snow, a eulogy always, almost, spoken.  Death, though it is final, is also hesitant and unsure. It is the persistent silence which follows that convinces us this boy was the one, this land too, these factories and these barges sunning themselves in the grey light as if they might dip beneath the water and re-emerge glistening and alive; these docks and these cranes, these warehouses angling into the shadows, preserved in a death-like geometry, though tenuous, as if ,if we clap and summon the lord, if we stomp our feet until we cannot smell what keeps the body here, until the body shakes, then might these songs wake him, might these factories turn and light like a bulb screwed in, might we be sentence like- not final, but running on forever through the grammar of mourning, the grammar of laughter when laughter is all that is left, until all that is left is his skin, and his bones, and we who buried him are only stories or ash on our grandchildren’s mantels, and his name spray painted on the Oak Park wall is painted over or chips off and washes into the dirt, and his bones too become earth, and the bullet in his leg is all that remains, and rests, a small black seed opening in his coffin.  Look  BY MICHAEL LEE   Driving beyond the city, beyond cattle grazing, the long evening shadows grazing on light until it is gone, and the city is gone, I catch a glimpse of a house just beyond the road. In its one lit window- like a floating television in the dark- a couple makes love. The man holds the woman from behind by the hips, and she sinks into him, open, as though asking him to become her entirely, but the man looks past her, through the window, his gaze a kind of shadow wandering through dusk into the hills, then beyond them as if she is only a telescope to him, as if, when he is inside her, he can see a different life, one which contains neither of them. I don’t believe I have ever seen a man so desperate to leave, to enter a woman entirely so as to simply pass through her and become, perhaps, a thought she once had as a girl, become the morning breeze or her bedroom curtains shifting quietly like an Ivory Gull descending. His eyes scan the horizon-the last of the sun a simple red sliver of light, a dim lamp shining from beneath the crack of a great door-and it is this gaze I carry with me. Not the gaze of my mother or father as they closed my bedroom door as a boy and watched the dark fold over my face- and then, one day, never looked at me this way again- nor the gaze of the woman I loved the many times we parted at airports and train stations until eventually we parted and she did not look back, not that of my grandmother, only bones and a hospital gown, as she said my name and then turned towards the wall forever. Not the abandoned calf before it was taken into the woods and shot, not my childhood dog before we drove her quietly to a quieter death. Eventually, everything that can look, will look upon us for the last time, and our memory, which is a kind of faith, will be unable to carry even itself. Only the gaze of this nameless man will remain, floating in a box of light, the planet watching him stare out into the dark living room of the earth. I walked around the hospital six times and still the bricks did not fall, and still no one came to ask if I would like to come in. Though I prayed, and though I walked around the hospital six times more and still the doors did not open, and the bricks did not fall, and my grandfather probably laid those bricks sixty years ago, and still I cannot enter. Once, I walked six times around his buried bones in reverse and he was not reassembled out of the earth, not returned to me or my blood circling always inside me, music through the trumpets outside Jericho, and the darkness blown out of them, as if to shout me too down to rubble. I walked around the hospital twelve times and still the bricks did not fall, and only dust gathered in my throat, and still no one came to ask if I would like to come in, though I looked each shift change in the eye, though it was below freezing, even as the sun began to rustle out of the concrete. If we are each a city of sin then this pulse rattling inside me is just a clock counting down. A single note blown forever until it isn’t, that is. Until the river dries. There is a bible verse in which the people circle a city until it falls to the ground. There is a bible verse in which the blood circles inside the body until the body falls dead in the street. I know, I wrote it. It is comprised of my dead friends, and all their memory. Let me read to you now from the Book of Stephen. The Book of Jay, the Book of Don, of Susan, of Big Bob and Sean, let me read to you in the pitch of bricks being laid by my dead grandfather and his dead hands as he builds a hospital his grandson cannot afford to enter. I will tell you the story of each grain of dust washed from his back until his own body was washed out along with the water into the earth. Twenty-eight years, and each day I’m this close to opening the kingdom of dirt, and this day I’m walking around the hospital at two am- because I think I am dying and want to be dead-then three, then four am. How American, all this fear. This trembling ground. There are only so many parallel universes that concern us.     In one, he isn’t dead.  In another, you drink light with your hands all winter. There is a universe in which no one is lying  emptied in the street as the gas station burns, a universe in which our mothers haven’t learned to wrap  their bones in each small grief they’ve found. There is a universe in which there is no difference  between the past and the ground. Another where the oceans pull the moon.      And so on.  This is an incomplete list.  It has been abridged for your comfort.       I could tell you  about the many universes in which bad things happen to people other than the people  you love. Yes, in another life, it’s someone else’s sister who climbs to the roof that night. In another life,  the boys rise darkly from the asphalt to choke the engines of cruisers, and no one gives birth  chained to a hospital bed, and no one’s child washes blue, ashore. Sure. You can have these worlds.  You can warm them in your hands at night. But know: by signing, you agree also to be responsible for the universe  where the oceans glow red, the universe where what we call shadow is pulsing with the musk  of hooves, and especially the one in which humans exist, but only in the nightmares  of small children. Will you hold that one too? The version of the story that never learned  to consider sound? and the one where sound is only the opposite of metal? and the one  where the sound of metal is never enough  to quiet the dead? Raw root of love, deliverer, throat singer, source and flesh-form of foxglove and bullet against whom the mind spins silken tents: philosophy and song. Here in my commute between waking hours, I’m rich with undoing, turn whirlpool and fiddlehead, dream I’m anyone’s daughter but yours. Once, I was a spiral galaxy in your arms. Now, time and mire collect on the horses, on teenage girls you coax over hurdles, coach and groom with sweat unto grace, and when you change your tune, Mother Hurricane, you assemble your children and show them what’s broken:  Who tamed whose land with the wrack of whose hand, who sowed these fields with untongued syllables, bones of the continents they call to  over lost crops? Some terrible lord pre-owned my name. The sunflower scatters its offspring: loose change. It’s the way we dramamine: devil seas  buckle the voice box, cinch our language.  So we hang garters around our necks.  The plump moon howls back, kids melt alongside their plastic figurines. We live forever  in this wet carcass country. One man’s husband  is another man’s crosshairs. One dog’s bone  another dog’s lone meal. This the undulation between what we know and what we blow  up. Trace your jawline to the map  and tell me you don’t feel Florida  sinking. Inside our palms are baby sharks circling palm trees. Politicians wear the masks  of other politicians. Our parents get married  and divorced again. In the season between seasons,  when rain comes down in sugar cubes, we take lighters to weather and get high, go cosmic.  Our veins crack like a gold-trimmed plate  tossed onto the driveway as we tongue  the ridgeline between pleasure and sharp blood. When we are good we are only mostly  good – the dull yellow chance that we will become  the ghosts a future self left behind.  That we can approach, unzip, step into this water and glow like any dead jellyfish.  When our shadows fill with bodies, we will write  letters to the living. We’ll tell them they too  will burn like a mattress stuffed with money. That if they know what’s coming, they’ll bathe  in gasoline and wait for the honest god’s glory.    buffalo jump  BY PHILIP SCHAEFER    I am trying to understand the body as prize in new and ceremonious ways. When we finish making love, I tell myself it’s possible to understand pleasure only with my mind. To stop feeling the crude oil of my joints, the lamp lit with hers. I recall the story of a people who would force a stampede of buffalo off a cliff. Eat the raw heart of the first to fall. What if we, too, are able to hold wild geraniums in our teeth and never speak? Grass as a method of madness and nothing more. I consider the slow breath of the lone bull hovering like glass over the ledge. I feel my pulse twitch in my throat and begin to dream my eyes back into the attic of my head. This is a marbled lightning we contain by being silent. I want the world to know we will be as loud as the salmon who swim upstream into their skin. We will apologize for everything with our chests in the wind. We will cannibalize our names until the letters drip garnet. Blood kettle, bright seed. Here a line of men walk like ants along the midnight highway until their bodies are muraled to the front of a semi. One more dandelion skull shaved off by the good lord. One more switchblade twitch of the wrist. This the town in which someone leaves a horseshoe in the mailbox, a lock of blonde glued to a photo of a girl without a face. This town where a puppeteer spends weeks in the basement, pinching our elbows with strings, pinning acupuncture like railroad ties along the doll’s cloth spine. Willingly we go alone onto the tracks. We lay down with mouths open, white sun wringing out bleach while children jump from rotting bridges and a retired officer roulettes a warm revolver into his chin. Here, junkyard boys boil hallelujah through a slotted spoon in an abandoned forklift. Some as young as seven. Sam or Steven. Freckled with constellations, ten gods touching at their cheeks. One drowns a trash drum with gasoline and waits for his bones to fill with hickory. One floats into his own ghost. Their mothers pay for what they cook. Call it poetry, an allowance. Girls double-dutch and lung Cinderella until their eyes turn ash, until they can forget the hard flesh that never fully filled their mouths. Older brothers. Drunk uncles teaching lessons of breathe and obey. The wind a thing to hold onto, its knife a welcomed flight. I can’t say grief lived there because nothing ever did. Its purpose seemed to be to wait, and, like me, to contain its waiting. When the priests called Rachel, Sarah, and Elizabeth barren, I could think only of cathedrals and railway stations, specifically dust swirling in tunnels of light, the clockwork sounds of wings and footsteps. When I studied the ancient practice ostraka , I smashed an empty flower pot, wrote my brother’s name in magic marker on a shard, exiled him from the empire. To my surprise, he cried. I’d forgotten what it was I felt—I needed to see. Outside had taken me in. I loved it not for its vastness but minutiae, which I observed with the attention of one who is not herself observed and cannot bear to be. Mica in the pavement, larva in the rose. I fetishized the sea monkey, diorama, created little worlds of rules: if you see wind holes in the cedars on one side, you miss sparrows nesting on the other, and if you leave the utility lines out of your picture, you’re not being honest. Be honest: when I first saw real wallflowers spangle at the preserve in their tiny deer-proof cages, I became breathless: to be singled out, protected— We girls saved our cigarette ashes to fade our Levis with. We crisped our hair with curling wands. We always smelled like smoke, playing as we did with fire, like Bovary or Butterfly without beauty or the babies. One friend, a nurse now, sent video of Johnny Depp on a pediatric oncology ward. He visited, as Captain Jack Sparrow, one patient in particular. Piracy and stardom had never been easier: the girl leapt into his arms. Her silent mother was more reluctant— she knew how to wait. As did those barren women of the bible, all of whose wombs were “opened” by God for acts of faith, some giving birth well into their nineties. Except for one. Daughter of Saul, wife of David, who, failing them both, displeased the Lord, and about whom it is written, “Michal had no child to the day of her death.” Have mercy on those months the Hudson boiled blue in its seaward scribble while the skyline slumped in heat;  those days our evenings were so many sit-ups after work, the temperature still digging its red-hot heels in, we crunched like canny animals in danger— but we did it all summer on your building’s roof, where the washboard, the six- or sex-pack was a vision of a world well-toned and so damningly beyond my grasp  it tamed me. Ashamed of the gasps, the grunts let slip through my bit lips, I envied your easy sitting up, your rarified belly.  *  El Libro del Ejercicio Corporal by Cristóbal Méndez prescribes for the improvement of eyesight staring willfully in the face of winter wind;  proves how the planets get sick and soil their night sky. “That the body is inside the soul,” and “leisure hurts.” I submit to you  the chapter Sobre Juicio , On Judgment, how man comes to lose it.  It’s a muscle, after all—like memory. Like what it was we once called a little fucking bravery:  when lugged before the Inquisition for the forging of zodiacal seals rumored to heal all sorts of 16th-century ailments,  it was said of Méndez, el cuerpo froze and el alma flexed.  **  Ice accretes on my porch rail in a lazy way. Still  the GW Bridge draws a dazzling span across my shut lids locked against the wind. A clear  flabby night here in Lafayette under the heaven’s lingerie—  stars, moonlit lace, nothing not betrayed.  Your soul looks skinny, said no one ever. If I still love you, wow , it’s that business of  the body’s remembering, my gut the mind of what? of an elephant, for whom an old face is never strange but regret’s the only mirror,  and Mayor Bloomberg—have you heard this?— bought from the circus a run-down elephant exercise ground in the Hamptons.  He’s rich. So were we, so to speak. I wish we’d made a show of it.           The thinkable begins. Blue hour, this explains my drinking.  Back then, the drinking had little explaining to do.  Chosen by swells, blue swallow to anyone who knows better.  *  The morning at its smallest: whether winter should be weather this warm November morning.  Hands gripped to steering wheel—blue to anyone who has felt like theory before.  I say this explains all the women I know, the draft under the front door.  *  Pinned by the same nails that once held the house, still-lifes and oils,  I have little use for hammers and measures now.  I took the hammer to the wall before.  I say this explains movement, when taking it too far, became far enough to focus.  *  Italy is what I talk about at the office. Lovers are what I talk about after work.  *  When remembering surpasses:  The South is The South, a title for a childhood and old pet names.  I say this explains my lying still, the blue that lessens cities  into snow globes, chipped ice.  *  I say a lesser god to lesser men— even orchards took in snow. Blue to anyone who knows better, even hunger goes under. Vanishing begins at the mouth. From twelve stories up, it’s clear this city’s made entirely  of glass. Last night the last leaves— hanging-on, letting go. Now, strewn  bright as confetti after a parade. The building’s façade shifts  with the sky. And we take turns consoling the young hustler, listening  to the litany of injury: one year in prison, two tours in Iraq, another  failed attempt to end it all that ended in a ward. And then there is the newborn  he’s never seen. The world outside this room is a reflection. Seen thus, all that has been  lost recedes as dawn descends in layers and silence until it reaches the street.  In the soft-core flick, the muted figures keep shifting positions on the screen. The path the men walk, no longer holding hands, matted with leaves. Along the edges something vanishes  as they approach. One is troubled the slitherers can only be heard. How name what can’t be seen?  But some things are only known by what they leave behind. One points to a cluster of narcissus beside a black bag spilling trash  like an animal gutted. The feral cats must’ve feasted, and the bulbs settled after a flood. Hard to imagine anyone  kneeling to bury them where abandoned factories rust between unsown and unharvested fields.  On the bank  two figures linger in the fading, staring down to see themselves looking up. They appear linked in the murky surface.  At the blurred edges of their reflections tadpoles retreating—waste water stirring in the wake. Soon they’ll begin to bloom:  skin, teeth, webbed feet pushing from mire, and a mouth ripping open a voice to cry out to the others in the darker hours. But for now  they must remain married to both worlds. And then, since there was nothing in a union but the dream: We called our own. Blue shadows  on his face: a horizon of snow—endless endless— this is how old light affects a young vetnew brother chain smoker—the tip of cigarette between his lips  a pupil blooming his face lost to light his body by a plate glass window—I’ve never seen someone so bombed before haze the color of soottexture of steel thick hatch of beard  an explosion wonder which one blotted his ears thinned his limbs  birthed this blue painting the christmas lights noose behind him the smoke is sure and smells like death     I’m the only stranger I’m not blinking and I’m standing too close—all of him is brushstrokes and blur the lights reveal  small miracles—a mouth red—running. All the little Fiats have clambered up the hill on the old Roman road—  Reformed , it translates— and in shallow ditches lining the villa have parked nose-first.  Their owners, skinny-suited Slovenes and Italian Northern Leaguers,  orange-cheeked and already in their wine, go slipping up the hill. I am in  my father’s garden holding a tray of undercooked, clean-cut pigeon breasts  skewered top to bottom. There’s talk of the wild peacock none of us has seen.  It cries like a child from the bordering thicket while I make new rounds  with a tray of potato dumplings, little mouthfuls: the yellow dumpling like an allergic eye,  flushing with clusters of meat; the bitter green; the pink one, lidded and sweet.  I am in my father’s garden in a silk-lined suit and a thin, European tie,  watching two little boys— Umberto and Lorenzo, I think they are called—  dig a limb of charcoal from the outlying grill. Umberto drags black lines  beneath Lorenzo’s eyes, arms himself with a stick, and both boys disappear down the hill.  Our wailing peacock quiets and hides. I am in my father’s garden where a south wind runs off  with the sun. My father ruffles my thick, dago hair. Here we are: love, it seems,  is a lack of alternatives. The pride-and-joy cottonwoods, flaring  hierarchies of branches, flap their papery leaves. Underneath a juniper hedge,  the peacock folds and flattens its plumage of bored, bright eyes and holds its breath. The evolving scrawl that looked as if it were about to form a number forms a sickle—  *  Now we’re entering the cloister-garden.  The melons still sprawl the western quadrant, and here, next to the refectory, two rows of vetch remain un- gleaned.  I see we’ve lost the tomato plants.  Inside each yellow-green bag, the Japanese beetles swim with discrete activity.  *  Woke up today and remember nothing. V beside me, my alarm not yet gone off.  Today it’s Sunday.  We sit on the front porch, Sundays. The porch-swing carries our feet aloft.  *  Night proceeds.  It’s late. Then hurrying footsteps . . . and overhearing, inside the nave, the chaplain say to the headmaster,  Of course they want salvation —  *  Question: Am I dreaming?  Midwestern sunrise, wherein the sun bullies its way up out of the mantle  impressing the mind with the idea of an actual passage.  But, here—If I step in this shadow . . . poof! Even the sun can’t see me.  *  Went for a walk together this evening. Talked of the difference between guilt and shame. V says shame needs others and their expectations, guilt an inner value or law.  Were on that path beside the pond near the old filtering plant; don’t know why, but remembered a scene.  *  Near the abbey’s exterior wall we find a greenhouse, wherein we talk with the herbalist’s girl. She shows us  Darlingtonia Californica , the pitcher plant.  Confusing its prey with a pattern of speckles it leads an insect deeper into the painful throat of the plant itself—  Behind the cash register, the abbot attends his favorite variety of pea. “These peas,” he explains, “are, like our souls, climbing a ladder to perfection,” though he adds  that the space between each rung is many generations. For,  Natura non facit saltum , he says.  Nature does not make leaps.  *  Night proceeds.  I’d had no intention of taking the fruit, yet when I found myself assembled in the fruit tree’s branches, there it was all before me. In this order: green, red, yellow, green. Taking whole clumps, I felt my mouth turn suddenly delicious.  *  There’s a man anchored inside a cleft of the chapel wall, and a little brass placard attached near the door reads OPEN FOR SERVICE.  This dream, so I’ve had it before—  watching gravity bow the head down, exposing the circle of thorns; how the lines of the shoulders, flexed, align with each trapezius, before drawing up to the nape: The shape of an unstrung bow.  *  3 a.m.  V wakes and turns me over, pointing my belly toward the moon. She inserts her index into my navel, and it goes straight through me.  She says for years we’ve told ourselves we have to solve ourselves: A key in a box in a tunnel through a door one finds at the end of the dream.  I say for ‘solve,’ substitute ‘fix.’ Like a door, but no hinges.  Once , I say, there was no need for fix.  She says that’s a real self-cruelty.  *  A knock at the door.  He (our eldest teacher) will take my confession, the two of us, the privacy of the vestry.  We must see to my soul to make no doubt of its destiny .  The two of us.  We in the vestry.  *  A white page:  That’s mutability.  *  Behind me, the light of a place moves further away, until tired, I stop under a low-hanging crab-apple.  I consider the crab-apple: a sour fruit; but a comfortable tree.  *  When I look at the sky, I see light and solidity. I  I step out of the womb-crater, out my creator, knowing that I was made so that my mother can breastfeed herself –  her blood weaves on me my first dress nurses rinse with cold, black waterdrops.  II  Thetis, the seaweed-dress wearing mother, saw a God between her legs the day of Achilles’ birth. How boys forget that a mother’s arrowhead-sized fingers iron silk skin and confuse blood for ichor.  Vulnerable Achilles. Achilles not erect. Achilles on his knees. Tear-salted Achilles begs. Achilles who bit more than he could chew and choked.  III  Instead of a breast, I have a heel on my tongue. Mother is three tree-shaped shadows away and praying for the boy to wake up a God. And yet, the heel on my chest is growing. What else but to accept the sentence? What else but to pretend that each of my Achilles’ Heels is a keyhole waiting for its key. You meant “mercury” not “mercy.” I misread. I do that. Waiting for the aquarium gurgle of circulating heat.   I’m headstrong over heels. Mercury confuses my spectral lines, hums ultraviolet, then the fluorescent light kicks  awake. “Fetish” not “fish.” Oh. I misheard. You ask for a sorcerer, and I spat up a salmon.  It’s wild. Should be low contamination. When I roll up my sleeves: just sleeves. I’m chopping  fishheads in heels. I’m heaping the plates, and you require a show, so I’m heaving like yet another serious low pressure zone.  Call me the girl offstage about to be sawn in half. Sequined, no. Scaly and pink. It’s a joke, that old classic sitcom crash. And won’t  the neighbors laugh, darling. You ask for a catalyst. I’m that thing you play noxious. I can’t melt any faster. Summer, 1992  while in Chicago, police created a whole new crime category, Starter Jacket Murders  Jet Magazine , May 11, 1992  starter jackets were the coldest second skin. they’d glitter in the whole sale windows of Maxwell St. storefronts like flags or primary colored emeralds. shone from the bodies of Black poets on Yo! MTV Raps.  Chicago , Hornets , mascots, cities emblazoned on the chest like tribal tats, religions, gang affiliations. clean sport cuffs and collar. snap buttons and sheen. the coolest wore them open even in the crisp air, airing rope gold and white tees. a coat perfect for the fall. so much loot it’d be crazy to ask your mama. oil slick arms just outta reach like everything in america. so cold it seemed reasonable this could be the ocean of satin somebody might die over. Perhaps these words, too, will vanish. The electricity will fail, memory cards corrupt; the generators run down and even the pages decompose eventually, or burn. I am no Greek kept alive in libraries or the minds of curious men, these equations I write not vital to our survival or progress. My telomeres will weaken. I’m not immune to age. And if I want it remembered the way you asked my skin to sing for you or how your scalp locks the scent of Oregon, the lookout tower, the flames just past the horizon, I can’t hold it or make it stay no matter how clever my pen, my fingers at keys. Your arms will fade from knowing, the particular blue hunger of you debauched in the confine of colored ink. Somewhere, there’s a museum of best mixes, azure, lapis, mummy and ochre, lined on shelves in glass vestibules, preserved for future study. There are interns dusting each collection, responsible for keeping the markers in good repair. So if I am the servant whittling time, only to have it return out of knowing, if my body stains the air and settles on cruets or seeps into rags to become the perfect brown dunes and their shadows, my innards the crimson cloak on a worshipper, if I am the pigment and the vessel, why not blue? Why not the light through the fogged air of that mountain, why not memory engraved in something stronger, a stone arrow to arms that were and are and are good.           Por que no tenemos una pais anymore cuando we lived in Santo Domingo we watched Trujillo spill 100 daughters onto the street y lo sigue de este recuerdas the memory of a city turns you to salt     esta de Dios this would have been your fatherland before men who were fathers took it apart     con sus manos sucios por supuesto    nos decidio we had to wash ourselves of home in order to survive     we flew so that su madre might be untouched sacrificio para sacrificio sangre por sangre what else could we have done but taken the house spilling into bricks in front of us and sprinkle it into the ocean? el oceano no hay azucar salt is always hungry salt is what made the men forget their country had a name that was not the name of a man who gave every mirror his name mijo      la sal esta pequena pero the ocean will never hold your face so kindly      y este is how men grow vain and forget to wash the blood from their hands before they hug their daughters  j  j  leslie odom jr. sings obama’s anger on npr  The strings twitch into a song the way the wind flinches a tree into the end of October I look into     the belly of Mississippi and on screen the Black man opens his mouth to reveal a small white woman and the song is a fugitive just like that the song is a mask made of everyone I have ever loved    and all the quiet we are now    the song is and is and is and ends     a hair exhausted of its color gone now to the color of harp strings which beckons the fingers to harm themselves into a music    and I imagine hatred must require an entire orchestra a legion of calloused working hands similar to my Father’s own pair only in the weight and desire But again what else is there to a pair of hands besides what can be flayed loose? Beneath the skin perhaps a matrix of bones sun starved and maybe even the color of mercy maybe not    maybe just a barely country maybe the most fathomable wound and this is less about anger than it is drought how dehydration is considered a failure of the well     rather than an impeachment upon the throat      and here it is as hot as ever Here a November where nothing is cold enough to die    here Obama’s anger Chechen dolls onto my computer and everything a man hasn’t said lays a bloody lullaby in my lap and this too is history a labor of callouses and blisters and other casualties of running and I have never known music not to escape I have never known myself not a fugitive from my own anger I have never known us not sprinting as if sung from somewhere else and in the distance men send bullets into the sky and sing hallelujah and their song is the unstitching of a scab     and maybe I look out the window and mistake the copper for a star      maybe I mistake the violence     for home  I  He lolled on her belly like a piglet on a sow, his skin caked in white paste.  A draught lifted her ruffled collar, and Darwin’s mother’s memory of pain  was just now seeping out of her. He was taken away and then, in a moment,  placed back in her lap, prim and dry. Newly civilized in lace and linen. Darwin’s  mother recoiled in sullied silk and ribbon when she first saw his face: In a way, he was  already a man, therefore discomfited by the smell of her good clean blood.   II  In God who formed one body after another in my middle  like the red speck growing in a yolk to fill the egg with feathers and folded bones lies perfection.  And in the fragile egg, its shell weak and broken open like chips of sky, fine pottery,  breathes a red and fluttering clot prone to illness and sin.  Like God, I give birth to men so they might build a church and a government over me, making it easy for me to become  transparent, a strip of gauze hung over a side chair or pinned up in the chapel or garden so the silhouettes of columbines will show through my skin.   III  The door at the top of the stair, a black velvet gown, her curiously constructed  work-table, death-bed – these are all of what I remember of my eighth year,  since after my sisters’ grief placed coins on our lips, her name disappeared. Some say Plato dreamed up cinema, made shadows  on a wall mate and murder so well showgoers believed  and never knew themselves the show, their lower  selves immobilized below the motion  picture, held charmed to stalagmite, meanwhile  heads rocked and arms foreshadowed  the outdoor-concert power-ballad sway  in time, miming images all their own. Here is  a theory of real estate: man who just so happens  to glimpse a species of dream claims to be  sole projector, prime speculator with a stake  in every last future container of light. And:  man gesturing to the exit sign may be your landlord  still, if he stands before a common hole  and calls himself the door. When it goes dark inside  we sense the sun came first and water, sand, and rocks.  Even amoeba got besotted with oozing selfsame  shadows for millennia before human fists  and claws animated radiant walls, touched  index fingers to thumbs and linked thumbs  at dawn, splayed fingers and ta-da: meteors burst  into butterflies, lazy seagrass and new trees  and giraffes ate lions ate starfish ate snakes ate  dragonflies ate pelicans ate demons ate moons,  to hell with the chain of life and men  stoned men and one day a dying king said make  the shadows last, decorate my death with shadows  painted red, sun-gold, trace them with quavering lines  unreal as the line where night meets the seam forever  flickering at the world’s end. Movies: we’ve lived them  since troglodytes and lava land still bubbled, since waking  ate away sleep. We look out from bone-domed caves  but never quit spelunking our buried odeons.  Neither did that ancient barker in a tunic  of metaphysical isness humbugging a true  light. If there is light there will be enough light  to view us moving around us and besides,  besides, these brief illuminations  of life remind us to suspect the glare  of reeling creation is really a trick of fire. Remember the morning you found an owl in the wire fence?  You weren’t alive to me yet, father, even my fingers tasted like plums.  All that winter burned on the sill two plastic candles, fake wax drips  that never slid down, glass flames. Frozen sparks hovered in every window.  Another force, not taste, not desire, dragged the shadows from our feet  so long they tangled in the low light cast over our kitchen floor.  The shadows became marriages. The wife’s mule became a white Corvette.  When warmth sprang blue-faced chicories up we ripped them  over our plates. We ate. You told me mothers usually get custody,  and she became a portrait: two round eyes, feathered with lashes.  The world was painted last, as light, white dots riding her irises.  Some other force, not death, not yet, drew my hands  one into the other, turned them into an outstretched bowl. How the body  contorts to cradle fruit as fruit cradles its pit—hard, wormed stone  around which flesh translucent curls, the effort to contain a miniscule abyss  while widening with intertwining veins— Who doesn’t want to speak in tongues  of this. Plastic candles wait for their season in a box. The face waits for dust in its frame.  The wife dismounted her white mule young, a bough of cherries staining her dress  with the evidence of arrows. It isn’t death. It’s just tugging each feather  from barbed wire all morning, fingers numb with cold,  holding its body like a baby under the tail while you work the second wing free.  Your trash bag full of owl. The taxidermist shaking his head. Football pads strapped on, the two of us trucked into each other all through summer. We ran three miles  before breakfast, muddied our cleats in the rain, found islands of bruises floating on our biceps.  We were on the same offensive line— both undersized but quick—and when we ran  a trap up the gut, I’d pull away from the boy I lined up against to block whoever bull-rushed you.  I remember how your hair fell over your eyes beneath your helmet, how we were both still growing into our bodies—  this was before we left for college; before you were stripped of your scholarship and sentenced without parole.  This was the summer we each broke a finger and drove the sled with free-weights chained to our hips—  the summer we learned how to listen for footsteps racing toward us, how to never flinch.  *  In the dream, a woman jumps off a building, slips  through the breeze and comes apart like a comet  entering the atmosphere. The crowd is pointing up  and I’m running out trying to catch her  though I know I won’t. When she hits pavement  I can’t see her face, can only wake up  wondering why I didn’t give her wings.  *  During my lunch break, I walk out onto the Potomac though the weatherman said spring is at last hot on our heels. I sip my coffee and tap the ice with the toe of my boot. I throw a stone halfway to Virginia.  It’s been a year since I read about the girl found floating in reeds, and I think again of baby Moses, how lucky he was to be delivered into safe arms.  I remember reading bungee cords and slashed . I read boyfriend and then I read your name.  *  For punishment,  when a player ran his mouth  or didn’t follow orders  our team ran wind sprints  up and down the field  until breathing  felt like swimming,  until the cavities in our chests  burned.  And all the while,  coach would stand on the sidelines  pointing at the stampede of boys,  a thick arm around the loudmouth,  the fuck-up,  telling him,  Don’t look away .  *  That same summer, one by one, I hauled stones, set them on top of each other.  I brushed away the ivy and leaves, stacked the heap high, a new wall in my mother’s garden.  Bleeding hearts and phlox in beds, I jammed rocks that didn’t belong together  together, packed them as tight as I could, building with pieces I could never precisely fit.  *  By fall, we ended practice each night with Oklahomas. The team circled around two boys who were told not to hold back, to lower their chins and shoulders  and really plow into each other, hurt each other. In those circles we yelled until we were lightheaded, roses of smoke rising from our helmets where our  mouths would be. Sometimes, you and I were matched up— hands dug in the trench, stadium lights lit, bodies aligned— forced to collide, to hold each other for that instant  of contact before pushing back, one of us dropping. Afterwards, we took off our helmets and our pads; we felt the sweat run down our backs, the veins climbing  our forearms like small vines. And how small we looked then: huddled beneath the November stars sprayed like shrapnel, perfect in the violet sky. Small, kept in basements, our voices are hard to hear over the cassette’s soft whir,  guitar notes bleeding out, riot of cymbals crashing. All summer we practiced, sweat  through our shirts until we stripped; we tore the knees out of our Levis to look  like Johnny Ramone and spent nights getting lit downtown. The sound of nothing  on the tape is a low drone, rain on water— laughter unravels like smoke and is gone.  We could feel ourselves changing into something bright and sinister and starry;  we relearned our bodies, their furious constellations. When we count off again, listen to how big  we try to make ourselves, how we never quite fill the room—power chords feeding back,  the kick drum’s beaten skin—while outside birdsong, the heat breaking;  a mute sky turning over until it broke too. Not at first like the letter that doesn’t come, but the one that does & makes no sound as it holds the room.  This morning, rain arrives on the sill & words rise to mind & fall like swells on the piano & never cease to surprise,  at least in Florida with riptides & surrender. The Sunshine State .  Between beaches, just two days ago, I considered the world mapped. Today the roads are rearranged & the cities mislabeled— maybe the state is broken,  or my own is, or yours— birds losing direction & sense, unbecoming themselves in pulled feathers & song. Even the resident mockingbird cleans her wings, shrugs.  What magnetism drives this? Maybe the new moon is fornicating the sun, & we’ll have hurricanes in winter.  What sound would that make? Does whispering in your ear bring a rise? I have imagined falling in love again, something I no longer thought possible, but in this crescendo unresolved,  you appear again & again. What are the odds? I read a story yesterday of a West Coast boy finding a message in a bottle  after decades at sea. malibu sand creases softer,  tells jesus stories more often,  escapades of him in blue denim & socks—  feet rattlesnaking over burning coal, the way he’ll laugh until it sounds  like the sky is blossoming tattoos again.  tell me about jesus, how his mouth looks in whisper.  yes, and the malibu ocean  forming a jaw,  yes, and the guitar strings twanging off the surf,  faucets of bronze bells and cataracts, chestless babies constructing.  i’m wondering how jesus tastes in your malibu mouth— tooth by tooth, the wander  of a lazy eyekiss  only toeing the bleach-white medallions of sand.  maybe this time, under the shadow of smoke,  he is explosive canister bonfires touched  by gasoline fingers. too many volcanoes buried  deep under skin.  maybe he is touching his sides,  placing christmas wreaths against sunburnt skin, small & psychedelic in his sheepskin robe,  stealing the glances  of midwives & stationary waves & shy rocks  hidden behind ocean crags.  this time— two boys loving, two feet halfway against  water in high tide,  only the last soft fingers  of admirers hoping to remember something past the taste of cherry wine. he’s bending, maybe, two hands on flaking malibu skin.  unsure, quiet, two eyes lined towards the horizon again. first days in Indiana with my tornado phobia  No real water here, no stream with secrets or gardenias. No basement here, nothing underneath  for the midnight twister. There was a corner, a fire station in my belly, a nested doll,  and pepperweed. No rejoicing, no floating about like snowflakes, or glitter. That first Indiana storm  took me, bonking and chasing my tail, thrashing and clotting—all talk talk talk . Ribbons  of pavement were twitching below. A little shed was swirling. The wonderful lamp of a small town  flickered. Indiana, the ferment. Indiana, the distant mother bringing thermometers  and warm washcloths. Indiana, the sad and pink plump sky. I’ve been spun and honeyed. Filled  with windmills and brown bands of cattle. That first Indiana storm took me quietly, bent  and in a terrible dress. Beach girl, Southern girl, flint and dandelion girl,  toward the lighthouse girl with moonshine and moss—a bed to let the body speak. Starving, and two months since the black walls dropped their anchors, I whirl, tenderly— arranging around me the great bones and red ribbons. I have this strand of berries, now, just gushing from my throat. The golden leaves are my friends. But they are falling quickly, piles as big as hiccups, soon, and pushing the persimmons out the window. All night, I am the collared dove, smearing my worries over the acres of sky. I chase the horizon till it rolls and flames. I am shining like a burn. I want to eat gingered pears and pear pies, to see curtains of white chiffon. But, I am afraid, again, of the mornings. To wake me, there’s the inner click of wind, the topmost tier of wisteria, begging me to write, pushing me towards the other world, towards the softening, the red gown behind me, gasping. Out of the mother sea, out against the rise of porcelain dollies, out of my grey knit sweaters and into a shadowy forest, I think of the light rain dripping down like satin stones. I stand in it for a long time. Nameless, and in my final hour, adore me: the heated grace, the silver potion. Some wild, somewhere beauty still hangs in the lungs— black lake, black sky, and even more, black shoes. So black, this wispy, pretty heart turns, the top quite gone. The pulp, the paperweight, the poppy, the full set of teeth, so black I may be dying for words, for a piece of yellow flower in my hair— a bit of gold filling, a bit of risen sun. The bullet goes back in the gun. On Black Friday, a protest starts large on the Magnificent Mile. People slip through the throng to bring gifts into the stores. The young & brown with hoarse Voices scream themselves quiet & whole. The old & mostly white on their flanks smile and turn home. The shopkeepers twist their locks, dim their fluorescents and follow the last trickles of the march. Everyone leaves full, carrying some form of gratitude.  The bullet goes back in the gun/  the bullet goes back/ in the gun/  bullet goes/  in the back/  the gun/  back goes bullet/  bullet goes gun/  gun in the back goes/ the gun bullet in/  gun in the bullet/  goes back/  The bullet goes back in the gun. bullet holes close in a nigga’s chest. His body is a miracle blotting bloodstains from the snow. His leg jerks & makes an angel in the powdered dust. The bullet goes back in the gun.  The shadow over him pulls back. He stands up, flails a bit to get the dust off, turns his head with an open-mouthed yawn as a blood rose wilts on his stomach. And for the last time, the bullet goes back in the gun. The boy pushes a breath from his lungs for the first time.  The door of a police cruiser slams shut & the car peels away in reverse, its tires polishing skidmarks from the road as its sirens recede down the block.  The boy goes about his day. Smiling, he hangs up on his mama. Does some other kid shit, none  more significant than this: he moonwalks through his front door for a quiet morning at home & lives. My tragedies are small. The pigeons like dishrags, gather. The soot of a sweet earth covers our hands.  Fluid recollection: I ask if anyone else sees a hotel rug, paprika-colored, ash at edge—a hole the size of a finger.  On the first day God created morning, night. On the first day we drove through forests seeking rest-  ing places/graves in the abstract. Some part of the apricots have names. Some part of us petals: becomes juice, rot.  One of the birds, stiff in flight—feather corset. My mother’s name means pigeon, after  the sounds birds make: that throat hum, the way they collect on sills. I remember two things: my painted horse was stolen,  and in the dark I saw them, half-rib and eye, swelling from the trees, wet-green, soundless. The dark  looked like any other dark. If gravity cannot be shaken like an immense breath reversed,  then there was never the voice and never the chorus—  never snow gathering you up, no mornings spent gauging  your own stubbornness swaying in the sky’s branches: dark  globes fewer until just one, then days passing without  that last walnut dangling on. The sound entered, a wind  rhyming everything with else and the room shuddered,  hit heaven and fell flat while the snow collected more  and more of you: grown child testing the errand of light, ears  scanning the unhorizoned years until tuned again to North. Somewhere in the cold, white mind of the snow, the blood  was shed before there ever was blood. The boy laid down  in the field. Crows gathered.  *  Perhaps, like music, our lives are written  long before being played out on the body’s black key. Now, like a vinyl record re-wound  on which believers will swear they hear the Devil speak,  the snow zips back into a cloud. The dead unblue.  Somewhere in the cold, white mind of God, a love’s dark code  waits for its cue.  i could’ve married the wolf but chose my own  crimson husbandry / of blood & its dark gifts;  the children we bore before we knew them. i could’ve married the wolf but winter came,  brandishing its grey doctrines. now, the bitch  tells me she never wanted me, was merely  transfixed by the gimmick of my pulse. still, our children grow into their furs, their teeth, the slow  drip & crescendo of their particular madnesses.  these days, instead of love-making, we grieve  the libraries we lost to fire— but you teach me fever & salve, you teach me stars & their ecstatic  alchemies— & here in the poem, we turn out  our pockets to find that we have, finally,  no word for snow. First-graders hurdle moon-blue rhinos to chase dragonflies that smell of pine needles  & wind. All the swings have holes in the seats. I call it improved aerodynamics & take advantage.  Skecher soles flush with sky, I split the air as I imagine God’s truth does, while below me  my year-old daughter mumbles good morning to the earthworm wound between her toes. Only  it’s more than a greeting, this song, this river of liquids & glides—  better to call it a babbled hymn, an offering to the world of sunlight  & mud, a whisper born from breath where language does not yet live.  * * *  I’m in the memory ward of the downtown VA, laying  my bouquet on the nightstand and sitting beside my mother  on the edge of the unmade bed. Filtered light. Drawn blinds. Her breath  a thread of warmth unfurling as she furrows her brow  at her granddaughter squirming silent in my arms.  This evening, we talk about what my mother’s language allows us—  only her most practiced concerns: my father, fried catfish & jazz.  The house I grew up in.  Tuscaloosa. Corner lot. The way summer rain battered the lawn  like quarter notes spilled from Coltrane’s golden bell  as our dog Brantley ran circles in the tulips, leaping in the air to bite at the wet music.  Even if it didn’t happen like this I’ll say it did. Later, after my mother has fallen  asleep, I think back to a story she told me as a child.  (We were walking a creek’s edge in fog the morning after her youngest niece’s wake):  In an instance of perceived weightlessness , she began,  skipping a stone that would vanish before it hit the water a second time,  the mind renders the body a myth it no longer requires. This happens  on a swing set, the moment you stop your ascent,  before you begin to fall. Don’t take me down to the dark, where the dog perks up  at her meat supper, teeth barbed  as grape vines. Watch the blood drip down  like wine harvested, purple off the incisors, the dream-  dog’s bird friend perched above my bed, ceiling  red with feather light. I want to wake up, divide  time between the kiss and the oh , my heart gone dizzy  as a merry-go-round, brain ground down  to mush, my lust weakening  the seams of me. Thanks, new boyfriend, sprinting  the hills to find me ripening  beneath the dream ceiling again. I watch its fire churn  like my father’s ashes, blazing, the urn  loaded up, the boats of my eyes  taking on water. Wake me. The dog snaps at my toes,  and who remembers where I stocked  my gun? The bird above me bleats like a lamb  through its beak to quake me with memories  of him: my father running toward me when I clocked  my forehead against a playground pole, the red  soup of the cut dripping, eye socket black,  swelling, Dad’s palm not  sopping up much. Then, the blood got his shirt, dirt  wet with purple humming, and the grass  sodden with my mess. I miss him, I guess,  because dreams plague me every night since  he left, my boyfriend carving my mouth out  with his tongue to help me speak again. Still  the dream-dog raps, the door to my brain-room cracked  and waiting for dark to prick my heart muscle. No light  but red, the bird’s feathers, crimson  as the snow that caught the brunt of my head wound,  my father’s hands, always his hands, moving  over and over to cover  the cut. Remember? Never not remembering, I dream  I scream down the dark, the dog, the bird  waiting, red as a brick office building, my  boyfriend not once in time to catch me before I slip away .           The space of an event is that which opens up by the gap that separates an effect from its causes.  — Slavoj Zizek  The lazy miracle a slipstream creates, we wake out of the enormous night holding  flashlights to each other’s eyes. We travel  the house’s music, unseen life inside the silhouette of our belongings, desire steeped in its own wild  division of things, the duffels full of clothes in our closets, a drawer of lubrication to wet  the dangerous kisses. I can’t recognize it all. The tulips poison the house upon entering it.  I can’t recognize the order of it all, the parties responsible for such a disaster as poisoning  routines. I can’t recognize it calling my name  the night our house began to burn, the night we might’ve never woken to the alarm in time  had we slept ourselves into the ground. I can’t imagine how to recognize holding  each other into a fire or what it might’ve saved,  the water needed to douse what electricity started the flames. It’s amazing how circuitry  can go wrong only to become exciting again under different conditions, the alarm telling us  the story, as if we’d cut our ears off to avoid it,  our fears constructed in the grey smoke between saving and being saved, or neither,  calling to us through the walls, not responding to the heat we didn’t create in ourselves.  I remember running down the stairs together, tripping over words in the haze, closely  related moments we hung on the walls, habituated identities ghosted onto furniture,  particles in motion beyond themselves, identifying a direction all together, all alone  when I witnessed the years we negotiated in the unending days before the house’s wiring  gave into itself. I can’t recognize it’s opposite,  the notion where divine grace enters the house to deliver tulips and then torches the place.  Is it wrong to ask for salvation when the word has no grounding in our home, no object  we attach to give image to our asking for it? And why not say the words anyway  in whatever perverse manner we might conjure a piano playing our way out of the flames?  An image comes to take us back in time. It is desire. It is leftover food on the picnic table  as hail falls suddenly one June. It is our son’s arm caught underneath his body so he can’t turn  in his crib where his torso shakes, broken record-like, because he can’t flip over at night.  It takes me back to that place. It takes me back. It takes me . No matter how often you talk to the night the night will not tell you its secret name.  Mine is Lola. As I hum this, mosquitoes hum my scalp, off-key. I can tell they believe  we can be, in the blood, anything we want, but I want to be liked, as if I was a girl bent  over the hood in twentieth century floodlights. Shut up and rotate the tires. Rare is the mechanic  who replaces your brake pads for free and then castrates squirrels in the off-market quiet  of his own shed, said my father, the philosopher- rat in a dream perfected by twentieth century ennui.  No matter how poorly you flirt with the tomatoes, the tomatoes will blush, delicious and American  as the fear of not being fucked back the right way , and though I’d be remiss to say what constitutes  the right way, it is all about atmosphere; up against the fence, which is faceless; inside a swarm  of hands and genitals you can feel in the blood where you are anything you want for five thrusts.  Before the garage door opens, I’d like to ride you again, dear bicycle, if only to where I’ve already been .           I know when it doesn’t flinch at my arrival, that the rabbit in my front yard is dead. I knew this under yesterday’s  sun, when the rabbit tried to move and could do nothing but stare at me, drowning in my merciful shadow.  I have returned today to see that my home has found death, or that death has found the shadow I fled to.  The rabbit is so small, the grass has barely bothered to part for it. I wonder if it will do the work for me, and pull  the rabbit into itself. I’ve seen a street do that. I’ve seen small creatures left on a sidewalk, their bodies elongated and still  until someone confirmed that they would never pull the world into their lungs again, and then they were gone, as if the concrete  had not been fed. But it is insatiable, the tar and the earth and the blood it demands. I find a shovel, because it is still  hot out, and my daughter will want to play here. I assume we all dance among the dead, especially if we don’t know any better.  I do not want her to see the rabbit like this, where the rabbit is no longer a thing as opposed to a thing left behind, but I do not  want her to not see it either, as I don’t know when someone she loves will leave something behind that she no longer recognizes.  And isn’t this what I went to college for? To buy a home in a place where my daughter can learn about death from small animals  instead of classmates? I learned that animals flee a scarier thing unless they have forgone fear or are already dead, because  one time a police officer told us to stop, and we ran into the arms of a new night, except for Big Kevin, who must not  have been scared, or was already dead, either way, the next day, he was still on the sidewalk, and the day after that he  was gone. I do not know if the cracks of his burial took him in or who was assigned the shovel. My father told me that I didn’t  have to go to Kevin’s funeral if I didn’t want to and that someday we would move to a neighborhood where  this doesn’t happen. But it is too late to teach me about what gets left behind. I am still afraid of what may find me  though I no longer flinch.           Last summer I learned to walk into an open mouth: white skylines caged around my neck like a city on a leash.  I think of the way the boy spoke—as if trying to swallow a plum—& realize there is no easy way to say close. I’ve  fallen into cathedrals and landed on my feet. I’ve strung and unstrung a cello with my veins, still beating.  Because in the dark, what matters most is how the shutter of a throat closes & not how empty it is. I still remember the night  I saw a stranger’s hips rise like a scaffold, his hair on fire— the kind of fire that shouts the need to be abandoned. So  I left. It’s how I learned to walk away, they say. My sisters frozen in the field, palms pressed against a corpse meant  to be mine. When the boy turned back, I set the maple tree on fire. We watched from the road. Two bodies split. Tell me he came from the body & not from religion. Tell me how the man inside the bullet  turned into a fist raised up against the rain. How he walked into the toothless mouth of the dance  floor just to watch another ribcage unhinge into bleach-white petals. I will never know what it means  to be afraid. As in compressing a body into a bruise & praying it will never be unclenched. As in  boxing a mouth into a sound- proof oven, lungs scattering into a crooked ellipsis. I am  watching this war outside a box made of mirrors: when I dip my hand inside, it comes back pebbled  with saltwater, as if swiped against some stranger’s jawline in need of another person’s warmth.  In the sky, there are white vultures circling a blood-lipped cathedral. I let the sunrise steep. Each morning, a mug of coffee  I palmed but didn’t drink. If you stayed asleep, I’d slough off infidels  for hours on our muted television, wait for you to notice my heat signature  no longer pressed against your back. This became my new normal:  you wore only a bath towel for the entire day. I slipped the knot,  pinning cloth to rib, and you didn’t mind.  I convinced myself nothing existed beyond this town’s drowsy borders.  Somewhere south, my brother took a safety razor to his thigh,  and I didn’t care. I rolled out the paisley blanket  as Lake Cayuga’s cold breeze cracked over us. We drank wine  in the afternoon and fell asleep in public. I grilled chicken in the rain.  Somewhere, my mother asked for money, and I disconnected my phone.  I acted like I knew how to choose the most delicious pomegranate.  The gorges bursting through town were so beautiful they enclosed  the bridges with chicken wire. We trespassed along the reservoir,  found a tire swing, and I forgot about my father. Your silhouette,  as it dissolved a half-step behind you, navigating the blackness towards our bed.  Our monotony an aubade that taught me my hands could do something other than hurt.  You shaved the divots of my back I couldn’t reach. I tackled you  in the cherry orchard, slathered the juice against your skin. You clasped  and unclasped my belt, leaned in when we kissed. I can’t remember  why I ever read the headlines. Lord, I don’t care where you drop bombs  so long as it isn’t here. Who could bear to interrupt this temporary dusk  as it broke over us and yoked to dawn? We slept through. When they say that water is a staple, they mean that it folds in upon itself like science fiction. A landscape  flooded or parched or polluted— leave the details to the guys in set design. What matters most is the romantic  pursuit of what we’ve always held to be our birthright. A lemon wedge. Pucker up and take it like a man. I. Sometimes, blood on fresh snow like an opening. Sometimes, the apartment stairwell back-lit, hallways laid bare for miles, tunneling throat. The woman next door presses her palms to the floor in gold-light, feels for pulses below, comes up empty every time. The dead dogs humming. The rise. Blue movements: telephone static, someone thumbing a bruise. Too much on either end. The glow & pulse of the tongue: my mouth as wide as this room & just as empty.  II.  An imagined summer in the foothills, hot breath and sweat. Something that bruises from a distance. Something electric, under-tongued. On the roof, we stared at the sky until the colors swallowed our eyes and the scene went flat and our palms were sent scavenging, waiting to swallow the black. Bones simmer in their own patched space, wider than earth. These nights: I swear I could sink through the carpet. I swear: the sky as my head in whiplash. I think in soft-blows: the backwards melt, white tennis shoes burn soft as snow, rot like teeth. Boxes of yellow puppies. What I lost when I didn’t look at you. Coney Island summer, the burn of the teeth. And the day swollen with light, the strawberry patch, every wound after the first was a reminder, sky broken-back and faltering. How there was no grave marker for where I first burned.  III. You walk into my dreams in marrow light. A sky froths and stutters over children skating on a frozen pond, spits up ravens that curl and shrink. When we were children, a sled crashed into an oak and blood spilled cotton-soft. Words shatter this type of lightness. But in this dream, it is my body splayed over the ice, palms sacrificing themselves to the sky, an empty threaded pulse. You walk past me and my eyes cloud until I’m blinded and the scene repeats.  In the years afterward, people will stand here without hurting and never know. I’m thinking about glow sticks  underwater, a girl I loved swimming  in the pool, her body like a dark lamp  over neon coral. I’m dancing  and thinking at the same time  which results in weird wavelike gestures,  freeze-frame contortions. The DJ thinks  I’m hopeless, but who cares?  Memories are like cravings  that can’t be filled, and because  all memories beg  to be replayed—I really get into it.  I cut through the air faster and faster  in pursuit of a dark room  where I coolly untie our swimsuits  to lick chlorine from her neck-  line, working up to the light switch  I can’t seem to find because  she didn’t undress and that’s why  the room is dark. She never left the pool.  There’s nothing to remember.  Shame is the movie of my life  where nothing happens. There are no  swiped wine coolers  in the Coney Island’s well-worn lot. No dogs  chained in backyard grottos, boys  on skateboards threatening chase.  And when, years later, the mother of a friend  I haven’t spoken to since boyhood  calls to say that he had finally—  that’s how she put it, finally —stepped over  the threshold of his own life  with a pocketful of rocks  or a tumbler of bullets—the truth is  I can’t remember which—  I don’t call her back.  I don’t tell her  the lime tree outside  my apartment is, in fact, a lemon tree  that only recently decided to flower.  That, for months, its fruit remained  stubbornly green, pinched,  and I juiced more than one  leathered pouch into an off-kilter  batch of guacamole.  On the call I never place  between California and Michigan  I don’t say that, once, at a party,  I scaled a condo stairwell to hang  my adolescent torso across a rooftop’s ledge  and considered letting go  until a girl offered to pull me  from the alcohol buzz of my sadness  to splash across a pool’s neon floor, and lie  in the lawn, and wake still wet and well  past curfew, and even in the face of this  small kindness, I—being young and frightened—refused.  I don ‘ t, I don ‘ t.  What a moving picture  my life could have cut together.  Instead: I stroll along a street. I stand  against a wall. My friends in the audience  ask: When does this thing start?  In the dance hall, the DJ’s record  skips, each spun note swung  square at my breastbone.  There are spotlights in the rafters,  watery coronas  I can’t escape.  There’s a disco ball  coming straight at me.  All I can do is dance.  i.  How to say this? A pearl- handled cleaver pulled  from its block, a stone-whetted blade laid on the throat. I remember  this was what we woke to: his father shouting good got-damn and crazy bitch ,  his mother crooning hat in hand and get on out . Barely double digits, we drowned  their blazing howls with poorly dubbed kung-fu. Its audio—all vowels:  Aah!                 Eeh!                  Ooh! When we took to streets, we grooved  beneath the flattop net’s webbed mesh to boom-bap beats of Spalding  bounced on cracked concrete. We cradled stereo to cheek. Why not? We lived  inside that noise: bass-shook, carpet trembling. What were we, but boys?  ii.  His father left. His mother shrunk. We grew into anoraks and boots. With keys in hand,  we took to streets in slick cars finning fast. This was Detroit. Here we crooned  our Motown tracks with trembling vibrato. How we loved the bass’s  howl, leather seats that whispered  Ooh.                 Ooh.                 Ooh.  When his mother hit him, we sang. Good got-damn! We didn’t know the lyrics  for snow and blood in hair. It was always winter. I wasn’t  always there. His mother laughed like a blade. She was well practiced  and steady. She knew how to cut kielbasa and grits. This was Detroit.  She knew her men. Said g et on out. And so we drove. The windows down,  we’d bounce and groove and shout.  iii.  Bom-bom-bom            shang-a-lang pop  We can’t stop don’t stop won’t stop pop  Bom-bom-bom            shang-a-lang pop  We can’t stop don’t stop won’t stop pop  Doo-doo-doo              shush-shush shush  iv.  Of all this, nothing’s left. Gone: apartment doorsills steamed with rain, spaghetti-scorched  lasagna pans, laughter breaking on the pane. This is Detroit. Sing it. Good got-damn —  and here the tune begins to change. Only half this song is true.  Each boy needs his boogaloo. Wait. I’m trying to speak in some manner of fact.  When all that’s left is a sweat-stained key palmed in my pocket, a cleaver gleaming in its sheath,  I won’t forget. Brother. How to say this? It’s all vowels, now.  I                       I                       I J____. I never meant to leave you  in that place. The slick cars finning past, the concrete  trembling with bass.                      All light unmade you. As the snow fell I stood in the yard behind a house  Left to the city of our birth. Though it wasn’t Even ours I knew that this far north  Each hour becomes a door To the interior, as if to say Open,  Just open & let mercy have Its way . & so I spent my nights  Wandering from one full room To another, holding the thinned father  At the waist, the boy & his sister By the hair. Yes, nothing  Was silent. Nothing Astonished you. Eventually I lost  All interest in their music. Eventually there was Nothing to do but remember, & so  I thought of the only story You loved, of the blind doctor  Standing at his sister’s grave in his own last years. & how, as he knelt, smiling,  In some ancient field covered in vultures, With his arms raised because he’d been  Commanded & because he knew To lift them must mean  A kind of surrender, it began To snow. It just had to. But in the grasses  Of a country that would neither end Nor begin there was no longer anything so clean  Or brief as winter, as surrender Or conquest—only memory, only the slow  Wasting of its harp. And because it was Not yet winter, his widow carried  Their firstborn toward the only border She could think of, then fell  Three miles from a watchtower as the guard Stared & thought of love, of anything  But her & the slow child who only stares At him now, who will not stop staring  Until he makes her. Then snowfall Ended. You kept talking. I touched you.  Snow, as it does, as it must long to do, Covered the yard. Often  I could not hear you for the winds, For their once-terrible invitations.           I’ve bitten the flowers; every bloom in my garden’s genuine.  I can’t understand these vaults within them. Thumb their faces,  find a thin bright dust like pollen or the pigment of a moth’s wing.  Mating colors. Scales. I don’t know. Some remnant of transformation.  They say you can’t reduce the world to weights & measures,  but when Archimedes placed that golden crown in his bathtub—  Eureka —water’s tangible displacement. He ran wild  through the city, joyous, naked. I can’t stop touching myself. Adamant     incessant     the snow and I     refuse to calm tonight  specks flit     splinter like the living     who seek each other  then disengage     not conquest     but gentle repetitions  falling apart     back to the ground     as one     requires no sounds  no different from my father     reaching out to the dead  spreading     paper tributes for his father     in the shape of blooms  gilded squares in orange frames     faux notes tossed to the underworld  bright chrysanthemum     curled     blunt spears seared  whatever they want he said and stoked     the flame in the barrel  cinder surging     I knew I was born with this fright in me  this fascination with the settlement of everything     holds me down  and when I trudge     down the ever-deepening path     holes open  wide mouths waiting to be filled     but what can I give  down there     even the embers are cold     white     inviting Never mind Mars or whatever is bright on the fringe of our solar system,  they are too far—gas, ice and rocks that matter only to our desire to know the unknowable.  They might be bigger than a child’s imagination or small enough to be fixed,  linear on a canvas, maculate, let dry, scraped flat.  That impulse in Cézanne to watch objects settle on a tablecloth unscathed.  There’s an end to a still-life— when the green apples go red,  when the knife and the milk pot float away, or seem to.  The moment you see that, you know they’ll move, again, somewhere. this is destruction         splash of gasoline  a hornet’s nest knocked from the overhang  the bodies      curled  brittle the thorax  the wing  I have slipped in and out  of destinations—  a word that implies more than passing  implies meant to be  smoke rolls up from the south  summer months  the swamp is burning  has burned  will continue                this unvarying landscape  long stretches of highway  the marsh grass  dried golden and hollow  last week I woke with no idea  where I was      or who lay next to me  I am searching for something  less ephemeral  among the young and unattached  a dangerous thing—an eave  an extended invitation  that we should arrive so willingly  at this paper house  that we should stand over it  as it burns        but tenderly  Come closer: this house is full of keyholes.  Glass knobs  fractured, faceted—    You could spend your life here. A door swings open:  time stops  quick as a watch.    Look: there you are,  sitting on the edge  of a bed, a patchwork quilt,  hand raised  to comb your hair.    This is not a farmhouse. There are no chickens in the yard,  no tomato vines  curling up the casement.    This is no bad dream disguised  as something clever.    The hallway’s full of white doors, brass keyholes.  The walls are crumbling, ants carry off the smaller pieces.  Crickets have poisoned the well.    Be still. In the kitchen, a woman hunched  over the ashes of old cigarettes  keeps your name in her basket.           And we came to a series of rifts machines gouged from the land to expose its rawer materials. Down  the granite slopes following the bicycles we stole from neighboring lawns — ah the simple joy of wheels  learning what it’s like to stop spinning — our bodies stripped to the waist and ready  for the river the rains had made from such deep hollows. As this is a childhood edited  by memory I can tell you nothing much about the crash and ripple when we broke the surface  or the panic when those wings we assumed would spread from our shoulders failed to catch the current.  When the girls came later to fan their blankets out over the castoff rocks  and change the shape of their bodies beneath our bodies, I can only tell you there were martins  arguing with the distant huff of horses while beside us the radio cracked on and off about missile-lit cities  in countries we’d someday learn to pronounce. Children there lost in man- made quarries. Spokes rusting in place. When will you leave him?  Soon. Her sweat your coronet.  The body as an assemblage of exit points.  As paperweight & lever. As secret on  another tongue made real  only  in lightning         -flashes between incisors.  The boyfriend’s underwear  pinned to her hips  your mouth’s unwavering mark. Time winnowing a door  down to the shape  of two fingers  held only  with the raw clutch of her body  keeping you inside her.  The same grip of thief on rope  before it becomes  the hangman’s noose:  the moment of discovery crystallizing into the shape  of a boy’s fist. Your  name distilled into fling  also meaning fire .  Which is what comes  when a woman does not sink  as expected.  You swum through that river when you held a girl in  her fiancé’s bed  & allowed her to peel you like rind of fruit  she could not swallow.  Her hair dark reeds  or river snakes.  Her wet mouth the rupture between your name  & what  she made you. What if, the ground grown coarse  with frost, trees overgrown gangling in sleeves of ice  encasing an orange thrown out, yeasted-over—  inches from the fruit, you  shucked your clothes  and lay down into only yourself again?  Sharp and thin the frost is an in; the quiet  woolling everything, a tell.  Well-water a clog of crystal;  cardinal a prick of red working to unclot it. . . If  I pause long enough with my back flush against the frost  I know the names of things are pinched  or widened variations on an animal’s  prearticulate death-huff. An identical steam when I say  either eye or orange . Inside the white puff  it is hard to see the blood-spatter  but it’s there—  the latter giving life to the former.  ___________  By this time the backs of my knees  are bluer than before. Lashes scrim my vision like toothy fire.  The trees now garlanded  fickle-orange.  I want to feel believed. If I tore my clothes into strips and  swaddled the spoiled orange would you believe that there’s a light inside.  Would you if night fell and  the frost pricked into me.  Belief is a sharp bract in a darkness. It’s not dark yet  but evenings when beetles light the land with their moistened backs  a doe crunches near enough to sniff  oils on me—And I having thought  it once more beautiful when hacked into separate, shining hunks—  like the diagram of manhood dissected on the tv-screen, advertising  a man with a pill that would  pass through the halls of himself, a bird  taking in the dark world in contours, whitening the walls  with its cry. The pill a distillation of “stinging nettle”  you’d find  in the yard. The chalk pill  “returning men to a normal existence.” I want to be  in charge of my own disorder, like a hound  raised in a hall closet,  knocking its head against empty frames,  lightless mirrors—but told from the beginning all it sees  inside itself that needs to be done will never be done  outside of darkness.  j  j  the dead  BY JUSTIN WYMER    ask me which births are most important. I smooth the grass. It’s accidental reverence I don’t repeat. What happens where they are happens again and again like inclement weather in an artery. If you snuff yourself out there will be no scentless fawns to overlook again. There will be nothing in rut. You’ll keep loading the same shadowy men with your own wishes, expecting them to see the sky as you: hay. No sun. Just sight departing and departing like a kingfisher’s beak in the sea’s humdrum conversation. This one fact, which is your life in time, is meant to be vocal so why haven’t you slipped your hand into something you’re afraid of. “Beside,” they said to fear, and “alone.” Why haven’t you trembled at the bristling animal inside you, haven’t you touched the chest of a christ and offered to harm him first. O death, the old noir, red raincoat in grey vellum, glossy scream trapped as ripples in the custard. The dead tell me the markets are flowering there, there are snapping flags and salted rabbit, prayers writ on the inside of teacups you buy to blind you after you’ve had your fill. You know the drill. Lonely man walks into an alley of thought, looking to be hollowed. This is the realm of the market just past the flamy-pink onions, where the shadows won’t speak to you. You pick the one that looks most like you, you step in. Fold your clothes before, then after, and step out. all month i dreamt of losing a baby in a coal town— abandoned, graves toxic  from slurry fumes—forgetting its body on a shelf by a clock; raking it in a pile of gold  tattered leaves; dropping it in kindness, a coin in a beggar’s cup. Today  I smell like leaves, or shirtsleeves you can’t wash of sour earth. Today’s another I outlived myself.  Though last night the stars stippled the lake of oil beside the tire, semi-red and gold unlacquered,  like the arm of a blood patient whose doctors are shy, too kind. I am shy and unkind and  no need to tell a freckle of glass slipped into the waterglass or the dead are always cold  as the river chews their collars I’d drink it myself after all. Back then, in the dream,  there were no flowers and the churchyard daisied with split gold bells.  I waded into the river, somehow clean, with the child and climbed the bank-rim out  alone. I’m afraid I see my tongue is of no use, my body a raiment  for a ritual I was too shy to learn. I’ll suffer tongue after tongue of blurry  laughter on my neck not understanding the complaint. In the dream I had fathered  nothing. I drank nothing. I breakfasted on honey in a cellar. Loved nothing; was witness  or web to nothing. I thought to refuse to be a man. For example, were I truly  unordinary, I could lie in moss and in sleep devise horses, dollmakers,  unripened fruit, the cure for faulty blood. I could birth the shadow beneath a stone  and near the shadow that keeps a spirit fed. The spirit piebald humming like I remember  my brother. In the tub faceup eyes white from looking too long inward. In the coal town  the doors stand whitely still in shadows shaped like houses. Even the keys are made of ash.  Keys the shape my brother had been, a buddha whittled imprecisely underwater. In the coal town  my brother would get his child, would go to the river, crooked and watchful, and find  a tiny hand reaching up through the dimpled mirror. In the dream I had no brothers. I had  the child, who was mine. When I wake again, into the fumes and smell of ash,  the grey keys of clouds shadowing the child’s cheek, a septic gravestone, its hand warmer  for my brother’s touch, and sense nothing has changed, the waterglass still webbed, and  the freckle of mirrorglass drunk from it, for I’d already peeled my clothes off and gone  to the river, the finches I’d forgotten brothering in weedy clumps over it, leafscattering  their shadows over its wrinkled silver, and sense nothing has changed, I can chew my thumb,  swallow a half-moon, look in the face in the mirror and say  You are not my brother. I dreamt a land of someone else’s invention. It was a time for big decisions, so I followed four  ghostly Mustangs doing 95 on I-70 into Colorado. I saw Vs of snow geese heading in opposite directions,  passing through each other’s flight pattern like subatomic particles or the sudden astral bodies  of Americans killed last year by other Americans with assault weapons, and I knew it was a sign,  geese and Mustangs shadowing each other in and out of formation like sylphs. I loved them. Who  wouldn’t? Just east of Denver the blizzard hit and we all slowed to crawling, even the semis,  even the Land Rovers. We fishtailed and jackknifed through Limon until half of us were upside down  on the median, the other half praying and peeing. My dream, or whoever’s dream, had not prepared me  for death, though I’d witnessed the palindrome geese and the phantom Mustangs. My wheels were in motion  in a way that reminded me of a marriage I’d failed at for twenty-five years. So I pulled off in Byers  and got a room at the Budget Host Longhorn Motel from a man who looked like a snow angel who said:  We only have two kings left . I lay down on one and slept . The symphony’s out of money again, and no wonder: all those violins, the twisted strands and sponges—who could not think of torture? Last week I read a novel about a man so awful that when he died I wept because it was fiction. I wanted it to be real so that he could really die. I wanted you to die also, and to be feted with a lengthy, organza-filled funeral, so that I could make a big show of blowing it off. I decided to go out and get a tattoo of your funeral with me not there, but apparently it’s illegal here to tattoo a person who’s crying. The trend now is to be interred with beloved possessions: pearl-trimmed gun, gold watch, whatever you’ve got. Some people recoil at the waste of it, but not me. These contused little objects of wealth—they’re disgusting. I just pray we have earth and shovels enough. I pray we have bodies enough to bury them all. raise your voice above   the lights of the city  the street sweeping   the hills the clouds  in no rush      clear your throat  loosen the knots      in your chest  like a hundred strings from a hundred  black balloons     there’s nothing  in the sky you can’t stab with a pin  there’s nowhere    too cool for a flag  everyone is welcome     even your friends  of friends     when the moon is full  the sea cranes     its long neck  the stars floating     on their backs  their lips     gone so blue           Summer again and again in my head.  This time I’m ready for everything. I anglerfish. I terrify. I skin-search only at the bottom of the pool. Say  I’m looking for a mouth  to cover my mouth. My eyes are in a bag. The bag slants open and I a little lantern. Tarnished. Grinning.  Below my floorboards, a gun  translates: anyone would turn yellow in this heat . I plague doctor. I immigrant. Masked for no one’s sake. Words for hands  —all the better to kill me with.  Chaos theory puts me in every iteration of the fall of this country. Chaos theory gives me the trigger. Holds my breath.  I am the native speaker of so much blood.  Of all the wrong angles a body can learn inside its own echo. Washed out. Any body as long as it floats. Any body as long as  I’m the one to put it to words.  I good soldier. I puppet. I puppeteer. I’m tired. My fingers, I watch them shake. All I want is to make something  and never have to touch it again. My mother has a dream in August and won’t tell me how it ends. On the fence the crow counts to ten. In a month we will all be citizens and the man on the radio knows it. Limns us into nightmare:  imaginary capital thrown to the page. Red as a shock to the tongue. And all the lights nothing more than ways to fill containers. What kind of language lets that happen? I don’t know—  is what I want to say but can’t. I hear it all. This can be wire and warp. This can be a story that forgets to move like a story. This can be told and retold—every time in the wrong country. I’ll wait.  *  Act of creation: I dissolve out of the dark. Yellow,  by which I mean white but cheaper. I stand only to warn  and be warned. Keep still. Today I am the body politic. Today I am  the body.  *  My eyes are dry for three years. At breakfast my mother tells me five times to be safe. She remembers how gently the stray grenade slips out of a hand, into a family tree. How gently the hand  slips out of the girl, into its own pale orbit. Nothing is wasted. Nothing is better than this. I’m trying to be specific. On television we are all of us thieves. Or better, the reason the sky looks so much closer than it did  yesterday. The dawn breaks on my knee, acrid and faithless: proof that I come from somewhere. It’s always been too late. Wednesday. Smoke- screen. The crow at the window watches us eat.  *  Act of creation: the radio on my desk—the dial murmurs  away from my touch. My ancestors flicker out  of its jaw, curving smooth as an order to kill. The bulb above my head spitting  in my mother tongue.  *  Autumn now. Dislocated into any other hour, I’d warpath my face bright with tar. The rain sours. It’s breaking records this year. Like everything else I’ve ever touched. Get your gas masks right here—  quick, while they’re still selling them to you. Quick, while words are still words and they still fit between your mother’s bones. Along the highway the billboards, unblinking. I’m speeding. Thinking I could build a house  with all those weapons. But the man on the poster— the intercom, the history book, fixed on the distance from my hips to my chest, holds me down when I cry  fire! in the theater. Progress , he says. Look at you , all safe.  *  Act of creation: turn it off. Turn it all off. Yellow,  by which I mean too hollowed- out even for the birds, by which  I mean starving slowly to life. The radio man,  he sees us. He is so afraid.  *  I will say this: it’s nice being talked about. Too weak to stay. Too good to live. Incandescent at the prophet’s feet. Crow’s wings aflame behind the metal curtain between my legs.  This was going to be about my mother. This is still about my mother. Don’t you know these are dangerous times we die in? Minor chord, first inversion—  foreign girl found splayed in the prophet’s backseat. The woman who raised her, shuddering back into color. No sound. I will say this: it’s nice knowing what I know about tyrants.  *  Act of creation: a world, unarmed. Three times,  check the locks.  *  Sometimes I picture the house, after. The land laughing on its axis precisely because it shouldn’t be. I can’t decide whether I’ve made it this far. Can’t decide how to decide. Anyway,  no human could breathe this fog. Not without someplace to return to. Mother, I miss you. Next time I want to be smarter. As if that will get me out. I want a storyteller here at all times. Look at me,  still so helpful. Next time the crows could sing a song of sickness: these vowels are murder on the heart, mother. They slacken in the throat like dust. Now  love  even leaves are surrendering their last drops of water  final burning  colors to the ground  & now I can see the house across our lake  yet I cannot  wait another staring moment for snow to hold still the birch branches  to cover  the truth of these vigilant trees  it’s more than I can take  our water is still blue  just deprived of light  along the shoreline deer tracks in sand are hearts cleaved & marching  not away  I’ve built a blind from the dock I pulled to pieces  cross-legged & armed warm  to watch Moon rise  bright rock at lake’s bottom one more blurred surface that I cannot walk. The rooster, the bicycle bell, the seagull tapping loam to lure out worms—even the sea; none of these unexpected. But then,  offstage, a drunken trombone slurring wayward melody, a Schubert melody: an engine pulling his tin-thatch wares around a gorge.  A cow, maybe, lowing up slopes of plush and thistle, dung, dome, dew. And her bell: a flattened soup-can, halved and set loose by a Demiurge, around  two clanging pebbles and a rusted key. This light makes flesh of things; mired in skin the eye only traces the ripening-outward to soundfell where air  pleats like muslin; air, like music, sound trans- ubstantiated, lashing in, out of being, brimming once more my grandfather, his hand in mine  a sparrow. And a street in Madras ends in a row of huts, and a woman selling peanuts sings, breaks your heart; and at the periphery the mackled crescent  of sunthrush sea throbbing as behind throat. Enclosed by nothing, attached to nothing, all-entwined, like rain, it’s that sea murmuring  beneath chirp, beneath chime, beneath silversilt-origami- light so freely given, folding, unfolding, in his palm, on mine, the dirt, a word ever on the verge, the sea. Remember, there are other ways that men can touch you , my mother said.  I thought of the man who pushed his thigh against mine on the bus, said how are you still fifteen —  but she meant  so they don’t get you pregnant .  When she told me about men, my mother began her sentences  Understand. Remember.  We’ve all failed our mothers once.  On his mother’s couch, my mouth filled with him, and I remembered  as a young child, my face slammed against that first heavy wave:  how the brine filled my body like a bag.  Understand that his cock became the shape of my mouth and claimed it. That night  he rocked my rigid neck between his hands until it locked. I ate nothing  but my work, spat him warm into the sink.  If I told her I decided to marry the first man who asked me  is this how you like to be touched , my mother would understand. I trade each bite between my mouth and throat, and all my fat pleasure  rings dark with rediscovery. Like the backyard tree that sags with time—  what might I find if I took a saw to it, killed it to learn its health.  Bulimics know death is a disease of increment.  Between my teeth, along my gut, I see the spans the acid’s left:  my pointer finger ringed one shade dimmer than my fist.  I make my body a map of contempt:  grid in the ring of fat at the belly button,  the thighs that grind together. Soon the men will mark me too—  the mirror assenting, night-dark— but in the morning,  the same creases where my body bows. The same plentiful  famine. My hungry throat already claimed.           I’m so done with God & honking; I attribute my new anxiety  To the fact there are three mutually exclusive remotes On the coffee table. A test-tube baby is hatched with a serial  Number instead of a name & every word she utters will be recorded.  Her cloned twin—they’ll beaker every drop of moisture She ever produces: eighty-four years’ worth—and this is the new  Conceptual art. I believe gadgets are erasing our internal  Lives—the world escaping from its straitjacket. Automatic doors have their own agenda. If only I’d taken  The butter dish out to soften the toast would not have  Disintegrated with this morning’s aggression. I fantasize what I’ll have time to accomplish in the time  It takes the coffee to finish percolating. I don’t percolate as much  As I once did though erections are still somewhat involuntary. I sobbed when I carted the felines to the Humane Society  When my pregnant wife’s asthma flared up but they were  Missing from their cardboard box. Then things got even Stranger, like a paperboy delivering the Sunday Edition  With a duct-taped mouth. Domestic equilibrium, however, seesaws:  If the cashier rings up the wrong price you get that item free But by the time I find a good parking spot & unload I ain’t got the oomph  To trek back to the supermarket. I like web surfing Before & After  Photos of meth addicts, mug shots of unmade-up movie stars In orange jumpsuits. I’ve seen young women stick their bare feet  Out speeding car windows; their license plates verify they originated  From another planet but I have no interest in puncturing Their delusions. Remember, my wife says as I leave for the office,  There are cameras everywhere. ( There is no place that does not  See you —Rilke.) I accept the fact I no longer require a television To watch television, but those taunting remotes. When the cloned  Kids were embryos I assembled toys (half-assed slapped them together  Actually) but always found myself befuddled with extra parts— Kept them in a secret box just in case things fell apart…  Working late shift Lexi studies monitor  for the rise and fall of contraction, mare  prostrate in hay bed–lined stall, the night  cold for Florida—then it just happens,  feet slip into rubber boots, a rush to barn,  grunts and snorts and a colt pushed from  the warmth of womb, that familiar pinkness  replaced by concrete cinder block and night  air, steam swirls rising from matted hair,  a white stripe streaks muzzle slick with mucus  and confusion, legs flailing under the weight  of life—the mother laps her tongue against  newborn, cleans blood left by placenta,  a last reminder of that prior existence,  all the while Lexi watching on, a median  between two worlds, horses indifferent  to such divinity, like an angel visible only  in the quiet hours when rats scale power  lines and mud-caked scrubs give way  to feathered wings and the silence of flight. The basil haunts the cathedral of not-quite-frost, invisible apses and vaults blueprinted  in the air. The last surviving plant, gnarled hands and scoliotic stems, is the church’s sacristan.  You make it bleed because you can, by mashing it with the broken teeth of garlic, adding olive oil  as a kind of joyful weeping. Then the squirrel-brain walnuts rattle as the Cuisinart  declares the end of summer. The altar gleams, the paten dreams a body into being born again  on Christmas Eve because the sacristan believes the way the basil plant believes:  rigid and brittle and of a single mind. A dozen priests have come and gone,  a dozen heirlooms red with the reflux of contrition— too much wine, too many hands  of poker. But the sacristan, because she was plain and simple, stayed and grew pungent in the hours  before she left her resin-scented room to ready up the church for Mass. I used to use pine nuts,  but they’re so expensive and have a stale taste even fresh. I used to go to morning Mass  in the dark. We sat in the pews, a broken chain, while others woke to the morning news.  Garlic means learning to taste pain through to sweetness. Garlic’s the chill on the nape  of the neck that you’re sure is a presence. Turning, you see only charcoal  and a silence so deep a footstep leaves it pregnant. This holds you in place.  The crushed leaves are regret, and the warmer the bread they’re spread on, the brighter  your outlook on winter. Green can be exaggerated, heightened, because less  is not more in most cases, though winter brains love to rub a paradox together.  I’ll always love the Catholic church and pesto with the same set of knives moored just under my sternum,  and they, like the sacristan, don’t give a damn who recites the prayers, just as long  as they’re said. My mother had a priest friend who seemed so genuine.  When it came out that he’d done what he did to a boy we all knew, my mother found other portals  to divinity; she didn’t need to go to Mass each week. I have never heard a sacristan  speak, but recently, I watched a woman at the Clarion Hotel in Fairmont, West Virginia,  cook, stock the breakfast buffet, bus tables and wash dishes by herself  while we and 50-odd football fans filled our faces. She didn’t speak to anyone,  but sped from task to task, a wispy, gray offering—  Take and eat. This is my body. Sometimes there’s no room for the third person.  Sometimes I think of artifice as if  my hummingbird heart can’t hum or slow,  so I set down my thoughts on a twig  and say “I am not I” over and over  until I’m more comfortable with not being I  so I can hide something in the third person.  I sat in the stacks imagining every voice in every book  on every shelf saying themselves out loud at the same time.  That’s how I imagine infinity and loneliness.  New York City at rush hour, Paris or Berlin.  I want so badly to separate them all out  and listen perfectly so I don’t have to be  a voice a part of anything, so rather than the third person  there will be only a guitar’s sound in the night,  not strumming, but picking out each note  in Moonlight Sonata, like a single leaf off  the willow I used to climb, responding to a single wisp  of night. Behind all this some great happiness is  hiding. And still, most nights, I sit in the dark,  knees drawn to my chest and all the words I know  dangle like ghosts I can’t grip, can’t stop gripping . You are my personal Twitter. Everything’s meant for you, my single large following. Every text or tap, every language trap. I’ve walked so far  down your street, I might as well keep walking. How much can I say before I get to the end? I swing the loaf of bread. This film isn’t French  isn’t film. It’s French fly season. Above your bowl, the swarm. Above your bowl, I’m warm. I’ve sung so far down your throat my mind’s well—  Keep singing! Was everything worth it, up till now? Can I account for my comma? My ! A comma mistake: everyone’s making it. I come in and take  your apple, nipple. Stand closer. We know not to waste a single space but neither of us is sure about all the breaks—how much does this count?  We eat up the hour lie down liecloser nearly time for me to be leaving. Our pastpastime. An hour lie between our you&me: it’s only you & me.      double portrait  BY BRITTANY PERHAM    The likelihood I’ll talk to you today is very small. I’ll shut in. My mind will loop some pictures on the wall.  Today is very small: a matchbook with an open flap, a picture on the wall, a postage stamp, a pocket map.  A matchbook with an open flap won’t bring back the bar, nor the postcard stamp and pocket map we bought. We got that far:  the back of the day-lit bar, the third round of G&Ts. You bought. We got that far- away look, two divers in a sea.  The third round of G&Ts; a few mean words. Look away. Two divers in a sea, no lamp or tether cords.  A few mean words: the writing on the wall. No lamp or tether cords. Today is very small. A brightness in the kitchen; a willow holding sunset in the hoop of its dress—  while my mother set the table, I heard my father’s car surrender in the driveway.  I wanted to shine. To make my body burn. To unlock every glass case where I used  to store all my silences and watch them pirouette on the cedar floor.  It took so long for me to understand why she turned away—  shame for having bought me the gown, for wishing I’d been a daughter.  I wore pink tulle. I wore myself. I spun until I could no longer see  my father, standing in the doorway, his head in his hands. Now, the shadow-selves are razoring off  the heads of dandelions. They know I have been hiding  behind red clovers and a rusted door.  In vulpecular prairie wind, I’ve been. The almost-boy  in the feral box. The skin in the dress  and my rattling kith of cornflowers  bruising the hardwood floor. It is a crime  to be surrounded only with yourself,  said Mother. My hair always  refused to lie down even as she combed it flat.  Soon, the bowl of me will empty.  Something winged will stand at this door.  He’ll breathe in. He’ll use every one of his teeth. ∞ In shop class, that redhead with the jumpsuit zippered from throat to crotch, trilling, Boys,  don’t touch my zipper , until they trailed her like goslings, transfixed by the shiny metal pull. The couple caught  naked in the science building bathroom. Backhand whispers, But I wouldn’t even take my shoes off in there! And how many  eighth-grade dance parties in the country club boathouse, some girl in a corner crying about some boy, some boy nervously plucking  the wales of his corduroys, waves lapping—unheard but always lapping— as I got freaked by the Pagan twins to a Boyz II Men slow jam. Confused  girl meshed between two confused brothers, I tried not to stare at the girls I wished against me instead. And every day those hallways: crowded cattle shoots, musked-up clusters of young bodies, slap of sandals, snap of bra straps, high sweet stench of mall-bought perfume. My nose to the back of another girl’s  neck, close enough to see a single strand, escaped, curling beneath her collar, the gym class dampness between her shoulder blades. Sometimes it was all I could do to keep my clothes on. To keep from moaning  aloud. Once a bucket—an occasional, embarrassing slosh over the top if jostled—now a sieve, desire leaking from every pore. Which is why I tried so hard to be harder. To use the world as my whetstone, sharpening  myself against each day. My body cried out for armor. Big boned, broad shouldered, I was built for it: forced into a dress with shoulder pads, I was the 80s’ littlest linebacker. So I began to run, clanking  like a tank around cul-de-sacs. Began to climb, building biceps strong enough to stiff-arm the world away. Even my heart grew heavy, grew into one more thing to carry.  ∞ Regardless, each March, the swarms arrived—my gut-wrenched need made visible, made just as repulsive as I’d imagined it to be:  windshields caked and rendered useless, radiators choked with the bodies of black and red lovebugs, kissing bugs, fuck bugs, a horror movie  façade on every building, curtains of them unmoved by the breeze—a mob, a building blackout. And I couldn’t help  but envy them—those ardent bugs, coupling for days, even in flight—their lust answered, each writhing insect partnered.  Their desire so singular, their purpose was obvious: they didn’t even have mouths to feed. Let’s be commies together. The share and share alike kind. I have eight hundred and twenty-three dollars. A broken left big toe nail. This poem and a cat sitting on my lap as I write. Syphilis or a cold. A woman offered to hump William Carlos Williams full of syphilis so his brain would have spirochetes and his poems the genius of madness. She was a sexual commie but water’s the biggest communist of all. It’s in trees, leather shoes, ampersands, beach sands, and the poor rivers never get to sleep. I dreamt my legs were pogo sticks. Now that I’ve told you, you’re richer by an immeasurable degree of hopping. One hopes to go higher. One bounces to the eye level of a rose. Then one notices the rose-of-Sharon towering above the rainfall and commands one’s thighs to work harder. This is the School of Aspiration you’ve heard so much about. When I was nine, a boy climbed too high, fell into a silo and ceased to be a boy. At school, we turned our confused expressions toward each other, each of us a mirror of not knowing what becomes of the little hands we carry at our sides. At roughly the same time, with approximately the same tears, we began to be older. We still enjoyed the story that a big yellow ball rolled across the sky’s blue playground every day, but none of us believed it anymore. This was the end of unity and the beginning of the desire for union. If you mail me an impression of your face in a cloud, I’ll kiss it and send it back. Enough of this and we’ll be an unstoppable political force. You over there feeling connected to me over here feeling tied to the woman who stops by my house six days a week, the mail just a front for the old habit of lighting fires in the distance for ships at sea to see the shore they’re trying to reach without it killing them.  I have a horn growing from my forehead. Like my worst habits, it’s invisible to me. These include yelling at crickets to shut up. Apparently I do this in my sleep. I’ve been hoping to build a cathedral in my sleep. How cool would it be to wake up to Notre Dame on the front lawn? You don’t have to say very . The very is implied by your existence. Any reasonable person is in awe of large buildings created to meet God. As it’s impossible to meet God, the buildings are incarnations of our desire to do the impossible. The horn grows down and over my nose. A lover once drew a sketch for me. I loved watching her hand. It was muscled and veiny and seemed to think for itself. Her face scrunched while she worked. She looked like a rose struggling to bloom. Concentration is its own little room. No windows or doors. I get that way kneading bread. I often look up from kneading bread and realize it’s changed from summer to winter. She liked the horn. The dancer liked the horn. The nurse liked the horn. I’ve dated many women who do interesting things. They all believed the horn was a confession—the horn is me admitting I’m ugly inside and not trying to hide it. But they’re all gone and the horn is here. This is worrisome to think about metaphorically. It suggests I’m married to the horn. That there’s no escape from the self. But what better use of escape hatches than the self? Don’t say submarine. That’s the obvious choice. Say cloud. Say fire. Say if you could open your shadow, you’d jump through.                                                                                                           You must think this house is the world, the oven door a dark mirror  in which to learn your face. We’ve been inside so long, you don’t know  a living thing when you see one through the window: grackles  blacking the dead grass, sycamores bone-white and eerily  double-jointed. I bundle you to my chest and step outside, opening  the umbrella. This is the world: a room that goes on and on—  no walls, no buckling plaster or cracked ceiling. New as you are,  you aren’t the only novice here. What I thought was a bird—  a large, low-flying white bird— is a plastic bag. Even the rain knows  only one shape. Look, it’s drawing circles on the puddles. at the Virginia Military Institute Museum in Lexington, VA  It may not be his & yet it may – the gun Lewis carried from Philidelphia to the Pacific, the one he called  great medicine & set off, smokeless, pneumatic, sans muzzle flash & gunpowder cloud, flintlock-free  & firable in rain, to amaze the natives & which he accidentally shot through the hat of a passerby,  grazing her temple, before the expedition had even departed. It gleams behind glass. Yes, I think  it beautiful, but in the way of true tools: the tale of its travels, the hands that touched it. Speaking  of tools, I can’t help but wonder how often they run the vacuum in that glass case above my head, where  stands Stonewall Jackson’s stuffed pony Little Sorrell, who lived long after Jackson’s death first as a POW,  then a tourist attraction at southern fairs & rebel reunions, at the end held up for visitors in his feebleness  by a sling round his belly, till the sling slipped, Sorrell fell to the floor, & broke his back. Fortunately you don’t need  a horse’s bones to stuff him. His skeleton’s ashes lie buried at his master’s feet, while his hide dims  under museum lights, the tufted hair released in gentle molting, its decay wholly, holy, despite delay. In a prehistoric painting, the sea is a slumbering green picture  with one rock by the sideway. The young are bounding into waters, laid awake by the shore, finely lined  with the confessing greys: sloped like shoulders, like the currents shearing the strident’s feet,  now porcelain and hungry. The sand crinkles as if the earthen husk is flowing into each other  like wet paintings, sonic knockings on white-chip walls, the whisper of a curved brine gathered at the back  of an orchard. The sun is abating, like eyes at sea, next to the knead  of the white rocks from the underway. The young are damp from the rivulets, folded into the granite rocks: the slope  gradually heading into abyss. III.  We wanted to film financial risk: nothing domestic, no three-martini business lunches, no conversations that fractal like snail shells.  Our method would be formal, like one wide brushstroke of dark acrylic paint—I won’t even say the color—in a frame. We set up  our cameras to catch the last dregs of daylight squeezed through an alleyway like a ruptured membrane or softened vein,  the city angelic in the distance wavering chalky thighs, secreting an innocence between the knuckles  like someone dotting umlauts over the o’s of English words. Like a studio technician snoozing among an ecosystem of knobs and lights,  we coordinated fraud with the circular saw of our belief—switched on and slicing fast through the before & after. What is iron,  but change? What did we catch in the light, disappointed by how quickly life returns?  Mare Serenitatis , the empty sea of the Moon.  IV.  When the cymbals mimic smoke seeping into the theater, a prolonged  asphyxiation like winter holed-up in a cottage whose cracked fireplace  emits a shapeless agony, dying a little more each day from the scent-  less fumes. At what point must we redirect? We asked for music  to follow the action, seductive, complex but hopeful. The composer charges us  $2,000 a song. How much does each note sleep through the set? How much for the death  a soundwave stretches into a horizon the sun already splashed red then silvered?  I want twelve songs, one for each electric hour before the clock flips everything around.  I want to embarrass the law into giving you John Lennon’s voice, free, and all the happy  birthdays not in The Jerk , Sixteen Candles , and The Birds— where a girl with a white napkin  tied over her eyes plays blind man’s bluff—the song evaporated from the actors’ mouths into clouds of  psychedelic figure$. The composer who wets crystal goblets with the tip of her finger and rims  the transparent lips of the glasses into song might pay off her credit card now, I hear. Well,  what do I know about love other than the pixels of organ dragged out of the synthesizers throat,  so much warmth and robotics in the conjured crescendos, how my mother must have sang  to me, half out of habit as she packed her bags in the night, not knowing her voice would sear  me like the pocked face of a planet, the glimmer of a last note, all she left behind.  V.  Give me Al Pacino in HEAT, all flab and satin. Val Kilmer’s pixie-blonde  mane as he fingers the venal riggings of a bomb. They don’t make heist movies  like they used to. I want to be robbed sometimes, unaware of what’s been  lifted, to not understand my own wealth as the ingenue never realizes her beauty  until it’s been siphoned dry. I hired the scam: pistol at my throat in Venice, my cardigan  knitting my wrists useless. The way swans attack children in lavender shadows,  I say, Do it again . The motorcycles arrive, a ladder lifts to my window ledge, and all the men  climb in—isn’t this what the libido wants, America? All breasts and no  clit? Let’s publish the screen in dollar bills, act, crazy, and quit. Lights, camera— . I can’t explain the nature of my need to photograph  the missing  signs hung up in foreign cities, but it grew  like a bulb  in the spring where I used to knead my sweet  fixations like  batches of sourdough bread. I wasn’t able to speak  in French  or any tongue until I opened your mouth with mine, the holy  O-to-O  which kept me in the tangle-sticks above the cliff, atop the  long stairs  to your cellar, where you keep your bottles of candy pink  anti-heartburn.  Given any three points, there is a single corresponding ring –  is it  true? I doubt the line of questioning but the dots of zero dimension  pin parts  of me in place. The shape is always changing, like living  inside of a –  the circle, I mean, is shrinking and growing as we go about  our daily  transmogrifications, turning kernels fat from sun into  higher emotions,  acting factory for dopamine, for melancholy.  Who needs  a miracle? I wrote this on the hill they call Mont Royal in Montreal,  needling into  the future as I always do, living on mind-slides lit by the dying  light bulb  of an old projector, whirring and whetting its levers with new  spitting images,  stacked into the abyss of a memory drive, where they  blink unstitched.  The deconstructed quilt is just a heap of scraps and holds  no heat  on the screen of my laptop, which is murmuring: were we ,  are we ? Edith, I’m done with things That are bigger than me. The moon can go fuck itself, For instance. The moon with its eyes  Full of unkind marbles, its hands Like two slabs of flank meat On an iridescent tray. I used to Think the moon was mine  And shy, how it followed me Everywhere, at a distance. One night each month The moon would not show up.  I’d call and call, thinking I’d done Something to scare it away. Edith, I’m done with things that don’t Come when I call them.  When I was younger I studied Grief, like how an artist studies art History. Trying to see what others Had already done with it  In order to do it better. I would Walk around at night watching Grief as it shone, blue As milk, out the windows  Of people’s houses. Edith, I’m afraid All the time. Edith, my life is a long sequence Of self-fulfilled prophecies. When I found you  Beneath the kitchen radiator, what was Left of you, like a teaspoon Of strawberry jam, it all made so much sense, That feeling. For a while I wasn’t afraid  Of anything. Truth is, I feel safest When I feel lonesome. To truly love Someone is spooky as hell. I’m always Waiting for a roof beam to fall  On his head, for a pack of wolves To get in through the doggy door while We’re sleeping, or for him to leave me At the gas station. For him  To just get in the car and drive Away while I’m standing in line With a pocketful of quarters, waiting To buy two Diet Dr. Peppers. I have been lying a lot lately. I texted him to say I had a dream about him, Made up a whole premise. A post-apocalyptic Waterpark somewhere outside  The Ocean City, New Jersey of my childhood, vaguely Fourth of July. I wrote the story all out In my head, so the facts would line up Should he have any questions:  The rides were in striking disrepair, like an ancient Graveyard dug up, the wretch-sweet Stench of long-ripe fruit, spots of blood Along the hem of my dress  From where the green flies had bitten My legs. He had two of my brown Bobby pins hooked onto the pocket of his shirt. The sky glowed  A silky purple in the potassium noonlight, Like we were inside A plum and some needful giant Was holding a flashlight to it, trying to see  Through the skin, checking for worms. I wonder what it means That he didn’t have any questions, That I never got to tell him any of this. You, Edith, are the only one that’s heard  This story. And so let me just say In my defense, that no lie is ever entirely Invention. Sometimes I really do feel like I am living  Inside a piece of fruit. That this is why I have such a sweet Tooth, and move through my days slow as an ant In sap. Sometimes I really do  Feel like I’m about to be consumed By something I can’t see. Cats have been known to eat The people that once cared for them When left alone in a room  With their bodies. I am not naïve, Edith. I suspect you would not hesitate To do the same to me. Appetite, The gorgeous white stallion galloping  Through our bodies every Few hours. How much bigger it is Than any of us. I once watched Six daddy longlegs pinwheel the ceiling  Above his bed as he told me in his half- Sleep that I was a knockout, one-of-a-kind , The Real Deal . That he wanted to take me On a cruise ship to Nassau, reserve  The honeymoon suite. What tiny And benign tumbleweeds. What rented tenderness We’re allowed in the in-between moments. Trust is an act  Of imagination. First we must imagine a world Without appetites. Edith, when you die, I will all but forget you within a month. I thought it would take much longer  But I saw into the future And it doesn’t. So much goes on Without you. The satellites continue To make promises they can’t keep.           a scarecrow is doing a rain dance out in the field  his rain dance consists of holding as still as possible  through many days and nights that pass with no rain  for as as many days and nights as anyone could possibly endure  and then when it starts to rain finally the scarecrow continues standing still  as if he weren’t trying all along to get it to rain with his silly dance  as if he weren’t wishing this whole time for rain  he holds still through the rain  knowing he has to save his energy so he is able to hold even more still  when it is time to do his rain dance all over again      soliloquy  BY DENVER BUTSON  j  the audience gathers.      but the audience is just corn.        and the corn has been here all along.   the curtain rises.    but the curtain is just  the  sky.       and  its  rising  is  just  the morning.      as mornings have been all along. the spotlight falls on the scarecrow.  but the spotlight is only the sun.      and the sun just happened to fall upon the scarecrow.      the scarecrow takes his moment at center stage. but  the  stage  is  just  this  field.           the scarecrow is only at the center of this field. depending  upon  your  perspective.        the scarecrow clears his throat.        and delivers his soliloquy.   even though he doesn’t really have a throat to clear.     and his soliloquy is just silence.              and silence is not really silence.              because of that dog barking. because of that tractor starting.   because of that  one  or  is  it  several  birds  screeching. but it is silence enough.    and the scarecrow speaks.   or  doesn’t  speak  at  all. with  such authority.   that  it  is  like  nothing  we  have ever  heard  before.                 and  we  listen. profoundly moved by the truth of it.     or the absence  of  any  truth  of  it.      as  we  have wished to be moved all along. When I say                                           endless, what I mean                                         is mist  hovering over                                      the asphalt column of New England,                                      blue  abalone and                                         wampum. Faded cedar shingles.  The tonna shell                                    becoming purgatory. Cape Cod                                             in Fibonacci.  Here                                                     the waves open                                                     and close  like an apology, some                            kind of contritious                                        monster  —Asterion,                                           the lonely Minotaur                                              chasing her  friends.                                                 And laying there  —driftwood                                          half-floured underneath                                           the ocean’s  final                                                     membrane, heaving slightly, having                                     destroyed  itself                                                    in place of seeing itself                                                    destroyed:  these enclosures, these imploded thoughts of intention.  These trees, every pair bodies  holding up scenes of this endless film.      [untitled 312]  BY ASHLEY PORRAS    Dusk, and it is a waste A waste these dimmed fuchsia auroras A waste these muted cries for the cable wires, slumped like silent nooses  I no longer see the street as a tress but as a canal carved from a bullet: distinctly precious, our long violent paths to indifference  Our matutinal suburbs, distinguishing themselves into broken pits of battery acid. This is what I tell myself, when I can bear to look to see  A jet again It’s suicide exhaust wasting imprinting the sky The twilight, this inescapable night which, for now, is lambent and young and unforgiving  –here you are again in your banged delusions, your mad feasts of yourself, in all your twisted newness.  Who will love us in this poverty? Mama grew up along the infected shoulder of a town Where laundry and children hung out open and greasy. One night, as we prepared the raw pears to steam for Lunar New Year, my mother told me about that crackle Of old neighborhood radios and kids who seemed to Curl off the streets like smog, heaving a kind of glory Like loose change and tasteless bubble gum. Mama still Remembers the meatless January when she learned What it meant to be doglike in the way only a hemline Could be vulgar. For her, this was how girlhood had Become forbidden: in the quiet bluntness of a gaze, in A new partition, in the same way we carry on now, a Muted harvest, stripping pieces of skin and watching The pears madden to fists in steam as if they were to Become something we could hold without surrendering: Inglorious bodies of flour and dust. I razed our red hair      so short,    the father confuses his daughter      for a soldier             and the house lights up  in a summer burn. Lie still then velvet-headed, we run for the far side of the lake.  The water    sunken in its bowl      of mud, yet deep enough   to wrap us    in soft webs of algae.  We float on our back, the sky      blue—less, fitted with thin  white  clouds, cut      and cut again       with the black silhouette of wings.  Water-fingers press into     our ears, the corners      of our mouth.  They teach us to     inhale properly so the voice travels  inward,  back  into the belly  and cannot swell the mouth    open. Remember?  I rub my skin   where we separated and       it stings. Water-body,   who is holding who?  I  still     can’t dry off. George Clark is the smallest person on Earth, living in a hole with all his possessions. Five brightly painted tankards, all purchased on the Kansas side of Kansas City. A miniature wooden trolley. An armadillo of clay. His third most prized collection: wine corks by the thousands, each purpled on one end, held in a copper tub big enough to bathe in.  Smoke drifts up from the hole, although George Clark does not smoke. It’s simple: wherever he is, it gets colder, then he breathes. He keeps his second most prized collection high on a shelf: hot sauces from across the country, carefully arranged in a red and green phalanx. Liquefied habanero. Devil Drops. The one that had a naked woman posing with a whip which somehow always came back to the front no matter how far back you hid it.  George Clark cannot move. He calls me exactly one month after my birthday and says Happy Birthday and I can hear his head bouncing off the sides of the hole. The men at the drive-thru window at the liquor store down the street know George Clark by face, by name, in secret. They throw a few lollipops in with the vodka when they see me in the passenger seat. Once he threw me down the stairs.  Once he hit my sister so hard she slid down the wall from the top bunk. I watched from the bottom. George Clark’s favorite food is barbeque sauce. His favorite city is San Francisco. His favorite color is blue. He keeps them lined up in a lit cabinet with all the antique toys he inherited from his mother. She also lived in a hole. And her mother too.  Once he tried to run my mother over with his car in her own driveway. She never told anyone about it —the police never believed—but I saw it happen. I was there. His most prized collection: a slender bracelet gold on his gray wrist, the white hide of a little dog, some woman’s tan slip-ons tossed aside, carelessly, at the earthen bottom of his hole.  One night he drove himself to the highest point east of the Mississippi in his old burgundy sedan. When he got there he looked out over his land and whispered to it and put his face in it. There, George Clark is the governor. George Clark is the king. I have built villages around his absence.  Have I returned all of Beirut: the trash made high as an Ottoman wall  to keep the city out of the city. One gull inside an airplane engine:  I haven’t seen Meimei in two years. I’m afraid of her funeral. The six closets  of petite size pantsuits and muumuus. Oh yes, I’ve wanted too much of her,  of the mountain saints we returned to in the winters,  to ask for the right way to drink, the gay bars where I tried to turn men,  seaman dialect, waxed everything, sunset I dyed my hair after, sea I refused  to swim in for years, until the night I did, a white boy’s hands pulling the tide,  seven million years of dead mornings, like a grubby sheet over our heads.           We left our brushes.  In the garages of the rich we feasted.  Or peeled the lids, anyway, from cups of applesauce.  Slim Jims.  Gas station nacho boats.  Oh, & we delivered ourselves unto the pleasure rest could be, & of the food & welcome quiet from our radio, which would have, since eight, blared its chorus of glam metal & Clapton across the lawns the little invisible sprinkler-heads of Gates Mills, Ohio kept deathless.  We slept.  It seemed from that distance almost noble, the work of a morning.  Those magnificent rigs of scaffolding we climbed to paint the eaves three stories up, though it could appear so— noble, that is, or heroic—only at that still point around which history, we knew, turned like a wheel.  It was simple, our work, & dangerous.  A man died.  I read Marx those summers, in which the rulers were always lying down upon the backs of their workers.  Were always, Marx wrote, just one of those vast contradictions capital is structured by.  To wit, its intervals of splendor & madness.  The emergence— in Florence, the fifteenth century—of credit in the vaults of the Medici, while one block south, scholars believe, the beggar-class of the Renaissance waited.  Which meant, you will have gathered, I was not one of them really.  I washed their brushes.  At lunch break I folded drop-cloths & swept our garbage from the floors of the bourgeoisie, a word Marx used to explain it was the last time, those summers, I would feel my power rise inside me like a wave.  They were the summers construction ended.  I left each fall. Such, anyway, was the phrase the newscaster used—two  airplanes, geraniums  blooming up there in the clear, he called it,  blue.  Beauty,  he meant, is at its sharpest set off in high-relief from the backdrop tragedy  provides.  In Christ  Majestic , for instance, etched above the portal at Chartres Cathedral, He  sits resplendent condemning  in a fold of light the writhing damned.  Dominions  of angels adore Him. & aren’t  they all, explosions, mostly floral?  Flames shining. It is like,  another said, confetti  raining.  Paper like a dirty parade.  Picture  someone’s mother, who loved,  as yours does perhaps, puzzles & Scrabble & to walk  the lake path on Sundays, breaking  suddenly into a cloud of texture & color.  Who just  as the flight attendants instructed buckled  her seatbelt.  On beauty like that the fire fed.  Empathy  flared.  Flowers, botanists believe,  birthed themselves petals first from mutations in the gene codes of ferns.  Before  Christ then, roses  rose.  Amaryllis lifted its trumpets.  One  morning orchids  covered the flood plains.  The people of earth, who did not,  strictly speaking, exist yet, wept  then at the blanket of purples & yellows spread  out before them, though never,  of course, considering that inside the aster’s sun another  darker blossoming existed.  This,  I mean, was the season the seed that would kill us all evolved.  Or call it  metastasized.  Inside  my cousin Barbara’s brain stem, cells her doctors are calling,  as of yesterday, stage  four, flower & spread, every  one of them descended,  they tell us, from that early Devonian-era explosion  of life.  Little wonder,  then, that among the quince & dahlias a monster  was born botany  knows now as the corpse plant.  Whose petals, that is, whose ridged  bell-like spathe gave  off for its predators precisely the smell of rotting meat.  We  are always that.  Spectacular,  isn’t it, the arrangement of flowers around a body?  How often  they can mean things  like the blood of Christ is shed for you, for instance, or in  my Father’s house  there are many dwelling places. Stage four means the cancer, my cousin  explains, has spread  widely in the body’s tissues, a system of classification we have made  to picture for ourselves the senseless  proliferation of life around our dying star. So too our terror  alert system’s spectrum  of multi-colored warnings.  To which, when it was over, knowing,  even, its greens  & blues could not protect us, we turned anyway, verbena  tilting toward the sun. For severe  risk, red.  For elevated, yellow.  A swelling  palette of color is what  some astronomers consider the universe to be.  Bright extension.  A bouquet,  say, of fire & ash opening  its petals to whatever other explosion is beyond  this one then shutting. We, the forgotten delta people. The dry riverbed people, Hair calling always for rain, Skin turned skyward wishing for clouds, We stand for blood. We kneel for water. For oil, we lay down, Fingers spread, as if in this way we might skate across the yellow clay of it all Like lagoon insects.  So it is written: Heal yourself, baby. With the tree and the touch, with the turmeric. In this world, nothing brittle prevails, So in this world, grease is a compliment, No, it’s a weapon, No, it’s a dream you had, where it was cold And your mother, seeing the threat of gray at your elbows And knowing that ash is the language of the dead knelt, and put her hands on your face like this And anointed you a protected child, a hot iron in a place of frost. Recall this, and Fear no thickness. Be resurrected, glistening in the story of you. Be shining. I saved some cornbread for you in the skillet on the stove. I saved some cornbread for you in the skillet on the stove. I saved some cornbread for you in the skillet on the stove. I saved some cornbread for you in the skillet on the stove.  I saved some cornbread for you in the skillet on the stove. I saved some cornbread for you in the skillet on the stove. I saved some cornbread for you in the skillet on the stove. I saved some cornbread for you in the skillet on the stove.  I saved some cornbread for you in the skillet on the stove. I saved some cornbread for you in the skillet on the stove. I saved some cornbread for you in the skillet on the stove. I saved some cornbread for you in the skillet on the stove.  I saved some cornbread for you in the skillet on the stove. I saved some cornbread for you in the skillet on the stove. Black revolutionaries do not drop from the moon. We are created by our conditions.  Assata Shakur  it happened under cover of night or early morning depending on who you ask. the hour when the press stops running. when the baker arrives and unlocks the door. the cables came down, silent and charcoal, matte and slithering. they hit the earth and coiled at the foot of a tree, on a bus stop bench, atop a mound of cigarette butts in front of the dialysis center. later when the NASA boys looked for footage of the arrival — surely some security camera in some parking lot, somewhere in America…?– that hour was all blank, everywhere, all blank, like as if each of them had a magnet for a beating heart, their veins murmuring  clear it away, clear it away , until the tape was empty.  in the years before, when hateful men warned of the coming, crushing aluminum cans in their hands while their friends threw darts, or in rowboats tying flies, they spoke only of darkness. ‘their eyes will be dirt,’ the men said, ‘and they will cover the windows with tar in the places where we talk to god. they will seize our daughters who will return to us in rags, holding mud babies and asking for a room to sleep.’ the hateful men and their wives wore reading glasses and drank cinnamon tea on the days when they wrote letters to each other about how the coming people would steal, how they loved the sound of grinding teeth in place of real music, how the girl ones were greedy and lustful and felt no pain but made endless noise and how small ones could trick you, looking like children, but their skin was mercury and they could not be shot dead so do not fall for it. they wrote their letters on glass and plastic and metal. they said ‘they are coming and they will paint everything black.’  so they had no words for the moon people when they did come. and the moon people could not be captured. camera lenses looking on them turned to salt and cast white trails across the eyelids of the looker. and the moon people were dressed in every color. they wore saffron yellow and Kool cigarette green and Georgia clay red and they wore violet, they wore violet. and they were loud. as their hands worked, hammering the iron of the jail cell doors into lovely wrought curls and bicycle chains, smashing the fare boxes at the train stations into wind chimes and bowing low to the passengers as they entered– some sashaying through the turnstile, some dropping it low as they went underneath, they sang. the moon people had been listening all this time and they knew all about Sam Cooke and Aretha Franklin and Mahalia Jackson and Marvin Gaye and Missy Elliott, and they sang while they smashed a bottle on the squad cars– a Hennessy bottle or a Coke or a pressed kale juice, whatever was near enough to say ‘this here is christened a new thing.’ and they drove them down my street and your street and your street, the tires painted to look like vinyl 45s and the children tied yarn and ribbons to the windshield wipers and the moon people turned them on high so that as they drove, the colors waved in the sunlight, which was now streaming so clearly  onto the porch where i sat rubbing the rusting chain of the swing and thinking of grass when the boy down the street, who in smaller days I walked to school when his mother worked early, who loved lime popsicles the best, who danced his way from his own porch to the basketball court in the afternoon, who the police had recently declared a man, stopping him mid-two-step to ask questions he could not answer because the query beneath them was ‘why are you alive’ and none of us can say, the boy, he came to me and walked up the steps where the paint is peeling and knelt at my side, and i did not look him in the eye. instead i watched a firefly, the first of the summer, land on his left shoulder, and i thought ‘here are two glowing ones,’ but he did not notice, only held my hand and told me ‘we are free now.’ and i could not believe i had lived to see it– the promised light, descended to us at last. Not the sirens. Not the men  dragging canvas, the canceled-  out moon, the ash windblown  and snarling in our hair. Not  the sick crack of the ridge-beam  or the gun-clapped silence  after. Not the four of us, brothers  and our sometimes father,  our breath knit and drifting,  our useless hands. I mean  when I lift Noah, half-asleep,  to my chest and turn  for home. When I look up  at the windows of our own house  and see the flames  cold and writhing  in the glass. That first time  I say it out loud: I’m  gonna go . And the slow walk  up the drive. And my brother  growing heavy  in my arms.   I find myself in increments of bone: the ridge  of my spine, the pieces of rabbit that I pile onto the countertop. In the dark I reimagine myself  as the protagonist of some movie, a Chinese girl with hard hands & shears for lips. In the movie  I grow a blade from a dead horse, trade my mother  for a cabinet of porcelain. A rabbit I love  wishes its body into the lake. When I’m hungry I steal the song from my mother’s country,  the meat of it nosing for warmth in a small dead place. I ask for my mother back. My favorite word  in Mandarin is 珠, the name of any round thing.  I bury the rabbit, then my hands. In the movie  my mother screams at the sight of blood & I don’t wait long enough to witness the outcome.  There are too many beer bottles in the house. In the end I 珠 my body, silver my fingers, butcher  the horse & ask for my face back. Hunger, the cold bite of it. Two girls pressing coins  into the backs of their hands. Yesterday I stepped into the open caress of a man with my softness  bared & made teeth against the bone of him, thought of you & the rabbits you stacked  in the crossfire. He said he does not know  how to kill, not even to martyr & I handed him a fish, a sparrow. Small things. I want it  to be summer again, to listen to the sound a doe makes when it forgets to breathe underwater.  I want to touch the river without it muscling  into the shape of your name. Last night I dreamt you were made of wine, jawless  & I was silvering my spit into arrows. Instead I coppered my body into a single hurtling fist  & the man fed me his knuckles because he said  it’s where the heart lives. Last night I dreamt I was holding you. It was dark out & everything  tasted like plums & light. You asked me about the coins: the girls & their own undoing.  In reply I named my mouth after a flock of birds  & watched your face turn bone & cavity, the hardness I do not know enough to become. & I could have been something more, a better  daughter, robot, river, saint, angel, martyr, girl. Something you would press your lips to  & worship. Last winter I knelt next to the lake & confused its sheen for another version  of my hands. Now it is summer & the sky  undresses & falls into my hands like a sheath of arrows that I silver into bone. I grow a doe,  a knife. I confess: this is the worst thing that I have ever done. Richmond, teach me  how to kneel in a bathtub without it turning  horror movie or elegy. Tell me about the doe we found in the river valley, its body soft  & motherless like a wound. We rolled the doe in sand & you told me about the hunt,  the sharp bite of muscle. & I want  to be remembered as the girl who cares for small animals & small cities, the girl  who lives close enough to the surface to bite. Richmond, I only eat meat to hear the sound  heat makes against my breath. Richmond, I licked  around the color of the doe’s tongue, a sweet thing I pretended was mine to own. The last time  we saw each other, you were holding a torn flag & I was butchering fish with my hands. I want us  to be like that again: moon-heavy & gutted, dreaming about the girls we could not keep.  Soon enough I find an Earth-like planet, but how Earth-like is only like, is like  how a kiss may be alike but isn’t quite,  or how every photo from Kentucky— how you used to sigh—is only  now a likeness. Or how this bandaged light upends the bruise that became  the sky: I liked you, I like liked you. And we held each other  as we made our child- hoods hush; we strained  to merge like trees into a custom. We held to each other’s hands  even when our notes were misaligned. We would,  without half-trying, alight one upon the other. What is gravity to our horns? We reached  and tore each other plain as walls or erstwhile countries,  and the dream became a sun, beneath me, the land, the fade  of wing,  my every instrument a lyre’s vital music, my every simile, a flame. love it’s only gotten worse my father can’t stop saying your name like a war his nation lost or a miracle  that saved him from an undertow unprompted you rise like a body from a lake before dinner  grace has never been more biblical than in the gasp about your name the quiet  being the inverse of a heartbeat i depended on a season for which there is no dress and i say yeah  and i say yeah dad but you love are a tragedy in my father’s eyes my reflection having just shaved  my skin is tender i say before he can say i remember yes she was just like that i cannot change  that i remember my love i swallow my hands everyday taking the place of your hands on the table   I can’t imagine my father wishing he would rather be anything. Once upon a time, he was a watermelon growing from a box. His mother died. His father beat the blood out of him, and teardrops dripped black from his face into his food. My father’s father made him eat his dinner through himself, the Miracle Whip salad spangled like dew in the garden. This isn’t a figure of speech: my father ate his blood. It’s hard to think he must have been young. He made me stop all my life. He told me to not to be a girl. Whatever I was doing, of course I stopped. He kissed me on the top of the head before I went to bed each night. He was always there. He read to my brother, he read to me from a book of animals. This is a fox’s paw. This is a bear’s. He told me, I’ll give you something to cry about. He never touched me. Bear claw, I said. Winters are easier for bears. I spread my fingers over his. No, my father said. Will her ghost crave what she craves? My liquor bottles               rattling like wind chimes. The medicine cabinet                                  unlatching all by itself. My hauntings are manageable                     shapes, in the form of small white pills. Each one           placed on the tongue is a communion and she is still here. Eyes                         thrown to the back of the head like dice into an alley.                                       Her name fingered in cursive on the bathroom mirror.               I am taking bets, confessing her memory into                      the hum of a dial tone, collecting dues paid with grief.                                                    I am lost without the lullaby of her constant want:                      an addict to point me north. This is a part of it                                      too. I understand the process of coaxing a life away from itself.            The careful surgery of removing a sallow mind. What does the stinging                 of morning feel like without the slow tragedy of                              looking asking to bring the night back? What now? Give me days,             just days and days of nothing but static. Give me empty promises            like flowers rotting in a vase on my vanity until they smell like                     her– a body that’s given up on being a body. Give me something I know.           A man touches you when you do not want to be touched and it doesn’t burn but there it is—a wick.  The body a little bomb that pleasure sometimes lights.  No Buick is safe from the hand that reaches back through that little gap between the seat and B-pillar to fumble softly at your ankle,  no complicated joint with all its crisscrossing papery sinews safe from the humid fire of a hand sent through the dark on the errands of need.  I lived in a swamp then, jogged through August along the crab-fetid ponds  and sometimes I beat him  but most times I collapsed after vomiting what little water my body allowed, tangled up and ropy with phlegm,  and no matter which it was he was always angry after, smoldering, the coarse dark hair on his arms and chest miraculous for not just ashing away.  His body wicked, yes, for how it bent me like a birch to it  but also in the strangled breezes that straggled off the sun-gilt estuary a swaying forest of fuses.  A stinking copse of quivering wicks.  I could. I could make a canoe out of him.  His legs the oars, an arm the tiller, the ribs and spine a sturdy frame over which  to stretch and batten the skin I’ll have shaved and tanned and oiled first.  The other arm a bony thwart.  But what about the waters long and deep and rough between us?  An outrigger, then. Scrap the tiller and the thwart,  the arms booms now fastened to the gunwales  and a leg of mine the float.  I can paddle towards you now.  At night I’ll eat the fish I snag when they try to chew me down to bone. They stood at the bus stop, two schoolgirls, a woman, and a wind: Wind, my hat is made of literary straw, my coat is tattered, my hankie a rain  The glee in poems trails my steps and in my hand there’s a pampered world  whose air  sky  and the tenderness  of its youth  the narcissus of its garment  I made  To write a memory I gathered a memory and to green the marshes I sprinkled friends over the salt marshes, and was at a loss with myself, I the conceited, at a loss with my palm as I collected stones, fruits and people from the hell of the earth to return them as poems that dreams almost leap out of  I was at a loss with myself and with things as simple as water  A god had kissed me on the mouth and lit up, he had released me to my name then called me by it, I stepped down from my body to look about him and saw and was at a loss  I visited my poem in its house, buried its dumb ornament in the dirt and told words:  Don’t come to me  a line on salvation’s platter, exalted  in anticipation and wailing, primed  for deliverance!  Interlocutors and disobedient they came: whichever way I tugged at the drunken boat in my contemplation’s depths, that it might see me as I walked, I the conceited, dreaming of giving light back to the blind, thought back to the foolish when I’m only one  who’s merrily walking in front of the bus However old I get I’ll never be as wise as I was that winter, rounding a barn corner with my cousin, finding the body of a bear, its tongue lolled out like a king’s scroll, its heavy body like an earth with the dead packed too tight, crawling upward, pushing at the dirt. It was pregnant, and dying, and out of breath. We thought of calling a grown-up, but the closest one was six miles east or one giant’s thumb north behind trees we deemed the darkest mile. So we stood there, dumb and untrained in anything that could help. Watching a thing die. Seeing its belly kick. The hardest part of winter is the suddenness of night. How you might spend two hours in the fluorescence of a library’s catacombs and when you step outside it is the vampire hour. Skulking shadows and some people preparing to be drunk, and some people who have been drunk seventeen years trying to make it through without opening the cabinet or stopping by a 7-eleven after work, on the way home. I know something about disease because my grandmother was diseased. Those last years, she always asked where her purse was. She left restaurants with pieces of toast in her pocket, dinner rolls up her sleeve and fish like a Jesus magician. I watched her face sometimes scrunch up as some little archivist in her mind tried to locate my name, dust it off, bring it with a smile. Instead it was my mother whisking us into the back yard for hammock time and lawn darts, or to weed the hill which had become bearded in stars from the star thistle bush, or she’d take us to see the candy man who was a genuine candy man before he retired. Truth is a pill you swallow by not understanding you have a mouth. So I am diseased. And my cousin never made it back from Afghanistan. A sorry letter. A little flag. That’s what you get if your child dies. Could be worse, I guess. The land baron’s prima nocta , Hussein’s unhappy production of gathering the heads of state into a run-down theater, listing half of them as traitor, taking each into a school playground, putting a gun into one of their hands, telling them shoot. We didn’t kill the bear. We couldn’t find a rock that would do. Plus there were devils in that field like any field. Could be worse, I guess, but I can’t imagine how for her. Her zombie children. To be alive is a kind of darkness, sure, but there are certain darknesses you live with, even come to love, and there are others. No two devils are the same but every sixth apple I’ve sliced became a metaphor for something it wasn’t: a knight’s head, a star’s blossom, a movie-set town blown leftward in the wind of a nuclear bomb. So much empty space between atoms. So much it can’t be properly understood. It’s why we can be filled with so many regrets and yet so many fiestas, two currents of the same river running opposite directions. The town we lived in would never come back. The bear saw to that. Maybe it’s why I understood so quickly when my cousin told me years later how some men in prison spend entire nights in the dark reciting Tupac songs to no one. Maybe it’s why men put roses all over their arms, to be wrapped in beauty’s many claws. Homes fail. New Families move in. The dead stay near the surface to see if their favorite baseball team will ever take the world. If you can imagine having no mouth you can imagine having reason to love the bite of the season’s first cold. Where I live now, there are owls in the river. They come back nightly. They fan their wings but I don’t know what they are doing. I never saw them until now. They are so quiet through this glass. Like a 1940’s film on industry. Bodies in motion for a cause that makes no sense now. I don’t know what they are doing.           He meant, of course, origin. What  strains from what framework of bones.  The form  the giraffe bends  down to the dirt same as the elephant,  binding our foreign, numbered—L4, T7—  weight. And from the war of nature  comes the production  of a higher animal. Say  from the war of nature comes  what we need—  a machine more than man. What mind wouldn’t  want this? Clean tactic, poor boys  of America safe before a screen.  My friend caught, in Jalula,  by an IED, not quite right  still. Who am I, then, to demand  a higher order.  There is grandeur,  Darwin says, in this view of life.  The new technology  that keeps our Global Hawk air-strong  thirty-four long hours. Improving the real  bird’s endurance by a day. So art  plays nature’s second part.  Coiled, darker  than black, the engine resembles  sci-fi’s most gleaming  machinations. Death-helmet, snake  pit, asteroid-flung. O endless forms  most beautiful. It looks ready  for space,  another world.  Over Gaza  men call drones zanana —nagging  wife. Slang imitating sound. How hungry  language becomes. Thy soul was like  a star—They are as gentle as zephyrs,  blowing below the violet—  Her beauty hangs  upon the cheek of night —Always  we want more. Catch up, fiction. We are  already our most gruesome  design. Operators, in their padded  chairs, in low, tan Midwestern  buildings, cannot hear  the buzzing— like  a thousand chainsaws —these new birds  make. Bangana—Pashtu for wasp—  sing us a song we can fall down  into. Sing something decent, something  far off and sweet. We are, we now know,  made from star stuff. Who wouldn’t feel  god-like, so hovering, so composed. If I think like the boy I take into me, then I know why the blood appears. I am an apprentice in a city named  Kiss the Hands Who Kill  & Achilles is the father. His sons crawl out war with fully loaded hands. I meet Achilles & the streetlights  hush. Bootleg Jordans grant a tongue for my speechless. Praise the bootlegger.  //  Outside, the streetlights bend to lend a shine. The block is hot & the boys  keep coming. I cannot catalogue a thing  he didn’t bore. Even the grass grows his progeny.  //  Achilles & his sons.              Achilles is his sons.             Where his sons?  A sensual breeze.  A choking. The body  a smite.  //  Achilles, deathless man void moonshine, I cut my veins & see his name. His sons: rampant, melodic. Sweet  negotiations. Love the violence that births you. Hate  the chirp of the birds you eat.  Love me too, father. Love me.      I TURNED MYSELF INTO MYSELF & WAS JESUS  BY NABILA LOVELACE    From “ Ego Tripping ” by Nikki Giovanni  My bones converge to altar / bloated in bad breathing habits / Bus  a table w/ me, Commandment 1 / Know the way I shake wool / Get my hair braided  & spend 4 hours in the hands of another black woman / wrapping each hair round  the other / cause my crown immaculate / while a man prayed to me / quivering in need  of my looking / divine on a cross / My head thorn full / Till  a wolf handed me his whole fur / I handed him  off my head / my hair / I think that’s what Daddy meant / by reciprocity  an inconvenience of need / that leads me back to me / I don’t make the rules I am / Once  the deed / in need of repentance / was done My funeral was  casket open / Buried mouth open / gold fronts gaping  as to not mistake / the gates of heaven the only way in / through me           “where the Third World grates against the first and bleeds” —Gloria Anzaldúa  The car overheats as you drive through the Arizona desert at night. You don’t panic. You coast to the side of the road. Above you, starlight and not much else. The moon hides behind the mountain, gets sliced open when it tries to climb over the crest. The spill is bright and reaches the trees nearby. Their shadows stretch like the arms of those who died of thirst here. You can’t belie this truth: you help them die— the promises you make are lies, coyote. They wait, you don’t arrive. The crooked lawyer paid your fine, the sheriff shrugged. Justice denied the dead who gather here tonight to hound you, a curse goodbye before they sink back into the dry surface of the sand. You remain inside the car but still hear the winds chime out your crimes, coyote. The cries of the wronged shatter glass, pry you from your den. Your hackles rise in distress as you realize you grew paws, a tail. Your eyes yellow and balloon with fright. You’re fucked. Your hasty flight leaves a trail of warm scat behind. A ghostly steam fades into sky. you drink until it’s a new era of music, until the kids can’t live with all the beauty with each other with you overhead the sky spills out as if choked from a stray dog’s heart and it’s too beautiful to hashtag you stand in the cold in another poem where your mother foreshadows the last garden grown under floodlights  at the last funeral there will only be the idea of I am sorry for your loss there will be a face, a body, and a voice inside your head about to rain it’s not unlike a storybook with all the pages torn out a song stuck on repeat in an empty room  we are sorry for your loss Beer belly of summer. You can’t remember the last time your mouth wasn’t pregnant with peach pits. Sweat beading in the crook  of your arm, you cut the lawn with a mower older than your grandfather. The night felt like an elegy, the morning like a handful  of hymns someone sang to you from atop a mountain. Everything in between blurred like steam rising from pavement.  Everything in between was her hands— her hands were in between everything. Her lips, red ripe like cherries eager to plummet  from the tree. Dirt roads and riverbeds, summer felt like eternity, a gift not even a god could take away, no matter how hard you sinned.  The necks of dandelions purpled, but you had your own palate for bruising. You discovered how to cut away rot without  spoiling the fruit. You trained your taste buds to tell you what you needed to hear, puckering despite her nectar baptizing your tongue. I.  I am what I am. I brought forth swarms  or I am a vessel for swarms. Your ear to my chest nearly deaf from the buzzing.  I never loved a man, but I let him love me in the back of his pickup, parked  on the clay road of the cemetery. I was dead then. I was skeletal. Someone else’s  skin clung to my bones. I’d open my mouth and hollyhock would fall out,  black magic. I’d open my legs, the gate to the cemetery swung wider. I am a vessel,  my body was a temple for destruction. My mouth prayed on her lips in the locker  room. My hands prayed, my knees, each strand of hair. Grape juice tickled my  tongue, carpet burned my knees, a wafer grew limp between my teeth. I begged  in every language I knew for her to love me. Love me sideways, upside  down, and inside out. I prayed to each freckle on her too-tan cheeks. Little  River baptized the others, but I stayed dry as dust. My mouth tried to convert her  for worship, but such a lost sheep. She never bowed to my waist for a taste of holy water.  II.  I am what I am, and I am your god. I swallowed the rainbow, chased it  to the alpha, the omega, and someone swiped the pot of gold, if it ever existed.  I am myth. I am a magician. I am a two-sided coin. Tails or heads?  I used to be dead. I was born again. Now I’m unborn and unbroken, hodgepodge  lodged in one being, one body. My flesh: a crime scene, a catalog of debris. I am  a walking catacomb. The first time I died. How could you think that  was living? A gaggle of ghosts swarm inside me, unnamed. The Gospel of Nothing  is what brought you here, now worship.  III.  I pledged allegiance to Nothing  and I signed on the dotted line. I cut on the dotted line. I cut out  the gut, the rot, the rut of the mutt life I lived. I lick my wounds, the memory of my wounds  licked by others. I am an altar. I pray to myself. I am Church of Resurrection, called back from beneath  a bottle of tiny white bullets to the redemption of her thighs. She is the Chapel of Reciprocation.  IV.  The doors are always open. I am Cathedral of Burn the Cowboy Boots with the Barn.  Burn this inscription into your other inscriptions. Burn the face of the night  so it resembles the day. This day, this daily bread. I praise the bees for fleeing the hive.  I drip with honey. Belly, a nest of stingers. In Santo Domingo— the neighbor boy’s belly a maze of dirt lines—electric wires  exposed—each street a limb splaying its wiry network as if mid-surgery.  Every turn shocks you like a woman’s wig waved from a window—the street  market of Los Millones—a feast of tables heavy with cotton shirts, children’s pajamas,  bunches of uvas de playas glinting like glass eyes in a crate—  Later at the resort a dark man in uniform offers you cold juice from a tray—  enormous palms fan velvet couches—a harem of heated pools blaze  outside, where children splash their floatable arms. A maid—her nose  like yours—leads you to a too-cold room— gaunt air conditioner sweating under  the window’s sill—& you recall reading once of a Dominican military officer  who invited foreign diplomats to his home, offered them such cool luxuries—  once, even the still-warm breasts of a female slave—sliced like the halves of an apple  on a silver tray.           Today the ordinary crusade of home, its wild bones as daughter to the sword-cocked weapon of the heart. It is all left  unfinished, lifted from a failure of attention and the outermost tongue  of stone. We took a way around to loneliness, a private garden. I met him here, my answers were a glass of fish. I meet him  here after three potted orchids. All this to wander into my storage shape for father. Even his fisted words were skin, his love a bread. May this time suit us better, this gaunt  adventure, the place the rare self comes to bloom. Each fraction of regret would fragrant. I think of this year as a sort of knowing.  Yesterday, he could still nitpick  a nickel. Now the winnowing of people waiting for dinner. All that hunger.  My answers are as good as the terror from which songs are made. I listen  as he calls the dead on a broken phone and talks for hours, what he remembers of searching, his searching  a rhythm that plays in my chest all night. I catch the green goodbyes, the silty footing.  He carries broken birds.  These days I read inside each shifting. How nearly I missed his softness.      Each Day Borrows Him  BY LAUREN CAMP    We have noon enough and that is all. Along the walls, other men with eager names. Now upstairs, the deck and plates of chicken.  We have between the sky and strainers. The door no one mentions. Minus such danger, lest he disappear. We have aides  and suffocations: the smeared sun. We stand together and point though none of us agree  on the location of the parking lot. Let’s be anecdotal: what he knew  is placed by the door, brooding. Every day he awakes to his unshaped translation of how adrift the air. The light switches.  We have switches. A round pill, a slitted oblong, a palm for a minute. We return and turn  words by the fish, and watch the fish in a wrapped portion of pauses. Later, I will know what to say  but then I tried to listen to the purple transparent flowers in a hundred liminal states.  I touch the top of his head where the rough spots are no longer spilling. Nothing and everything—  confidential. Once, in Algeria, wild dogs ate the wooden fore-wheel  of a woman’s pushcart while he and his fellow  infantrymen looked on, a half-dozen of them  having commandeered her porch for napping. Some  things are inevitable. How he tried to help her clean  the pulp up after, how something in the slobber,  the thickness of it coating the wood, slowed him.  Each scrap white as chicken meat after the cleaver  and the peeling and the rinsing in cold water. He knew  men who bragged about eating their lieutenant’s  thighs after weeks trapped in cold mountains. He knew  it was mostly lies, and that it would be their only legacy.  He knew to call the dogs charms sent to assure him  he would survive this and that he was not destined  for greater things. So when one dog came back, mottled,  prancing, sharp cowlick of its jaw angled high  to keep the rough strip of wheel it mouthed from  dragging, one of the soldiers shot it. It bled out howling  and they let it. Soon after, another soldier torched  the woman’s house. He cut for himself a swatch of her  curtain. No secret to see in the elegant little turnstiles  of its embroidery. History is dainty. Even panic can  seem quaint there. He knows what the future has  no use for; he’s no different than the acres of his father’s  failing orchards, his hours itching the harvest in,  the bland-to-bitter paste they made of all its ripeless figs. The town was protected by the body of a child saint from the tornadoes that ravaged surrounding farms.  But the bird flu was bad that year, and I saw one crow slide dead off the branch into the snow, the others tilting their heads with a little solemnity and continuing to preen their mites away.  This was also the winter I watched a lot of those old movies called weepies, ones where a handsome stranger lights the ugly girl’s cigarettes for her throughout the whole cruise until he steps off the boat and onto a familiar shore, his wife and children waiting for his return.  In spring the tree buds seemed kinetic in their fullness, and I inherited a map of the town’s drainage basins. I would scuttle down the concrete ravines at night and think of very different things:  Veronica Lake’s hair, if an older man complimenting your watch counted as flirtation.  The flashlight revealed in the water tiny animals washed there by chance, a few minnows dashing by a pearlescent tampon applicator, crawdad on a rusted license plate.  Near the grain elevator you could go underground, follow the pipe for several blocks until the graffiti stopped, and the sewer became so narrow you could no longer stand.  I looked up at manhole covers and listened to cars roll overhead, the thunk of hollowness itself.  By summer the town had tried all the normal tactics to make the crows leave and finally called a sort of avian exorcist who would only work alone by cover of night. The lawn  was untended, so I filled a glass bowl with fistfuls of purslane and dandelion greens, ate them with lemon and oil  on the stoop and watched a lone squash grow in the compost. It fattened itself on the waste, and it was so immense that one day it must have called out to someone who desired it enough they returned that night, took it away. Still the same great fields of long-suffering boredom as when we were children,  the day trip to the ag college, where a farmer mumbles something about pesticides , drainage ,  and the kids stub the rubber toes of their shoes in the sand.  They want to see the cows, eat ice cream with flat, wooden spoons.  They hold their hands to their brows and squint across the acres of dark leaves.  The farmer holds up a section of black tubing and talks about drip irrigation.  No word about the land, of toil. No word about the plant,  which for just that first day of a year means money , means luck .  The students come alive when told they can take home all the greens they can carry.  Rough, potent, the leaves trail sand behind them.  Some of the children cradle the collards like infants.  Others gather their arms around them like Rivera’s lilies.  One girl says proudly that her mother will make them for dinner tonight.  And I can see her walking through the door, face held  high over the giant bouquet of tough leaves, her mother sighing and washing the sand down the sink.           Remember, standing in the doorway seeing another body lying  on the kitchen floor clutching his genitals.  That is the way it is, that is what you are now , you think, spending hours  on the gray suede couch in the lonely, beautiful room. Remember when you ran through the streets in your tracksuit,  swam as best as you could through the lake, the rain never stopped you, cooling the locks that stuck to your brow.  Flipping through Schopenhauer, giving all of yourself to nothing, let yourself rain and hail and snow against everyone you love.  Remember watching Friday Night Lights and feeling the rape scene, the woman pinned in the front seat of the truck, reaching  for the cigarette jack and burning the man’s face. Seeing violence is your way of controlling  the violence put in you. The images flashed against your closed blinds. You made the volume louder, softer, louder.  She lay like the reclining nude in the Modigliani I love: arms over her head; thighs crossed; crotch hidden—  Not far from us, seagulls congressed and pecked at the algae foaming at the shoreline.  Her breasts poured out of her white bikini. I thought to myself, Why would she lie here with me.  The sun burned the skin off of my shoulder blades. She asked what I was thinking. I said,  Daydreaming with that bird.  “With the bird or about the bird?”  With the bird .  From The Veteran in a New Field by Winslow Homer  In the absence of rain, the wind sang  heavy on the branches & the boys came with matches & coveralls,  tractors & gasoline. All morning they worked methodically—pulling us from our beds  as if we were weeds. They had come before: packing us with care, sending us as silage  for the cattle in the winter. But the drought had changed them. The herring stayed south—  & the fishermen’s nets stayed empty. The crops were late to bloom & the boys grew  hungry. & though their almanac whispered dry spell , it did not speak of fire. Did not speak of the cold  turning of blades. No, the boys did not listen— delirious with hunger. They doused the land  in gasoline. Gathered us in a clearing large enough for the sky to see. & whether  the sky could see or not, & whether the sky cared or not, the almanac did not say.  & when the boys lit the fire, we broke into prayer— the wind raising the flames higher & higher,  the boys in the distance watching us burn. The story says we are in the country of Pineland: grassy roads curving in, named for longleaf pine, loblolly pine. Sassafras, black gum, slash pine clethra sharp as pepper, shallowing the land’s breath.  The story says I join the guerillas. The story says I carry this tent in.  Three cages at the wood line: the goat, the chickens, a solitary white rabbit.  Commander: You are Gypsy, from Taylor-town, the widow of Joker,  one of the fallen guerillas.  They make me a fighter. One woman among 40 guerillas and the 12 American soldiers secretly training them to overthrow their country’s government.  Joker fell heroically, and our child — there was a child — they made me eat his ashes. I am supposed to arrive at the guerilla camp full of fury, and if possible, to cry.  Commander: Do you take hot sauce on those ashes?  It’s May. Heat saps the water out of the body as pines swoon in and out and out. They have put aside the rabbit for me.  Commander: Gypsy, this is yours. Feed it. For now feed it.  The trainees help me set up my tent. They give me noodles to eat.  Trainee: Sweetheart, do you know you get fired if you break role?  We need this work. We hold on to it like a tick. If you break  role you fail this course. Stay right here together in this wood.   I break my camping fork. Gentle-faced Whisker gives me another.  What did you do     before the war?  No one told me what I was supposed to have done before. I decide on the truth, so I can better retain it: I was a student, I tell them, writing about war. The men come to fetch me. It is time to tell my story:  standing in the wood, something in me, delicate and moving and hot. I have spent my time considering the role: players crying on a loop. It is a play.  If possible, cry.  Commander: Gypsy, two plus two does not equal five. Certain stories  make no sense.  Sense   is an edge, see  if you dare   look  over into the white  falling  We are in  a role play  but if you feel it in there, you feel it. What is it  you think I am lying  about, Commander?  His eyes flash:  So you are an anthropologist?  I say: I am here writing about the Iraqi diasporic population—they received asylum to Pineland after 1991.  Are they Sunni or Shia?  I say, both.  Do you see how easy it is to catch you?  Listen I know the Iraqis in Pineland are mostly Shia but many intermarried before they came.  Julie, two plus two does not equal five do you know what we do to traitors?  My name isn’t Julie, I tell them. My name is Gypsy.  Time’s come. We’re going on a six-hour mission.  Carry your water on your back.  I approach the Commander. I say I’m sorry to break role for a moment. I’m a student from New York, and I appreciate the chance to play, but I am not the most rugged person in the world, and I am the only woman here, and I am not a contractor, and I would like to have a bit of control over what I do and don’t do.  Commander: Young lady, you have started out on the wrong foot. Don’t tell me  who you’re not.  Trainees: Suit up, Gypsy. Spray this on.  It is 100% deet.  We go. I can’t keep up with the group.  Gypsy, you stay right behind me Everything will be alright.      I try to make small talk because other talk brings me out  you have to stay in.  Drink your water    Follow me     Dissolve your super hydration tablet Drink your water    Push on tell your body      you are fine  You are fine.  The wood is long and tall: it’s shot with light. Light makes little lances through the leaves.  Whisker and Commander say, Gypsy, we need to have a talk. You come here with this sob story. No one knows really, and none of it matches up.  Two plus two does not equal five. A reporter named Julie went missing a few days ago. Rumor has it that she joined up with a guerilla group in order to get a story.  We’re pretty sure you’re Julie. Or, you’re with the government police.        No,  I say.  No. I am Gypsy. My husband was Joker. I am from Taylor-town.  Gypsy, you know what we do to traitors. Give me your notebook. I am not asking.  They bring me to the wood line for kill class. Gypsy, this rabbit is yours. We have all been kind enough to share our food and water out here. We all have to help out so we can eat.  There is a pit for the unusable  portions of the entrails.  Secure the goat, slit its neck over  the pit, and proceed with the chickens.  This one is yours. Use this stick. One time over the head should be enough.  Make the spy cry. Make the spy cry. The pines simmer and contract.  You have to, Gypsy, they say. You can do it. Commander tries to give me a fist bump to say We are in this together.  We are not in this together.  They cannot make me lift my fist. Gypsy how can we trust you? If you can’t kill an animal, how can you be a fighter?  The pines.  I’m sorry. I will clean it after if you want.  Commander is shaking. He returns the rabbit to the cage.  They bring me over   the chickens warm and still The flesh under their feathers the organs pulled out the pearled interiors.     This is meat now. I turn them into something  we eat. I think I am done, but Whisker says almost gently  Gypsy, you need to kill the rabbit. Unfortunately you do not have a choice.  I have a choice.            Let me be perfectly clear,  I say. It is not happening.  The men make a circle The pines make a circle You need to hold the legs.     They are tying together the legs       the animal screaming        They raise the stick        the legs are in my arms         The legs are in my arms.      On the day we fell through the black vortex, a friend forecast our futures from traces of coffee in lacquered cups: three journeys and twin daughters. When we fell, we fell past inseparable rivers and dusk in the trees, water in jars / spilling rain bells . Falling, we passed boats sluicing over draining marshes, orchards, which resprout just as they’re leveled. Twitching, you might think, is more like an involuntary jerking of limbs. This tale is also a dance.  And why did you work with the Americans?  “I did it to feed my family.” “I drove a truck for an Iraqi company that supplied the US military.” “I did  not know who I wasworking for exactly.” “Who doesn’t love a good bootleg Hollywood movie?” Inside  our dream of country, a tiny bird is singing  harshly with oracle.  Can you tell me about The Drawing of Lots by Ibn al-Mutahil?  Supple, the air the morning they drew lots. An ambush scheduled for that day. We stood in the giant field of wild onion in the exact middle of those curls of grass-scent and weeping. Everyone pantomiming  morning.  Al-Mutahil disorients us before we are given our lot. It’s is a Mass Casualty Event. We will lose our limbs.  The machine covers 100% of the Kill Zone.  You just bought a ticket to the show.  Every blade of grass waits for its lot.  What is especially singular about this book? The quiet noise of pollen, our speech soft as small dew on white flowers.  *  *  *  What did you do before the war?  Library fattening like roses, al-Mutanabbi Street had not yet been fed to the sky. “Not one  I loved had yet been lost.” We trusted  the khayyat-al farfari, who walked between villages and towns repairing every broken thing:  crushed clasp, fragmenting  wedding song. “Those days, the President cut the dates and orchards so no one could hide inside them.” When they smile, your eyes,  the vines put forth their leaves.  Was there solace to be found?  Trees lower their limes. One night, as light cools we eat dolmas, meat-laced rice folded into hollowed onions and grape leaves. They bring honey to my lips. Somewhere nearby, someone digs a grave in the velvety dark. In the War Game (a book anticipated it in a footnote), soldiers pantomiming death lay shirtless by a fire.  What did you come for, Traveler? Why do you think this has anything to do with you?  *  *  *  Tell me, what happened to those who worked with the Americans?  One room we called the blue-lit stage.  Music cracks. Measure the suffering on the stage by the piano-key teeth, the gleaming surgery’s afterhour. Root to tooth. Bone to eye.  What happened to you in that room?  Upon the husks of wheat, a blight. Eyespot, stem rust, stagonosoroa nodorum . Loosen this chaff. Plough it  into the soil. Sunnis say علاسة and he is chewed; the Shia say سكاكة, then a smashing, kernel to terrible. Burn it. Douse it.  Lather over the cracked stones. Consume it when desperate. Wind, who wouldn’t you blow? Carry the naked floret away from this place.  Who were you, after The Varieties of Creeping Things by Ibn al-Batriq?  That which crept could not always be named.  There was a catalogue: the squirming and the beetling, the under-strata in the mulch, the simmering  among the needles of the pines, the metallic-smudged handprint on the door, the traitor wrapped in sacred verses,  the white worm of pain inside your skin, the almost-lit  match in your chest, in that moment you did not speak.  Your mother, who is the most tender and most persevering person you know cannot put a wall between you and the creeping things.  Our author wants you to know: you are on your own.  Do you expect to one day return?  “I went back to sell my land.” [iPhone photo: Date Palm.] “I felt nothing.”  “Grab your camera! Get ready to film this!” says the soldier, observing the War Game.  “Two of them are still moving around. Haven’t they bled out by now?” In the truck, each laughs off her death as the game ends.  *  *  *  But the camera burned the hole. We fell through.  Anthropologist, why are you in this story?  Forest: War blinks through each of my friend’s losses:  leg,  house,  son.  Press Record: A spartan room, flowered mattress pad, droning TV and fan; rain spots, mold spots. Their living son does not turn from the TV.  “I did it to feed my family. I did not know who I was working for exactly. They found us. It happened in the morning.” Batteries stutter: the recorder beeps.  “Son, hurry, find her a battery.” Press: they  are crying I am crying. Press: I will never understand and how dare I come here. Lord, I  came here. I knew not loss. These woods are lit by you, and you, and you.  And who are you now, on the other side, Coming on Objects  Unexpectedly (verse) by unknown?  Out of the sonorous dark, came the objects: the bells beneath the river; the bridge (it is your childhood bridge):  the men and women and children crossing the bridge on that holy day—  someone yelled: “it is a trap,” and do you know, they jumped that moment  out of their deaths, the river took them.  From the darkness, came the light-drunk hole out of the white-hot nerve; came beekeepers  from the Yusifiyya farm, their bees fanning the air. Amber-yellow, almost bitter under the sweet  it can cure your sore throat if you eat the eggs of the bees right from the comb  (he explains; have I translated this correctly) you will have a very strong heart.  I wake to the sound of my neighbors upstairs as if they are bowling.  And maybe they are, all pins and love fallen over. I lie against my floor, if only to feel that kind of affection.  What I’ve learned, time and again: Get up. You cannot have what they have.  And the eyes of a dead rat can’t say anything.  In Jersey, the sink breaks and my mother keeps a bucket underneath to save water for laundry.  A trick of water is no joke. I’ve learned that. Neither is my father, wielding a knife in starlight.  I was taught that everything and everyone is self-made.  That you can make a window out of anything if you want. This is why I froze insects. To see if they will come back to life.  How I began to see each day: the sluice of wings. Get up. The ants pouring out of the sink, onto my arms in dish-heavy water.  My arms: branches. A swarm I didn’t ask for.  No one told me I’d have to learn to be polite. To let myself be consumed for what I cannot control.  I must return to my younger self. To wearing my life like heavy wool, weaved in my own weight.  To pretend not to know when the debtors come to collect.           After Katrina, we broke into our abandoned school, broke windows, cracked open pomegranates, traced  the water line, extinguished all the furniture and smudged papers until nothing we touched  had ever bled, or rotted, or grew  black mold like a new skin. We covered it all in a shroud of white foam, stole what we could,  wrote our names on walls that fell in like wet bread from the pressure of our hands.  And after all this time, I watch a farmer fill a silo,  the rush of grain against steel, and how it sounds like the white fog rushing from the extinguishers  that day in the school—my friends spun the red canisters on the ground  until their faces were blurred by foam  suspended in the air like seeds we tossed from our own palms and sowed into the floors, the wood  water­logged and warped like soil cut by a plow. That school is a luxury apartment building now  and all the new tenants are white people  from Massachusetts. There is no moral to this. When the farmer asks, I climb the metal railing  and look down. Grain glistens at the bottom of the silo, reflects faces of the drowned. Dear sadness—, send me away .       Settle in the sycamore                       trees,                the sky, the nettles     on the branches            outside.  The night is the closest chapel.                I light a candle on my tongue,                        turn myself to glass. In the wheat fields of the western plains,          I welcomed you  like wind.         Now the dead urge me on.      The sky, a shroud.              o battered stars         o calculating night be gone—,       grief is an exercise        the hours grew in me.  Sunscape,         signofhope,      solipsistic silkworm—, knit me a new body to praise.        In my mind           heaven is full of paupers in paper gowns.       Is that where you’ll condemn  the baby I can’t keep?         I would be troubled that this house                      is burning,        except I like fire for its need.      This is regret, not sadness.        This dull affect.  This empty well           that fills with filthy water inside me.    Inside me: a portal.      A wonder of the world.                A squatting saint.          Huntress I was  once, I swallowed              the winter sun            & met myself in the mouths                       of ghosts.         My mother calls but I don’t answer.                My husband hands me  his sadness       like an old suit jacket,              takes too many Ambien,                   hopes not to wake.            & this electric grief—,                        I speak for all of us now. We’re only  as useless as you make us.         Praise sound.       The smallest lyric.        The way we use the dead      to live. It was the season of car wrecks and continual blood flow  to our sex organs. I spat him out. I drank him in. I called to the Lord, and the Lord  was silent. You were driving , he said as he zipped up and buckled his belt.  Over the horizon, the sirens flashed like thousands  *  of miniature sunrises in the mirror—my face painted as a corpse. Breathe easy , he said  and put the car in park. In the headlights’ stray beams, the Volvo’s crumpled nose,  the glass lodged in our palms like a new skin. Our world  became very small. It rested on my tongue  *  and turned into a milky geode. Then from the shadows, the people descended  and tore the driver from the destroyed  vehicle. The police cars ululated in the dark street.  I gagged on the fumes. When my mouth opened, another row of teeth gleamed under the set I had  *  painted on my lips. He had already fled. I watched. In my mind, the city swallowed him as lovers sometimes do. Sometimes I admire the way the scrimmage between crows for scraps of carrion tossed to the dumpster sounds. It’s not something I often hear these days. Nobody is to shame for that. Without shame, the ability to foster guilt, am I still considered human? The drama of thoughts like this breeds reasoning for forked legs where I allow the hue of sex to smear. I could know better than to sacrifice intelligence for pleasure.  Is that what makes art so desirable? What makes the under-wine flesh tasteful? I should stop listening to animals lose their mind for blood but my neighbors can’t stop fucking so why pretend? A man explodes inside me a few times a month and I wonder what my art hums like. You ever see that movie where a group of crows dive-bomb a boy until he falls dead in the field, he asks. A murder, I say. A group of crows is called a murder. Rain who fills our mouths with sky-seed sharp & quick,  thick velvet filling rows of fresh & loosened dirt,  pools of red mud for the rearing worm and scuttle-foot beetle.  We held this insect life in the blue bowl of our hands,  rinsed our skin in the river, let the ice-spring run warm  and orange with our hearty rust, our maroon soft livers.  What does the river remember, the stream that bore us?  Our eyes carry our faces with no sense of the before,  just a roving & combing—how to go & how to go back.  Did we cross water sucking at the seasway with our teeth,  did we move in the slow muscle of mountains, wind lifting our heels?  We hunt by night, frisk the earth for some laden trove to eat from,  some smoked fire to burn off our questions in feathered ash.  Under stone-lit skies we roam the rounding wide brain,  scrape the insides of our eyes clean, gather & fold our silk,  count our gold coins & jewelry, press butter between our palms,  proof that we are well-fed. Language threads our ears needle to drum,  words tonguing our memory, drawing out lengths of river-map, fish bones,  wet grit of where we have been, the names of ancestors whom we know,  whom we do not know, the living and once-lived, slow rain who keeps  filling our mouths, we are collecting you drop by drop. I ride my bicycle through a country of black crows; they cover the earth with their lurching hops and lazy takeoffs. My childhood is closing like a fist around my hair, brown vine rooted in my skull, the womb of my brain, womb that will birth the real me. First time I was born I was pulled back to the world by a goddess of rain who tacked the thirst of a field of high grass in September to my back. I rubbed my back on the black walnut tree in the center of creation until my mind flickered like a lamp. A woman can be seen as an open door, as dirt and heaven, and through the slip of clay in her beauty, we are born. Because this was my first life it was there to be wasted. Years of washing my hair thinking it was someone else’s, that I needed a man, that my days were stopped like crows along the highway waiting to shop the carcass at their leisure after the engine of travel had ceased, to be alone with that picture of death, and to eat it in peace, an entire battalion of mouths that stoops to pick what’s theirs out from loosening gravel. When I was a child I knew none of this. I thwarted. I hid. I disguised myself from grief. One day I began to fill with rain. To my ankles, to my knees, when my heart was drenched a shudder bloomed towards my brain. I grew dark feathers and wings, found the highest point within myself and jumped. A thousand birds, a murmuration makes its own music. It sounds like humming. I am humming. I am plummeting. I am sails of rain. Safety , what is that? What foreign language am I listening to? Are those birds squatting along the telephone wires, spelling out O M E N? I’ve seen them before, I’m certain, yet their name escapes me. Something threatens to wash me onto an unfamiliar shore, the salt on my tongue, the sand crusting around my eyes. The fate of a beached whale: I reject it, compelling myself to ingest the nectar of caution, drilling into the maple tree until I hit the fattest vein, river bursting out. I’m ready to grip the nearest machete and swing. In a past life, danger masqueraded as mosquitoes, bulbous mushrooms, barren terrain where hunger was the only crop that grew. I thought I knew the extent of my world’s perils mapped out every dead end in the cave’s labyrinth. But something clawed its way through. Beast with no face. Branches wilted at its touch. No sound uttered from its footsteps, the ground kept its mouth shut like it was told to. I watched a neighbor wash her tunic in a puddle of rainwater, so focused on the task she didn’t notice the American soldier’s blade cleaving her head off, rolling melon, juices bleeding through the rind. Did I see what I just saw? Was she dead? How could she be dead? Where was the sign? The slow decay of skin? The soldiers were coming. Why they wanted to kill us all, I didn’t know. I didn’t understand. The shacks I’d slept in, ate meager meals in, were set on fire. Someone grabbed my arm, yelled at me to run. So I did. The trees had eyes and looked away. The mountains shut all their windows. We were on our own. I couldn’t stop running until I crossed into another world. Not the afterlife, but somewhere close to it, where I could see all the threads that connected us to death. Even something as innocent as a touch on the cheek could pull on a thread, alerting some starving beast.  They said the child was too young to understand death, to understand suffering. Underneath the frost-hardened pond was what they meant to say, which was if he couldn’t understand, if he saw without seeing, the crow pecking the eyeball,  his mother’s graying skin, thin and brittle like dried leaves, then he couldn’t feel. Nothing crawled through his veins. Nothing entered him or took something precious as it left. He was still whole, or had at least the potential to be whole, to grow a skin graft over the loss, tarp over a pothole, a minor bridge from here to there. The river overflowing. They meant to say,  You’re not our problem. We’re not responsible for tending to you, little sapling, little fruits, ripening, now frozen, now darkening with rot. Changed—  the trajectory of migrating geese. The way south blocked by gunshots. How many died before the flock lost faith, fled to a foreign terrain where rivals had already laid claim to fertile farmland. What in the mind dies with each corpse we watch lowered into the ground? Easier to pretend that nothing does. The child was fine, appeased by simple delights: a piece of candy, a dragonfly’s wings. Even better if the child believed this himself, if he never showed signs of leakage to the ones who lived and must figure out how to keep living, a task already difficult without caring for someone else. A train with barely enough tracks to cross the desert, a train that goes on and on. But around what? Traveling where? Why push forward with no arrival in sight? The view is the same. Mountains, beaches, valleys. That’s what the child expected. That’s what they were hoping for, but the view changed because death does that. Death has too many reminders, leaves too many smudges with its ink-stained fingers. On bed sheets, on tree bark, on shimmering reflections—how do you explain to a child that his mother will never call his name to wake him in the morning? How do you explain away all the changes in the mind’s routine, the jagged glass of expectation grinding against what isn’t there anymore?           A cecropia moth caterpillar, which hitched a ride from Ontario to St. John ’ s in a shipment of dogwood shrubs, has turned into a spectacular moth . . . agricultural staff are hoping to keep Georgina as calm as possible during her short life to preserve the quality of her wings . . . she will be pinned and preserved for future study. —CBC News Online, May 31, 2013  Of all the ways to be wanted, this coarse longing forward: kill jar, steel pin. Ripe & mateless,  how pretty your plush wings would look in a glass case. Absolve me of this: silly girl, I thought two hours in ether  would be enough for life to leave a beetle before I pinned his thorax. Later that day I found him alive, wings snapping, legs grasping at air.  Georgina, I’m afraid I have a sharpness in me. Once, a luna moth fell under a mower blade—rendered flightless, eyespots halved. I kept him though he woke  me at night, splintered wings rustling while I slept. I’m always trying to tell the story of your moth-mouth— by nature, sealed. Restless.  Lonely? I wasn’t. Turn away, a boy said summers ago as he tried to name the stars to me—car headlights across the field would slash my sight for the constellations.  I looked anyway, &, flash-blind, I watched the dark sky flare. Georgina, see these hands like wingshafts stunted? This spine, its rigid memory? I don’t have patience for the body.   That summer her womanhood was already standing with her in every room. Its new fingers  running against the long edge of the kitchen counter, the pool’s just-painted lining  & springboard. All summer it followed her throughout our cousins’ house,  leaving behind the warmth of an animal’s body in grass. The animal of her  reaching already & always the question of children, the animals of children, how do they live.  When my sister climbed onto the springboard that summer, her womanhood scattered  in sparks behind her, her wrists flutelike & practicing levity. The cypresses stood thick in their green;  our cousins suspected nothing. The girl gone now & I am thinking, what must it have been like  to be ill & rising, what soar precedes the sinking. When my sister jumped  off the white springboard, she was a child’s body passing a row of neighborhood condominiums:  each house like our house, cluttered in its small evening & dimmed  in its own way. But when she rose out of the water, her hair was black  & long, handed down to her from the Jewish women of Bukhara.  She cut it. Her braids lay like black callas on the bottom of our cousins’ pool.  Tonight I see it from the distance of rainfalls in another country; a small figure  carrying her darkness like silver, tight-lipped & misspelled. She looks into the eye of her torturer  as if beauty could only be beauty but the night, her night, will not give.  I learned this much from my sister: madness takes the blameless  & rids them of their most graceful possessions first.  October, her hair grew again & was slick, undirected, the first fur of animals.  I was thirteen. I told no one about obsession, how an evening cluttered with footsteps  is only the ill-lit dance of the lost. About the girl with thin wrists  dragging the night by its terrible antlers through her attic bedroom  until sorrow blossoms red peonies between the wooden floor boards.  Then it was winter & I told no one: how beauty is beauty  is hunger. The peonies extending red feeder-roots; first anger, then hunger. Then song.           Everything is in flux, Heraclitus said, and I believe him with my ragged heart.  My father in his boat must be rowing on an ancient river that might be a river I will never touch.  My mother is standing on a station platform gathering up her skirts against the onrushing trains that are neither arriving nor departing.  Whoever said life is a fire we’re ravished by must never have been burnt a thousand times.  Tonight, my cousin’s tumor is drumming too loudly in her brain, making her listen with a different ear.  The challenge of poetry is to find the ultimate in ordinary horseshit, James Tate said, who is now one among all the mysterious others, his body at the last unwritten.  Tomorrow, when I wake, I will think of the weather as I always do, how I ask after it each day with the same implacable question, how, even during the slightest changes, it is altogether different.      It wasn’t the food or company, we were laughing, everything had an aromatic shape to it, the wine, the rich sauces, the jazz that reminded us of late hours and smoke.  It wasn’t the good talk, politics, religion, delicious gossip, all we wanted to say to each other without anyone coming undone.  It was as if something were eluding us even as the night got darker and the darkness painted the windows a color we could almost touch.  Maybe it had something to do with the sound of the wind rushing through the garden or the garden itself releasing its hundred petals.  It wasn’t love or friendship, it was a small disturbance,  longing one of us said though it wasn’t exactly it.  It was something like a hollow in the throat, a hole inside the hole of the eye  a stone shining in a river that made the river seem emptier. How often have I stood in a field practicing for their departures all those whom I have loved and who have loved back until I am bereft and speechless thinking this is how it will be one day the morning fog lifting from the hollows and nothing of this field remaining not even what has held me here shamelessly and without reason at the edge of my small poignancies as if they were what mattered as if they were the grief that will come one day as it will.                                                                                                           cà Whoever steps on the seeds  ca loves to sing on penis,  chua and will patiently endure his  chua future wife’s nagging.  cá The fish in the pond feed looking up.  cá They play on our expectations  chùa and hopes of pleasing others  chùa and hopes of pleasing ourselves.  ca We’ve never gone that far,  ca we’ve never been with each other.  cà We want to eat each other,  chua eat each other whole.  ______________  NOTES:  cà – tomato  ca – sing  chua – sour  cá ­­ – fish  chùa – temple  cà chua – tomato ( Having to have a body )  Survival instincts: I turn myself into a smaller target. Thriving instincts: I put myself into situations where my pupils dilate.    ( Boxing )  To make yourself into a smaller target. You’re a beautiful silhouette, revealing only one shoulder at a time, constantly rotating clockwise behind the heel of your pivot foot. Avoid the left hook, the left shot to the body, the straight right. Keep your rhythm.    ( Dancing )  In the dark, with the music, there’s no need to be a silhouette; your shoulders can be square to others. One goal: to be a string undulating between two fixed points. Move sharply and quickly if you’re not feeling graceful tonight; slowly if you’re feeling confident and have nothing to hide or if your pupils are especially alive.    ( Mermaid birth )  The amniotic sac is intact and someone has to puncture it. Then baby’s song: so brave and so beautiful. His rotator cuff, the examining table, unused forceps and ventouse.  Silver nitrate eye drops: then Judy Garland is in color.    ( The roundworm travels up from the foot only to be swallowed again )  I ran first thing in the morning, sub-24 3-miles. I’m the fastest. Hot shower, a half-mile walk to the T.  It has been at least 12 hours since I had salt. On the train, the guy sitting across from me has what must be vomit on his shoes, not caked on but still glistening. Like me, he is purged. He is cold, fresh water.    ( Boxing )  You’re beautiful as a silhouette, in and out in and out. Masterful. You made weight again; hydrate back to 134. Don’t let your shoulders be square to anyone. Don’t be the midpoint of the base of an isosceles.    ( Dancing )  I ran first thing in the morning, sub-24 3-miles. I’m the fastest. Hot shower, a half-mile walk to the T.  It has been at least 12 hours since I had salt. On the train, the guy sitting across from me has what must be vomit on his shoes, not caked on but still glistening. Like me, he is purged. He is cold, fresh water.    ( Buckeyes )  We piled them up for ammunition. We lay down with them among the bruised leaves so that we could rise, shining.    ( The roundworm travels up from the foot again )  Shower, Clobetasol foam, Dove Men-Care Post-Shave Balm, Tretinoin cream, Joico Matte Clay or Molding Clay or Water Resistant Styling Glue. An apple.    ( Boxing )  Brody fails to make weight    ( Dancing )  I’ll move slowly tonight. Madonna, Laurent Korcia, Iron and Wine.    ( Buckeyes )  We piled them up for ammunition. We lay down with them so that we could rise, shining.    ( Dancing )  Ecstasy turns us into moths.  I’m an embryo in the mother’s womb. I sleep hidden in you. Don’t give birth to me yet.    ( Dilated pupils )  Hyperbole and the coquette.    ( Mermaid birth )   The amniotic sac is intact and someone has to puncture it. Then mother’s wooing: so overwhelming, so alluring. New Order, Erasure, Lorde, glitter, eyeliner. Judy Garland is in color.  ______________  NOTES:  -“having to have a body”: Frank Bidart, “Writing Ellen West,” from Metaphysical Dog (Farrar, Straus, and Giroux 2013).  -We piled them up/for ammunition. We lay down with them/among the bruised leaves so that we could rise, shining : adapted from Rita Dove’s poem “The Buckeye,” from Grace Notes (W.W. Norton, 1989).  -I’m an embryo in the mother’s womb./I sleep hidden in you./Don’t give birth to me yet. : Adapted from Anna Swir’s poem “The Iron Hedgehog,” from Happy as a Dog’s Tail (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1985), translation by Czeslaw Milosz with Leonard Nathan.           She threaded the loom with one strand of her long silver hair, which might have kept growing until she was done, which might have fallen out but I would come in and sit beside her on the cushion, without her noticing, and she would continue. Every day I saw this old woman from the Octopus Tree weaving at her loom, rivers and lakes underneath her hair. The bottom full of silt. I could see it if I reached with a comb and that was when she’d look at me. Under her hair, she kept her oldest son, who was out for a morning swim with swallows swooping down to touch the water. It made her happy as she worked on silk dresses and her hair never ran out. Sometimes, when she was tired, she’d tie it up, and let all the tired animals around her house drink from her head.      mosquitoes came for the old woman  BY MONICA SOK    She looked back once. Stones hurled over her open eye.  What happened purple sunbird? What happened bamboo-bamboo?  Old woman, protect the temple. Too late. Her hair is a dark moon-rose.  Streaked weavers said they saw her in the lake, but she cannot breathe in the lake!  Her hair falls not as rain does but like nails the evening hangs on. Understand  giant ibis, understand. Tell me, black-faced spoonbill,  spotted-wood owl, dusky warbler, what do you see? Swarm of mosquitoes  flying south? Is it not strange? Her long silver hair flowed out like threads from a loom  that glowed in the grass. On another exoplanet would it feel the same this interval of opacity and concealment, dip in temperature, surge of power as the lights are triggered by their sensors, the ones that say that it is dark out.  What other place in the heavens can seem so empty as the one over which the shadow of the moon passes. Crickets startled, bats confused, the voices of the birds have been arrested. No you can’t go out, this is not a good time, you’ll get hit by a car without its headlamps on. The idiots are still with us. That’s the bloody terror of it. For what might they do to us while the lights are off and we’re staring at the sun, rather, staring at the place it last was seen. Until it comes again to shame us with its brilliance. The playbill is shut and I’m thinking of the book Octavia Butler never wrote: how it could begin with the death  of the last black man in the whole entire world, which is the name of the play we are about to see: “The Death of the Last  Black Man in the Whole Entire World A.K.A. The Negro Book of the Dead.” My date and I share the armrest  and I’m staring at the black wisps on his forearm picturing the hair no one else can see: symmetrical except the patch  on his lower back. We stand to let three patrons pass, press ourselves against the backs of our seats. Sometimes when I kiss the man  beside me, I think of one of Butler’s protagonists who had the ability to feel another’s pleasure. I want to feel  what my lips taste like and how his it feels good really feels. These days, real life feels like science fiction and science fiction  can be truer than life—or at least true to life, which is what this novel would be: more real than local news,  a depiction (spoiler alert) of the fictions of race and their real consequences. And—there’d be a plot twist in the first  few pages: with his dying breath the last black man in the whole entire world would, like a god, animate a new one.  If Octavia Butler was alive to write it, the rest of the novel would, in its entirety, be about that. Mud oozing. The first forms  of life. The lights are dimming and I see clearly what’s beginning to move. A large branch stretched  across most of the stage and a woman, head-wrapped, gripping a watermelon in her lap. Uncrossing and recrossing  my legs, I take one last look at the arm beside me, dark and alive, before another world pulls us away.           we needed two attempts   the first time was so cold   in the unheated loft room of a friend’s house I’d moved to at sixteen that all we could do was force our bodies close enough to save a little heat  the second time   I planned a little more a portable heater kicking out a charred dust smell    leading him upstairs the room artificially hot  stripping off instantly how practical I was  not really wanting to be touched or   kissed or to do anything that might delay what I thought I needed   heater unplugged the room dropping colder almost instantly walking to the bed   kneeling down on it  as though praying   and him coming at me with his bare inarticulate thrusting that couldn’t hold off long enough for pain to give way into something like pleasure and I remember feeling something drip  I’ve left a present on your back he said and I showed him out   past the bedroom of my housemate   the bed I’d taken to sleeping in most mornings   when she’d gone early to the station   I’d set the bath  running   and keep warm under the covers still muggy with her presence   one time I fell asleep   woke to water coming through the ceiling   as though the sky had slipped inside the house   and I just lay there  not moving   thinking there was nothing to be done but wait for it to pass through the different layers of house   hope it might dry out   might still be standing afterwards           Charlottesville, VA  Driving alone down Old Lynchburg Road in the lilac haze of dusk it is so beautiful that for a moment you forget that the root word in this road you drive down every day is lynch that the origin of lynch as you know it comes from the name of men also named Lynch though no one seems to know which one of them should be credited for this and you think to yourself         somewhere in here is probably a metaphor about the power of naming      of how easy it is to forget the origins of things when you hold such power but driving down Old Lynchburg Road this is not just another history lesson or a play with words         it is these two gallons of gas left in this car that isn’t yours and the fresh growl in your stomach reminding you that your days in this place are as numbered as light-polluted stars and poems poems you could take or leave at least this is what you tell yourself as you’re doing all this driving alone because what exactly is loneliness if not the desire to have invitations to turn down and what exactly are poems if not invitations to look in the rearview mirror to see your self and your past moving further from each other while you hear your own name called from a single tree in a forest of trees singing of their fruit look    this bottlenecked mob of maples you thread through every day is just one more pinprick in the constellation of hungers that brings you back to this arbored byway again and again gap-mouthed and lust-struck as a murder of crows despite yourself despite how many times you’ve killed the animal inside you only to meet it again in the morning breathing out of your own mouth as though you have never taken a word to its throat as though you have never in your life been your own grim reaper decked in black from scalp to heel scythe in hand ready and eager to meet yourself pounding at your own door for all the talk you keep hearing these days about the need for gallows humor you have to wonder who is putting what or whom on the scaffold as you drive Old Lynchburg Road     so curved and steep you cannot see the faint parting of light lying beyond it  I did what I had always: mangle grass and mud beneath my hooves, between my dull-cornered teeth. Between walled houses, orange blossoms chimed in a green bower. Barn thrush and sovereign kestrel traversed second-story windows— some open, some broken—on invisible thread. I don’t understand stories but have nuzzled wingspans of their dead, their evaporating bones. I understood their lightness as they feathered the roasting smell of torched hashish through the tree branches and green leaves and orange blossoms.  In the poppy field, a woman dipped her head, hiding. There were ribbons fluttering from palm trunks and dry poppies rattling. There was gunfire. It doorwayed the morning. There was gunfire, and it painted the wind red. Whatever night left lingering, lingered in pieces—a clay bowl flowering the kitchen floor, the sound of blood dragging fur, of holes being made and refilled. I was the sound of children running. Blue and cloud, every alley ended in the sky, or iron gates with red spray-paint X’s from the last time these homes were made safe. Cans of purple smoke swelled velvet sheets. A soldier turned a doorway into his silhouette, his barrel exactly the size of my eye. He leveled a fresh white X as he passed. We condemn in the strongest possible terms this egregious display of hatred,  bigotry and violence, on many sides. On many sides…  —Donald Trump  Here in the United States, African American means  argument —what they say about “you people” versus  what I know about my people— but argument , mathematically speaking, means a specific input  in a function , what bears a defined relationship to   the output, but I’m not a good mathematician even on  my brokest days; I’m an African American meaning I’m angry at the function of something. And here,  in the United States, a man inputs a key into the ignition  and outputs the life from a body:  puts the life in a body outside of that body, turns it into an argument though the body nor the life formerly inside it   were African American; they were simply American — meaning white —and woman —meaning object —  before they were ever an argument meaning African   American, meaning maybe everyone becomes African  American when they die senselessly, or that African Americans are already dead due to senselessness, or that   African Americans have always been white objects in addition to arguments, but I’m not a good mathematician even   on my richest days; I’m African American meaning I’m angry at the function of something, and yet  this means I may be an object used for a specific function   to get a specific output, making me, more or less, a vehicle  like the Dodge Challenger that started this latest round, meaning it gave birth to something even as something died,  and I’m angry at the function of something in that statement   because it should be someone died: a woman, a human being—  but I’m African American so even that assertion becomes   an argument on top of an argument already against me,  and I’m angry about that because here, in the United States, blood is never literal if it is mine or approximates mine  like the president said by saying nothing of good conscience,  sparking even more arguments, meaning more   bodies, maybe, and I’m African American so I’m growing  angrier at the function of something:  the whistle that brings the rabid dogs to my doorstep,   the billionaire businessman who blew it.  This is how I do things: control my cravings, hide in store alcoves,  become undesirable. Once I’m pregnant, how will I justify wearing  what happened as a child. I want to escape what the rain reminds me of—  wet pill, black dress, the night I dragged my own paradise. My mother  misses me, wishes she could rock me to sleep. I didn’t go to Spain,  though Calle Pureza is all I have left. I took the metro to the cinema, another date  without his tongue as the center. In my nightmare, he is moaning in my ear. I tell myself  I would do a lot of things if only I were asked. To share  my bed with one person I wouldn’t have to pack my bags  with toilet paper and soap. I remember when noise would bother me—  a father with crying babies, a watered-down sweet. all of the Mexicans sneak into heaven. St. Peter has their name on the list, but none of the Mexicans have trusted a list since Ronald Reagan was President.  *  St. Peter is a Mexican named Pedro, but he’s not a saint. Pedro waits at the gate with a shot of tequila to welcome all the Mexicans to heaven, but he gets drunk & forgets about the list. all the Mexicans walk into heaven, even our no good cousins who only go to church for baptisms & funerals.  *  it turns out God is one of those religious Mexicans who doesn’t drink or smoke weed, so all the Mexicans in heaven party in the basement while God reads the bible & thumbs a rosary. God threatens to kick all the Mexicans out of heaven if they don’t stop con las pendejadas, so the Mexicans drink more discreetly. they smoke outside where God won’t smell the weed. God pretends the Mexicans are reformed. hallelujah. this cycle repeats once a month. amen.  *  Jesus has a tattoo of La Virgen De Guadalupe covering his back. turns out he’s your cousin Jesus from the block. turns out he gets reincarnated every day & no one on Earth cares all that much.  *  all the Mexican women refuse to cook or clean or raise the kids or pay bills or make the bed or drive your bum ass to work or do anything except watch their novelas, so heaven is gross. the rats are fat as roosters & the men die of starvation.  * there are white people in heaven, too. they build condos across the street & ask the Mexicans to speak English. i’m just kidding. there are no white people in heaven.  * tamales. tacos. tostadas. tortas. pozole. sopes. huaraches. menudo. horchata. jamaica. limonada. agua.  *  St. Peter lets Mexicans into heaven but only to work in the kitchens. A Mexican dishwasher polishes the crystal, smells the meals, & hears the music through the swinging doors. they dream of another heaven, one they might be allowed in if only they work hard enough.  we invented cactus. to survive the winters we created steel. at my dad’s mill i saw a man dressed like a Martian walk straight into fire. the flames licked his skin, but like a pet it never bit him. in the desert, they find our baseball caps, our empty water bottles, but never our bodies. even the best ICE agents can’t track us through the storms, but i have a theory. some of our cousins don’t care about LA or Chicago; they build paradise under the sand, under the bones of our loved ones, worn thin as needles to threaten any blue agents, bones thin as guitar strings to welcome us home. you were born in the year of the rooster & the dismembered grandmother  your mama’s first christmas alone, trying to guess how much sugar to put in the pies  & how much can kill.               you were bundled into the house with the two uncles  sharing one of the bedrooms              & zero baths (a summer cabin                                 in another life)  i have treated you like anything i never earned every light blazing                  fridge wide open,  cooling the whole neighborhood       doors unlocked. i don’t know    how you          survived  the years without sunscreen or health insurance.     crabs from the first time  i dropped                     (nameless as apple seeds)                       into the toilet.  the everclear.  the laxatives.   the Black-n-Milds. you should have happened to a more  careful woman.          never known anxiety           or         shame  the 13-hour drive through arkansas     panic silent as the sleet stickying the windshield.  the lectures taught with a gallon of Prep scouring your insides                   the distance to the bathroom tucked  behind one ear            my pride intent on beating your best time.  if you could speak in languages other than mucus & loose stools,  i would apologize        for this & other things just to hear you answer           in a voice not unlike  my own           remind us what we are to each other: echo, narcissus—both drunk on their own  guile. both murderous in their insistence       of love.  you should know        i never looked at you & blamed your mother           though it is true  i have wished you smaller      with more symmetry like the stone of a fruit nestled in the slick flesh  of the world.               in so many ways i have tried      to discard you  or i have           cut you in two with water fasts          & nicotine  stretched you to feed the men                       what they wanted  the women what they could love. when you failed           & i have called  you failure                   who could i blame? what wonder is it                    that your newest threat  is your own patrol of cells                  —house divided as the country                       intent             on stealing  your coverage.                                   it’s alright that this is the most   epic thing about you.  & alright that   like your ancestors     you might leave with fewer parts than            those with which you came  i would promise you                good years between now & then                         but who would i  be fooling?      even now        i’m slipping you milk &         slabs of bread             smeared  with butter.     like all your lovers i know             how much you can take  i have come to love    not you but your          refusal to be consumed  i push you up              pill bottles & down stairs. & every morning                    you wrap a thin          new layer  of membrane          around the sac that holds my heart     dispatch          a brigade of cells  with their sealed    warrants to a host of organs            i hope i never see. I wasn’t born. I was found.  In the thick of red tide, my mother  pushed me through lines  of dead silver fish,  sharks, and octopi  that rose in whispers  off moon-splashed coquina.  She rolled me into a tight cocoon  and hung me  on the ceiling  of a Christian family’s beach house.  Mira, vete a ser mariposa ya, she told me,  then crawled back  into the ocean, and the waves stayed  a shade of Georgia clay  until someone  cut me down.  My new family hummed  of spinnerbait, honey and Magnolia,  chamomile calm  against a sunburn,  and gave me rabbit after rabbit, which covered the backyard  in a coat of twitching snow.  One burst  into feathers the moment I held it close. A storm surge  broke, foamed at the dunes, and though  the polite ones looked away,  women in their lawn chairs eyed me  from their driveways—I was  a sad breeze veiled  in seagrass. I dreamed  of the edges of a map  riddled with arrows—  my nameless place,  my unknown sea,  the wreckage that hides in me. Like all our mothers, she was one of the lucky ones.  She passed her citizenship test studying English  out of our first-grade notebooks. She was too sick  to work the day of the raid. She gave her social  security number to her sister, so she could work.  She told us who to call and where to find important  documents. She prepared powers of attorney  in case she didn’t return home. She couldn’t attend  the Know Your Rights workshop. She sang us Spanish  lullabies every night. We didn’t know a thing about  where we came from. She crossed the desert  blessed no man touched a strand of hair on her  head. Birth control made it so she wouldn’t  have a stranger’s baby. Rape was a risk she took.  She saw what they did to our men: shaved  their heads and gave them a gun to fire far  into families for a flag or else beat them to death  like communist dogs in broad daylight in the middle  of the street; tattooed their skin and gave them  a gun to fire fear into families for a tag or else  beat them to death like anonymous dogs  in broad daylight in the middle of the street.  Our women always flee to save their children  from being slaughtered. Running is in our blood  and our blood has always been running.  What is a son but a reason for her flight?  What does that make me but an Aztec,  the same empire that made conquer sexy  before Cortes y las Tlaxcaltecas,  that made murder a sport before las policia  y las maras, that made terror our textbook  before the School of the Americas? Before ICE?  What does that make me but the obsidian  below her breasts, the man’s hungry fingers  swimming away like an octopus,  purloining the heart and her heart beating  in his hand as if to give him life?  My blood knows just as much murder  as it does martyr.  Whose hand can it be but mine? Amor, I wish I could tell you te amo means as much to me as I love you , but once after a week of diarrhea and two days of fever, my family drove me to a clinic in Jiquilisco. The room was narrow and hot as a needle. Behind the counter sat a lonely woman with dirty glasses. She couldn’t speak louder than a whisper. If I had to guess, she was seventy years my senior. Once upon a time she worked for hospitals, cutting umbilical cords from greasy bellies and amputating mangled limbs during the war. I did not know that at the time. The bottom half of her body could not move. My primo went behind the counter to help her search for alcohol. Her fingers fumbled to unwrap the medication for three minutes. There was no backroom for me. Two doors to the streets were kept open. A shaky dog nosed an abandoned black plastic bag spilling its intestines onto the road. I dropped my pants, and she injected me with a needle the length of my middle finger. I still do not know what she put inside of me. I laughed and said I felt seasick. Mama told me to sit down. Numb rainbows leeched the color out of her face. I laughed. I couldn’t breathe. I couldn’t breathe. I couldn’t—  I do not want to say I almost died. I did not feel any pain. A pickup truck full of shirtless men drove by, each sweating off the dust and shouldering an empty stare. Two locals walked in from the street to holler advice. A man with a moustache rusty as his machete. A woman who had balanced a basket of red beans on her head. Mama, forever faithful, forever Mormon, called down all the Catholic saints. I returned to her cry of mijo, mijo, and the embossed outline of her face through a dazed shield of purple. I breathed. I seized. My neck curled the way paper twists when thrown into a flame. I rocked back and forth, my arms whipping to and fro like limp limbs in the wind, a quarter century of muscle convulsing like a possessed man. Understand, we all thought I had died. I begged my family for forgiveness as I kicked back their arms. I thanked Mama for her patience as I shook from her grasp. Tranquilistate, hombre, my primo said, clenching my wrists. The doctora sat serene as a hen hanging by her feet from a line. It took five minutes before I stopped seizing. It took five minutes before I could see their faces clearly, Mama’s skin stretched like a bag over her face, the twitching size of her eyes. I love you, I cried, holding her shaking hands in mine.  I love you. I love you. Over and over again.  ¡Dios mío! Ya empezó a hablar en babosadas , cried the señora with her basket of beans.  No, no son babosadas, I told her. Es inglés. Es inglés . Severed by the neck. Hanging  by its hair. I find her red and crooked as a peach pit.  Hidden in the mangroves, moaning in a voice that drips red  into the river. They say my mother is vengeful spirit.  Swinging in the wind like an echo through the trees.  Her mouth is a cave of wasps. Her eyes sewn shut.  I hear her prayers in the chorus of flames that torch  the shanties, the singed singing of burning forests.  Each wasp is a prayer. Each has a deadly sting and eyes  black as the soul of an emptied barrel.  If I slit my throat, my neck. If I let my head roll down the river  merciless as a grenade. If my tongue tastes the blood  in the water. If my ears teach my mouth the broken language  of drowning. If my eyes learn to reconnect the nameless  limbs. If I could hold her head in my hands. If I could crush it  over my shoulders. If her eyes opened. If my muscles twitched.  If my body could flood with her memory, and if only,  for moments, we could share the same heartbeat before she said,  este no es mi carne.  This is not my flesh. I hold dark tea in your ruined city. desire, a pitcher of wild flowers between us.  the air, weeded with night. your heart, mosque-blue. I try to articulate, and fail,  the sadness of cows drinking from a thawed puddle, a box of winter cabbage,  the dry, cold hour of home. I hold the dark tea. I am trying to learn  holding without desire. here, rice boils in broth. here, you give me lemons, a jar of tahini,  you say, bring them to your mother— but there is a field burning with winter,  a winter of water damage, of potatoes only. my mother’s name is the last rowan berry,  lilac wilt, the blushed cheeks of red currant juice brewed late summer.  I hold the dark tea. I kiss your hands, your kind hands, the marble of which hasn’t,  yet, cracked. I speak. I speak, then. once in childhood, a man with  a horse carriage. once, many times, I stumbled on a rotting moose. the sunset  lit its lanterns over blackened cow parsley. my mother’s name is the sound  of the river freezing. winter never left without bones. it meant taking an axe to your root and you forgot you were a ragged, giving apple tree.  you forgot there was a blackberry-braided fence, the warm milk of a child’s smile.  your starched, white headscarf grew to brown earth. they took you to east, east, and your husband’s name  slipped from an animal wagon, became quartz in a nameless riverbed. death came in women  cutting wood in snow light, in mothers shuffling barefoot over the frost’s shining iris,  whose children became magpies, became silences cradled in silk sheets.  you could say, I  could leave , but the forest sparkled with bones. days wrote themselves into a bone diary.  a bone knows the night of your body, then the night of soil. each day of watery bread,  of silvery wind through a thin, old sweater, the trees falling, falling, the sky burning  in a pale flame. the sky, the only door. when the sun halved its apples, birds still  froze into lakes. you ate their ghosts. each day someone called the earth good,  and you repeated it, having forgotten your language . The path down the Way of the Cross isn’t straight but tangled, web-like, a place to get lost and then found.  Wind rattles the ocotillo as I pass, crazes the juniper, conjures a cloud of red dust on the cliffs. The wooden  crosses creak and sway as the rain blows in. Here everything’s tempered by extremes—the downpour runs off  to the muddy Chama River, a fire on the mountain rages. The garden path circles big volcanic rocks, lavender  peeking from the blackened pores. Overwatered, the yarrow lining the way grows too tall and topples.  ———  The desert can’t take so much rain: the main road washes out in rivulets,  crumbling into the river below. Nothing soaks in. Vespers drone on  toward the comfort of another Sabbath, in saecula saeculorum—  silence can till you up, maybe, make words stick and reveal  what completes you, let some sprit soak in. Or else the quiet carries  parts of you off. The desert, too, has its small voice, a coyote song at midday  echoing in the canyon, the cottonwoods’ green rising in counterpoint to red cliffs.  The abbey church behind the garden built on rock, under rock, sheltered  in repetition, perfumed—a muddy river rising fast to cut off the road.  ———  Three days I wait here to rise into some new life, but I can’t even believe from this cell, praying only to leave it— more empty words, my eyes to the horizon.  The river trees across this distance turn blue under pinnacles of rock, those remnants of old time: what impossible contentment, to stand and be worn. And fires still burn  out west despite the desert rain. The bells call me back—terce, sext, none. Hours and days drag like the text my voice softly joins, then rush on again.  —Christ in the Desert Monastery, Abiquiu, New Mexico           In this life, the questionable answer is always water,  more water,  rain pooling in windowsills, my home a basement,  color of butter in lamplight.  Three little rooms and a galley kitchen,  contentment gathering like cat hair in corners,  or, outside, snow that knits a curtain up the door.  We settle in softly, snow and I.  Snow departs as swiftly as it arrives, and I say, Teach me .  I say, I am okay  waking to showers over my sofa, the boiler room flooding above.  There is nothing that can’t be fixed, and this is almost true  if fixing is knowing that nothing is fixed at all.  In this life, the Poudre spills its banks,  swallows bicycle paths, turns fields to lakes.  The lower roads return to earth and water.  Logs from last year’s fire  spin and dip down the river, spearing up through the torrent  for a new, violent life. I lie asleep dreaming  a distant calm, faint drums,  a future in which I share a storm with one who sips it slowly.  My phone chimes at 4 a.m. with a pre-recorded warning:  shelters, closures.  I make coffee and listen again. The bridges are blinking out. We light your body on fire. We learn to pray.  Summer opens and falls to its knees. I hold the sun  behind my eyelids. I see your lips on Mom’s  swollen belly. She holds your head at both ears.  Listen. I can’t go back any further. Look at me  shouting behind the glass, my dumb hands  banging on air. I see you standing on the porch  of the dream. Even here, you’re turning  to ash, dissolving into ocean. Years of nothing.  How can I explain this feeling. Mom says  you’re still inside me. I trace the lines of my palm  with a switchblade. I learn to beg. Undress  language with my tongue. Collarbone, lipstick.  I come over the bathroom sink, drag my palm  across the mirror. Call it horizon. The beginning  of heaven. The house I’m always leaving.  Say, goodbye . I dare you. Say, I’m sorry .  My hand reaches for your face. It could fit  in your eye socket, dissolve into night like  your ash on my fingertips. I’ve forgotten  so much already. I drive across the country.  I fall in love. You have no idea. I look exactly  like you. I dissolve into hands. We smile.  Mom reaches for me across the table, says  look how far you’ve come to get here .  And outside, the rain assembling  like bones in a dream.      KARA  BY MICHAEL DHYNE    after grief therapy  We lifted the parachute high as we could, took turns on our backs, arms pulling the sky apart overhead. Someone said close your eyes and I felt the room breathe. My father was there and the house was on fire. We walked the seam between rooms together like I too had died and death was a hallway. How else could I be there? It was the dream we all had, our hands becoming hands as we moved them in tandem. He opened a door and I couldn’t tell the living from the dead. I thought we all were ascending. On the night my heart finally opened I saw a black ocean hang like a pendulum under a black sky. I swear I’ve never felt love like this. I say I’m afraid I won’t be the same as I was before, and you say it doesn’t matter. Let go. After Hernan Bas’ Leaving the Nest  When I ask my mother to tell me a story, she tells me of her cold feet boiled down in a vat of frogs.  She tells me of the way she danced- romantic with a mop at her wedding rehearsal. If you ask her, she’ll say  the mop had thick Sicilian curls, more rhythm than my father, and always took out the trash. She’ll say I should have thrown  my body  in reverse, killed  the headlights, and hid.  She’ll say you have his hair, and when your eyes flash red I see him               and a turn signal onto a back road.  It is true that  I want to spend           my life apologizing  for both my body         and my anger,  but neither have          killed anyone yet.  This is a triumph of blood.  This is a U-Turn. In my family, moving backward is progress.  In my family, water boils  to ice, and songs sound better while rewound. When I tell  my mother I’ve met the man I want to marry she asks to give me away. after Rumi  My worst habit is that I get so tired of winter I am a torture to those around me.  I boil rice too long, serve this to my friends who are too polite to refuse me.  We swallow locks of very blonde hair. A panic of the throat.  This seems to be a permanent sensation. The salted fish climbs onto  the grill  and returns to the water. I don’t stop him.  Now the sea is made of salt. Now we know thirst.  I am tired of winter. Is this hell, this wanting?  My friend who loves me doesn’t answer. My hair blondes in the heat of my kitchen. 
Cocktails at the Palacio de Bellas Artes  except for the bartender this space is all yours
anonymous in your blackness safe
with friends be especially fey                it complements the art deco  plumed serpents and other gods
in the European style               don’t let Rubi order your drink
briefly stumble through the Spanish     think of the murals  above you while JD and Rubi kiki
shackles cracked                    gunfire
marching Mexican workers                indigenous  people flogged and gored       a brown man chained
face down on a slab     back raw          cannibal
of images don’t make a fetish of suffering  it is distant      you hold the whip         sip your drink
when Marcelo asks what you’ll remember
mention history all the delicious food you’ll eat  when Marcelo says I’ve never seen such poverty drink again       thankfully it’s mostly gin          shame
becomes a tonic                       order another cocktail  watch the sun brighten a bronze of St. Michael
stomping the devil        make note of the police everywhere
in the square with their riot gear           tip as much as you can    2. Mexico City Metropolitan Cathedral  Despite the cathedral’s vaulted roof, the Altar of Forgiveness bright with imperial gold, it’s hard to see.  What little light there was had the quality of stone. There were paintings barred to me by shadows, rails.  I knew these images of grief by heart, mother and son, tenderness and brutality, cyclical as a soap opera.  The night before, drinking tequila at a spot overlooking the Zócalo, we watched people crisscross the square. (It was days before an election. The air seemed to buzz.)  Glowing against a lilac sky, the bell towers, made of stones from an Aztec temple, seemed to be aflame.  We know the names of architects and priests. We know the laborers as anonymous. This is not a gallery.  I tried remaining aloof to those praying, leaving bouquets at the altar. Women on their knees, like the men.  I wished I could touch the brown Christ, read the psalter. I was looking for an antidote  to Europe and America. When we entered, Rubi dipped her hand in water and crossed herself.    3. Teotihuacan  Not even the gods would have begrudged us that view. Perched on the Temple of the Moon,  Rubi took our picture, none of us looking particularly out of place for the most part, black or brown and thankful to be there.  Clouds like fine, old cloth covering crystals fray and shine.  We saw why the gods dwelled where stone leopards and serpents refuse to become dust:  vistas broad and old as the first uttered sound. To think of it still makes me sweat. Climbing behind three Mexican women, I gripped the lone cord, terrified of stairs not cut for my clown feet. They engaged us— JD and I—though, shamefully, we could not communicate.  They wanted a picture under a sun and wind-ruined shrine, we linked arms, smiled—  I was happy to be away from home and the slaughter of black people, though they were still killed,  are.    4. Obsidian Mirror  Don’t take anything from Teotihuacan, JD.  Watch it be cursed and I gotta fly back with your ass. The man who sold it was sweet, and it was a gorgeous, polished stone. Night entered the mirror and brightened like water where we saw our unburdened faces.  We were black men in a city sprung up like well water where we need not flinch at another’s approach. This city never was ours. On the train ride back, I saw a politician on the front page, recently elected, bloody and strung-up. We walked avenues where the poor with open palms called me  moreno , and men cursed our English advances.    5. Porn Church  Avoiding rain we dipped inside a church, where dreaded whites, hair like the Grinch’s hands, watched German women shouting at their subs barking in latex shorts and canine masks. We listened to Teutonic syllables ricochet off columns, into the dome, still bright with the wings of angels and St. Peter holding the keys to another heaven. A perfect kind of sacrilege, I thought, this global festival of sex, delight in porn that’s nothing less than Genesis uncut, no shame, forbidden fruit, humanity made fluid, out of that first water, mask for mask no more, and vulnerable.    6. Casa Azul  Marcelo lost his iPhone in a taxi, so we lost our photos of Frida Kahlo’s house.  Still, I can’t forget seeing her easel and dried paints.  Marcelo, said Frida’s death mask. He touched the shawl wrapped with flair around her face—no docent to yell at him this time. He whispered back, but I was not there to remember it.  And her kitchen! Painted the colors of the sun, vines, and sea, filled with pans which warmed tortillas and pots for the best pozole.  I remembered a picture Marcelo texted me, his bronze face framed by a swarm of tulle. Rubi on My Mind, he wrote.  On the wall, broken pottery spelled their names—Frida, Diego—though I misremembered: thought of plates smashed and thrown. They were simply stones, stones one would gather to skip across water.  Mostly, I remembered the four of us walking through her garden, how easy it was to fall away there, among the lavender eaves and gray shades, to laugh and talk low as fountain water.    7. Basilica of Our Lady of Guadalupe  I want to do it for my mother, Rubi said.
We found an empty aisle and joined O Mary, Mother of Names, the service.
Unchurched, unbaptized, polite,
I tried following
along but fell back with Marcelo. the many JD, in the row behind us,
never stood, unmoved
by a God who’s done many no good. hemmed to your starry cloak,  It’s the order I adored:
listening to the call- how many shine and-response, watching Rubi,
one sea rose among many, still? rise and kneel, pray and speak,
to old rhythms
washing over us. Even those of us O Mary, Mother of Leaving seated, unable to speak,
were offered a hand, a few words of greeting. Roses in Your Wake— I was a stranger,
and they welcomed me. A man crawled O Mary,  on his knees
toward the Virgin’s image. Mother of America, He must have worn
his joints and flesh for a while,
supported by a sister I only pray to love, or friend. I’d only ever seen
this in paintings
or documentaries. one day, Seeing him,
I remembered statues we saw
climbing to the original church: my American soil, indigenous men, women, children
offering all that will one day claim me they have—cloth, fruit,
freedom—to the Virgin. hopefully, The man had a ways to go before
his pilgrimage ended
when Rubi told us it’s time to go. not before my time.    8. Chapulines at Las Tlayudas  Spritzed with lime  they still didn’t taste like much
but Rubi and I ate them
after a reading
I didn’t speak        Rubi’s not a poet
We’d been sipping little pots of mezcal for hours  After a while Rubi stopped eating noticing grasshopper
parts like little hairs on our plate
Drunkenly I raised my drink pinky up as if
queen of some realm Here’s to the world  and all its garish colors  and the sun-stung agave
may it never run out       in our throats  You got a little leg in your teeth Rubi said    9. Ballet Folklorico  Sitting next to Marcelo was almost unnerving. Excited, his body was like a drum’s vibrating skin.  When the dancers flooded the aisles— white scalloped skirts like whipped sea foam, audience screaming—  and the papier-mâché heads, those large, startling figures, surrounded me like family I had forgotten  because I had forgotten how profoundly loved I have been. Lost in confetti and streamers, I speak our names  though no one hears. It was as if we were all dancing. When the bullet baptizes itself in her body, my grandmother  mourns down the moon, dissolves it on her tongue like a wafer. The night  a missionary fathered my father, nai nai opened her legs like scissors  cutting along our dotted bloodline. With her teeth she tore  the spines from bibles bled open on the bed. In church  she worships a virgin. At home she hangs her hymen on a bedside hook, blood  a mirror between her legs. The missionaries fisted pews out of mud & preached  to pigs, taught us to brush our teeth with mint leaves & chew 21 times before swallowing  fruit pits, priest’s seed. Nai nai feared both would make her belly grow. The old gods  fell as rain. Nai nai collects her blood in spoons, blesses my sweat  into holy water, says grace is the god guitaring our ghosts.  Says marriage is between husband & knife. Between mouth & drought. Between  the garden I’m gouged from & the Father funded to feast on me. He skins me  before a fire, tautens a blonde hide over my bones, teaches me  to burn is the body’s oldest belief.  *  Look me in the thigh. The arrow I’ve lodged there, domestic as a wife. I confess to castling the lady  in her tooth-bright tower. I can’t resist how she sings to me. I circle her tower nightly, hurl myself  bone by bone through her window. We sweep the shatter with our tongues. I unthread my cape & rebraid it  into rope. We escape down our spines & into a forest biblical with birds bleaching  to salt in the moonlight. We lick them into flight. I chop off my breasts, my fat ringed like a tree. I count the years in cages  I’ve broken into. The bars I bent out of tune. Pleasure our priesthood, prayer the key  my mouth unlocks to. My grandmother dances ash down my throat, sews a steak knife into my hand. Tells me to sever  each finger that enters me. I wear a thimble of spit. I’ve spent a year undressing you, I kiss off your buttons  & swill them with salt. My grandmother says girlhood is an exercise in control. I’m closer to a theory  of loss. My grandmother staples me to a souvenir cross, what the missionaries gave out with sacks of rice: hunger  mortgaging my mouth. Appetite is insurance. When my wrists bleed wine, drink holy of me. Free’s  not what I’m paid to be.  *  On TV, nai nai watches the gay pride parade. Says she’s never seen so many white people without clothes  on her island, the missionaries beat native boys for going to school without shirts. How they flayed the brag of their brown  til the bone showed, sudden as the sky between clouds. Here the pews fleshed from my thighs, the church organs  harvested from corpses. Every Sunday, the croon of nai nai’s callused nipples. It was her job  to nurse the missionary wives’ children. While my father suckled on the udders of guns & knuckles of sugarcane, nai nai  fed american mouths, her milk black with flies. Above, the sky scythed through the roof. The sea shredding itself  to tongue-sized pieces. Nai nai mutes the channel & two men dye their beards in each other’s mouths. Two women tie the knot  in each other’s nooses. Gay marriage legalized before my grandmother. Instead of papers nai nai owns a bible in every language she was  beaten not to speak. Instead of a pension, nai nai donates her name to god, repairs the roof  with a prayer for rain, adopts church like the child she was never allowed to raise.      In Chinese, ghost rhymes with expensive & mother  misspends her mouth on prayer with no payback, no god  bending our sky like a back. What a daughter costs  a mother must pay out of body: she reaches  into her blood like a wallet, a wound  we eat out of. She says one man’s daughter  is another god’s revenge: a river lassoes our local church & my body  expires mid-prayer. I wear my blood  as bracelets & go sleeveless on Sundays. When rain reaches  my knees, I stitch the flood my miniskirt. We will all be better  mothers than our mothers. Call this belief. When I microwave my mouth  a prayer boils over. My tongue tides. Mother heaps a houseful  of salt on our family altar, fills a bath & stripteases, teaches me  to do the dead man’s float. In a church  made of bone, I boil a broth of fathers.  I season my wounds & wear them aloud  I pile salt into an anthill & call it home. When it floods, we flee  on the backs of our brothers. We each a queen. We seek  sweet things, eat our gall bladders seasoned in sugar.  Agong dies after dinner, bladder come loose like a coin purse, piss  scattering like pennies on the bed. I make a wish. I fork  open his eye & call it a flood. Call a river a phoneline, my voice snipped  into silences. There is no country we can afford to bury our dead.  Mourning, too, is an economy of light. It was day when he died  & dark when I miscarried a moon into the wrong country’s night.  We burned paper Chinese money & it was the first  time I’ve seen my face on something worth  something. No one tells me why we capitalize God  but never ghost. Never grieve. How our bodies domesticate disaster: by swallowing  another country’s rains. By reining my jaw to the sea, my bones  lurched into boats. My breasts bitten into apples. My mother says  women who sleep with women are redundant: the body symmetrical  to its crime. Between your knees I mistake need for belief  in a father figure: once, we renamed our fathers by burning them  out of our bodies, smoking the sky into meat. I have my father’s name:  張, meaning archer. I consider coming clean  through you like an arrow. I consider the way we shape in bed, like the sea  has revised its shoreline & we must move to meet it. This country calls  your body a hypothesis it will kill to prove. Along the borders  of my bed, I plant a field of green cards, flowers thirsting into throats.  I translate my wounds back into weapons. I suck your name like a sweet  teat, pickle my tongue to outlive its language. When I kiss you, I remember  every silence begins inside a mouth. Everything edible  begins as a bird. At night, birds peck peepholes into the dark  the way I have always watched women: in the distance  between a girl & herself is an entire body  bull’s-eyed, arrowed holy. A girl castling  her voice into a throat of stone. I kiss you & forget  to turn on the dark. I taste salt afterwards, trace  where light through a window veins your body, its wanting  to reroute your blood someplace safe.           In the 18th century, cholera flooded Europe & all the faucets  in people’s bodies opened. They leaked & leaked until the coma set in. This yawning  sleep was so often mistaken for quietus that the fear of live burial  bloomed like bacterium, mania wet & septic. To prevent more  accidental entombment, a German doctor mechanized a coffin  with bells the dead could rattle if they found themselves gasping,  lungs filled with muddy oxygen & an urge towards resurrection.  [::]  The human body can lose about twenty percent of its water before the coma sets in,  before sleep is a box nailed shut.  Afterward, we exist only in endings, in dirge  & dirt. I’ve been to enough funerals to know that at the heart  of every cathedral, there is an organ gasping for air. The tune pushes  through a depressed cavity into a sick, sick sadness. I’ve learned what I can  & cannot handle, what body I have left when I am no longer water.  I can lose twenty percent of myself before depression sets in, before all the songs  in my head go silent. & after, I can only talk about myself  as ending. My throat, a carillon tower flooding with the musician still inside.  [::]  I’ve learned depression is the name we give to gravity  when we demand a diagnosis. It is both the casket & the cavity waiting  with its eager mouth. I am afraid that someday  I will catch myself sleeping & reach for a spade. This morning,  before I could open my eyes I pushed my ear toward my chest  & waited hoping to hear bells. & I remember how a man hung himself in that garage on the hottest day of July & his daughter walked in to discover his body  a little closer to god. Rumor was she found the family dog nuzzled beneath her father’s legs but it snarled & snapped whenever she got too close.  For a week, the news boiled the air in our neighborhood. Anyone who walked passed that house swore their neck started to burn. By Sunday,  everyone was back mowing their lawns & drinking Coors out on the fresh paved asphalt. All the teenagers gathered  at the community pool to drink vodka & escape ourselves, to count the years until we leave this city without season, this forever  empty sky. As far as I know no one saw the dead man’s daughter after that. She barricaded the front door  with plywood one evening & was gone. No one knows if she ever came back for the dog. But months passed & the summer heat stayed muzzled  inside the house all year. I know this because when the U-Haul pulled into the driveway this morning & the garage door creaked open  for the first time since, two rows of gnarled teeth lurched out & disappeared into the open sky.       reino or i see my grandfather by the side of the road, about where he’s buried, but he’s wandering around with a flag of vertebrae. I mean, he is dead, though. Doesn’t this make him American  enough to demand the land he was buried in is his?  Doesn’t this entitle him to break bread with gods  whose names fill the sky with anvils?  Or was he just buried in random earth—  because I saw a truck drive over his grave  like that isn’t how people get cursed—like that driver  isn’t going to crack open their jaw tomorrow & spill out  ratones, conejos, cucarachas, & all their teeth.  [::]  Who’s to say this soil is American anyway,  like have you asked my grandma?  She once swore the whole of California  belongs to her mother & my father still  calls this dead man Reino. That’s right, the whole  damn kingdom. Grandfather was, after all, an unruly man  he once pulled his spine out of a screaming mouth  & carried that hurt until the end.  Who’s going to tell him he can’t still reign  from the dirt?  [::]  The U.S. government  denied my grandfather a military funeral,  denied they ever held him against a gun  & called them both by the same name.  The official reason they gave was my grandfather  did not join the Marines legally, & fine  but he still volunteered to walk into any slaughter-  house with a crown of bullets in each hand,  they could have at least sent a flag,  or the name of that truck driver,  or a throne. Amidst the languid chatter of pint glasses, a man materializes. He reeks of Boston and bourbon, a disciple of Lowell, no doubt.  He says Ukrainian-Jewish women are beautiful, that once, a woman fled Ukraine by boat & she had a small waist & her father’s watch & a daughter  who is now his pregnant wife. He says I look just like her, reminds me Ukrainian-Jewish women are beautiful.  When God said let there be light, God judged that light was good & so it was & so it goes: the man names me anything & all my ugly  dissipates. It is in this light that I think of you, your dreams of America beating in me, in the heart of Texas, Godforsaken.  The rib-bearer knows only repetition. The man telling me over & over how good I have been. I am beautiful, Bubbe,  did you hear? I am cavernous! Burger King & Hotel Van Zandt. Sedona, Arizona & New York, New York. I don’t pray, but I don’t have to.  I inspire mirrors. I sweep cockroaches from the kitchen to the living room. I chop liver & skip town. Easterly woman, you left home  for a simulacrum of God. A hurricane rages quietly against the window where I am. From your rib I was pulled.       It takes six months after her death for us to clear out the apartment. The Florida air is heavy with moisture, and my dad sits in the living room, thumbing through yellow photographs, his father’s Air Force cap resting loosely on his balding head.  I step into her room, touch her things, put on her pearls, her lipstick—rancid. Next to her bed, I open a drawer brimming with black lingerie, the tags still on. Standing in front of the mirror, I put on a garter for the first time, look for her in my hips.  A year later, cleaning my own room, I find a birthday card from Bubbe, two years passed. On the cover is an old woman sitting by the phone, smiling.  If age is a number, mine is unlisted, it says, and scribbled inside,  Maybe that’s why I never hear from you. A deep breath, a dry throat, and finally— the sweet release of rain through humid air. I have always admired the bloodhound for his agility, the way he tears across the stubble field in pursuit of his master’s kill. I have loved his finesse, how he holds the dead weight in his slack-jaw like a lover inert from a night of drinking. There is loyalty in the way he passes her off to his man, who stands by like a chill pimp. And what self-control he has, the gundog, with his contentment to salivate, to come, to sit, to stay. He does not bite to kill. Perhaps this is his nature; perhaps this is an exemplary dog. You see where I am going: There is a dog that comes for me in low light, begging for scraps. When he takes me in his mouth, I roll over; I come; I play dead. Shock is not a survivable state, God no— ask anything that has lived in the mouth of the dog: the rabbit, the pheasant, the fox. O meat and potatoes! this game of fetch, this I do for you what you can never do for me — it is no good. Here is the image I offer, the showing & the telling: I, too, was taught to love without teeth, to hold the kill in my mouth and hum my ugly song. Perhaps this makes me pathetic. Perhaps this makes me a very good dog. The Arab apocalypse began around the year of my birth, give or take— the human apocalypse, a few thousand years earlier.  ٢  I earn my living teaching about the human condition, a composite of violence, vengeance, and theft, ingenuity, too, and forms of love unique to men and women, the only species that knows what others of its kind thought and did thousands of years before— stories, myths, histories, philosophies, mirrors showing humanity to itself, none of which, by the way, are enough to ensure our survival.  ٣  A mile, a mile and a half from the border, the Israeli border, Bint Jbeil, the small city my father left in nineteen sixty-seven, its orchards, hillsides, rivers, roads, highways, bridges, houses, schools, restaurants, coffee shops, pharmacies, hospitals, cemeteries, twice in his lifetime, obliterated. The Arab apocalypse began in the 1950s and 60s, in Egypt, Tunisia, Libya, Syria, and Iraq— the human apocalypse, in 1945, in a desert in New Mexico where scientists exploded the first atomic bomb. In Beirut, snipers picked off children sneaking to buy candy, yet the population grew. In nineteen seventy-two my father paid $9,000 for a house in Detroit. Forty years later, a foreclosure, it sold for $8,000, its windows, doors, floors, walls, the porch, the mailbox, the tree in front, birch or poplar, gone—now weeds and bushes block the drive, vines where the chimney once was creep over the rooftop. “In free fall,” an expert in urban decline describes Detroit’s population. At the current rate, by the beginning of the next century, stray dogs will outnumber people. Soon as I earned enough to get out, I got out. Still a street comes to mind, Forest, Grand, St. Aubin, Lafayette, or the bridge over the river to Belle Isle, or the tunnel lights before Joe Louis before Joe Louis was demolished, or, disappearing in a rear-view mirror, the horizon with smokestacks, which once upon a time I believed no other on earth could match in perfection. The Arab apocalypse began on a piece of paper in 1917— the human apocalypse, 50,000 years ago, when hunters wiped out the giant kangaroo. In politics, practically nothing is new. Twenty-four hundred years ago Plato worried about speech-acts, what he called “craft,” the crowd swayed so easily by emotion and flattery, the failures to follow. Today, which poems will cause institutions to fail? Who worries about that? The city was here when lust lured us away from the animals, when kings and the children of gods hunted side by side in the forests of lesser gods, when Priam begged for his boy’s broken body, when Achilles, cruel and beautiful, chose death for glory, when Abram became Abraham, and Muhammad heard God’s voice in a lightning bolt— it was here, and the asphalt and concrete won’t reveal what it was, the rivers won’t either, or the trees or the soot turning factory walls and lungs permanently black— whatever it was, swamp, forest, glacier, it was there. The apocalypse began with a thousand hoofbeats across a field, men hollering, women wondering where to hide the children. “Here,” a mother said. “We will hide in the earth— our ancestors are already there, the rest will follow.”  it’s true doctor i am a firstborn a daughter a fluvial child of loss         & yes of course  i love blame it is my government it is my god my own hand ready to take fault when disaster ignites  (if i had only called then [    ] would still be alive) (if i wasn’t so often gone the house would not  have been broken into) & at night i make ablution & heave my leathered knees into a prayer  to ask the large & featureless creator why & why & why & when i finish i fold the mat & rise  turn to my own face in the mirror & list because    because    because  She forgets English words. To her, I live in North Coraline , even when I leave her my address on a Post-It. She forgot the baby name book in the lobby, because when you’re screaming the name of a goddess you left overseas, you’ll forget names of other folks’ kids. She settled on Eric—eternal, ruler, destroyer. She hates the name but it’s fast and easy to write on form after form after form you don’t understand. Credit to her I could have been named ultrasound or sterile , or gook or chink or dragon lady . I imagine she heard that like a mosquito bite you’ve scratched into scar. She wishes she had named me better in a language we no longer share.  Expensive dragon , she translates, but no, not when six aunts shared a bedroom right before my birth. Golden , like what they traded smugglers for safety, what they didn’t have for food in the camps. Not that either. I would give you more examples of what keeps us apart, my soft hands, but she keeps from me those memories. Precious . That’s it. Precious dragon. Beauty makes some men mean; I never can console them enough. Lifetimes later maybe, a little red fox lies on the side of the road. I’m the type to notice.  I help myself that way, and dream my father more alive. He waits again by the library door as he is, was, and always will be. I held the book, any book, to my heart, everlastingly.  The rain is heavier now. It is dusk. Someone whistles in the street. Is it a man? It must be. In these times of heave and eddy, the people have grown  austere. Brambles should have caught flame by now. A reluctant warrior should have emerged  to orate forth an opus. Home is where the psalm is and so I choral my offspring as I am able,  encourage them to emote their own opera, compose a truth—some chord of code, perhaps a hex  in A minor, one not locked into that logic of the common meter.  My young dutifully mouth the sanctioned libretto. Their syncopated arrangements are an alien strain  unwelcome in the standard repertoire. They cannot outshout the refrain  that programs them to whitewash. To be an asset in today’s troupe demands a singer  eschew all appearances of singing. Improvisation invites discord—  so many more doorkeepers now. The homeland beats with a wind-bluffed,  boot-strapped people who like every boot to be on the ground, to die  with their boots on. A call to voice is a call to asphyxiation.  Too soon song will be roped into the service of boots. Twice I’ve turned my head to see a cop  inside me find himself in love. His thumb  heavy in the novel of my body kept my spine  from snapping shut. I fucked and found myself  while following the bullet to its logical conclusion.  Girl, I guess there’s glamour in it. Night slid  the streetlamp’s haloed cantaloupe behind me  behind him while I fondled my keys. One hole  in my skull pulled through the plum sky Mars’s light. You were right to tell yourself you’d never live this. You wouldn’t have survived. Each time my carpal flex flashed open and stained whatever clean appliance—rim of tub, my own teeth where I sucked the wound quiet— with its rouge run-off, I watched you run off. I’ve told that story. I’ve taken a look at the slow sea monster of my vomit luminous in the toilet bowl, two digits of my fingers still slick, nearly erotic with gag slime: there was my cocktail of daily medicine, half digested. There was a line of folk ready to tell me Black men don’t do this to themselves. They don’t, you said, take dick either, but here I am. There you are. Some night I was so hungry and tired and high on my prescription, I let a man I didn’t know feed me vodka and orange juice until I would remember neither my dreams nor his hands. In three of the five psych wards I nested in like a nomad bird—because where else could I rest—I fell in love easily. I once stepped entirely into a bottle of pills and tried to screw my body finally underground. My father lifted me seizing into a hospital and out of his house shortly thereafter. Dear fellow gay-ass nigga, who loves you these days? I hope it’s Black people. I hope no one stole the certainty of that away from you. To believe that white men had my back was a facile act: who else so long prepared to help me hate me? I’ve told this story. I barely graduated. I stunted my own growth. I don’t know how to go home. What you don’t know is I  needed someone like you but braver. Now I just have issues with needing anyone at all. Your wife is shrugging out of a nightgown and sinking under sheets. There are drippings of me still between your teeth. You’ve since taken men in your mouth and said a silent word to God. You could lie there beside her wholly without conflict or bitterness. She could be he. They could be happy and the world in which I’ve learned I live no less itself. From its stubborn clay I’ve shaped a creature, hollowed into its guts a pair of lungs, attached appendages that make it capable of walking out of every room it enters at will and willed it to love. What have you done. thank you birds for coming / are your wings tired / would you like a tiny glass of water / would you like a small seafood meal / please shake your feathers everywhere / my birds thank you for safe passage / my birds they do fly in formation / I wish my birds would come take the government away / I wish the birds would fly the refugees to sanctuary cities / my bird book is white and I am a woman of color / birds feather my poems / cages and hunters are the worst sort of plot twist / out of love I wrapped my wings around me / when I imagine wings I am learning to forget white angels / children are like birds / they can go anywhere in their minds / my birds helped me out of ice / flew me back to the ocean / told me about the good love the bad love and the young confused love where no one is to blame / I think my cats do care about my birds / where will my birds wander / I must let the birds go / they will find good homes forever homes and not forever homes / but I want to know where does the love go / maybe some birds will get dirty / maybe some birds will see the snow / I sign off my birds for flight for resistance for joy / and say let them be an echo for anyone who needs an exit  It is June & I read about having grace to forgive those  who would condemn us. It is June & a man reads a poem  where the father becomes a dying stag & the son says there is  something I need to tell you . It was June when I was in bed  past 1am gathering news about the Orlando nightclub  shooting. I fell asleep knowing I would wake to walk  against grief in waves. It is June & I am happy that, at  some point, Tegan & Sara will show up in San Francisco  or Oakland. It is June & I have never prayed to any god.  It was June in the 2000s when my ex-partner ran  the New York City pier dance. We slid through a sea  of men with shaved chests. The songs hardly had words  & the bass shuddered into our bodies. Fireworks  orgasmed glitter over the Hudson and New York  roared back. In the VIP section, I stood in a sundress  surrounded by so many barely dressed people double-  kissing my face & saying happy Pride & where is your wife  the wooden house in Castañer didn’t come with air conditioner or anything cool. The heat was its own kind of music, & so was abuela—demanding, sharp-tongued. The kind of woman, I imagine whose teeth grew in because she told them to. So the chicken never had a chance. It ran around the backyard, flapping its black-feathered wings for mercy, for god’s attention, but Papa Dios knew better than to get in between a woman feeding her grandkids. I looked over my shoulder & there she was, chasing it, like an old lover she came back to haunt yelling:  hijo de puta! sin vergüenza! ven acá! Her rosary beads slapped against her chest, over & over like a chant, & you knew everything in her path was temporary. Even the wind buckled at the knees, at the sight of a woman too wise to act like her blood was softer than it was—& I saw her do it . . . & I think she knew because the chicken clucked so hard it spit up its own good throat & she laughed; grabbed it by the neck & swung it high above her head like a propeller. All summer I tried, but couldn’t unsee that. Once, she gutted mom’s favorite pig with a machete & fed it to her— on her 12th birthday. Maybe that’s how mama learned to love us, to kill the thing that feeds you.  Years later, she didn’t go to her best friend’s funeral or the vecina who mothered her in New York. Barely made it through abuela’s; I suppose all she had was to love until death. & no more. But when we got to the funeral home & saw Doña Teresa lying in the casket—arms crossed, chin cocked up— the whole family busted out crying, wanting her to come back, wanting her to shout:  Didn’t I prepare you better than this—  Call it aesthetics or beauty, but you privilege a portion of her face, let ’ s say your eyes are accustomed to a certain side,  the way you have a specific space to lay your body when sleeping with her— first in your bed and then in any other, any horizontal plane.  Some would say this isn ’ t real symmetry, but you know of course it is,  with you as the vertical, the folding line, and through no intention on either side, her face is curiously balanced  (yours in hers for all you know); imagine a card tower as custom-built for the hold of the moon—your chest,  the satellite holding. A million instances in which you ’ ve drawn  a complicated cursive R. Every time, stop to think, starting in the same place, say, her right eye to the curve of the bridge of her nose, her cheekbones, and you find yourself like a contractor building over and over the same home.  She takes her steps too, though you never think to ask whether she begins first with the plates or the spoons,  and when you tell her, you mean it as a working definition. Or specifically, this is why  she cannot help but be, to you. And that is only her face— you have awakened by the mouth  of this wave, and again this wave, again,  for so long as to let the name change. What arced her like the inside of a pitcher of water,  and makes you a cartographer you cannot know by this, but here you are, facing  this little world with the only science you know. So what that it ’ s easy to love a country when your body has grown into its shell? So what if you play favorites with this history?  You think, what if I am stuck like this? What if  I never change? So what. Never change.  Moments are not for revision— if they are lived honestly, they are open to one interpretation only. They make you like a child.  Of course that’s what they make.       they say that if i were able to run at the speed of light, (or god willing past it)  time would curl on itself like fire after leaves. imagine the spokes  of a wheel reversing as you watch, a swallow glancing in your path, and becoming a bullet fired forward on a chain  and thrown back into his shell. to have access to the place nostalgia goes to slink,  hard and slow, like Samson in restraints. to see clumps of sugar hang like organs  in the cathedral of the sugar jar, the histrionic sun, and our fingers braiding, then unbraiding.  in the divine verticals, our bodies wed other orbits of love. Forever  is for the mind and not the body. there are many ways to die  they say. i find it difficult to believe. for any of us, there is only one. And the door opened in, as a sapphire asserts a certainty of blue and you, through the hall  like an alarm, and my body determined some parcel of space, your lips in passing,  and you reclined into the silence of the bed, and must have always found yourself there while I was not  thinking. How surely you dreamed. And what was in your head was a better thing than art, or rather, it was more beautiful  to wonder than to know; the absent-minded stretches of you where I might, while sitting, hit a deer. What made you finally  stand? It’s astounding I never upset you of your mystery. Loving is a misnomer, because you are expected  of your heart ’ s opinion on a sentence that is never completed, even as you’re having it. Nothing must be more free than the feeling  of the right to leave. You were really something like a cutting the way you laid yourself in water  every night reading. But the days average on and the planets circle round us like sharks. God it ’ s pretty.  But what does any of it mean? We pronounced ourselves over and over and afterwards we lay almost translucent, unmoved,  except your movement, all the things about us a theory, unburdened by the soft uncertain finish of the night.           a seagull—wings swallowing wings—I learned that a miracle is anything that God forgot to forbid. So when you tell me that saints  are splintered into bone bits smaller than the freckles on your wrist and that each speck is sold to the rich, I know to marvel at this  and not the fact that these same saints are still wholly intact and fresh-faced in their Plexiglas tomb displays. We holy our own fragments  when we can—trepanation patients wear their skull spirals as amulets, mothers frame the dried foreskin of their firstborn, and I’ve seen you  swirl my name on your tongue like a thirst pebble. Still, I try to hold on to nothing for fear of being crushed by what can be taken because sometimes  not even our mouths belong to us. Listen, in the early 1920s, women were paid to paint radium onto watch dials so that men wouldn’t have to ask  the time in dark alleys. They were told it was safe, told to lick their brushes into sharp points. These women painted their nails, their faces, and judged  whose skin shined brightest. They coated their teeth so their boyfriends could see their bites with the lights turned down. The miracle here  is not that these women swallowed light. It’s that, when their skin dissolved and their jaws fell off, the Radium Corporation claimed they all died  from syphilis. It’s that you’re telling me about the dull slivers of dead saints, while these women are glowing beneath our feet.       i spent years living with ghosts strung between my teeth  Like corn silk? like ghosts  How did they get there? good hygiene or poor taste perhaps a blend  Why keep them? i was so sad i would have harbored anything  Have you earned the right  to say sad? i don't want to talk about that  When did they leave? all at once they cannonballed right into a punch bowl and ruined my best shirt  Do you know why they left? when the dust is swept the broom is stored behind the door again  Do you miss them? they made me the delicate gulper i am today  But do you miss them? listen    the mention of silence is worse than the silence itself  your paperweight. This seems wrong. Seems like a sign that I need to spend more time on my own, so I  call my friend and drive him to the store full of overpriced healing stones. I want the women shopping to know I’m not  with my friend. I want them to know how great I’m doing with my adventures in independence. I’m ready to shout,  Look at my healthy new life! But my friend thinks it’s a bad idea to frighten people in a place with so many hard throwables.  Would they hurt me? These women look as if they’d smell like pink magnolias and violin rosin if I got close enough,  but I won’t. I’m too busy searching for the stone that best represents me—it’s not the blue one specked with God bits, or the ear-shaped obsidian. It’s not anything polished—and I think about how hard it is for me to believe  in the first Adam because if Adam had the power to name everything, everything would be named Adam.  Then I think, That’s a pretty smart thought. I don t say it to my friend. I don’t say it to the magnolia women. Do they still  count, these hours I’ve spent on my own, do they still count if I m saving all of my shiniest thoughts for you? 
Didn’t agree with me on my eye color.
I said it was more chestnut, and he wrote beer
the way when you tell someone else to look up
at a particular star
                             you can never be sure
it is your constellation at which they are nodding
even if their breath is warm on the curve of your
ear, and you want to believe in the trusty
abstractions again.
                              The air
was like entering after hysterically laughing
a room where a third person silently
lies. I had dreams of a voice saying: each
question will be repeated twice
and only twice
                       , unless
you retake the test.
Retake the test.
                         I woke up with the sweats
and then I came here, carrying a picture
of the person you should be seeing when you
look at me in my head. It was heavy
like the slosh of water in a toilet flushed endlessly
into the night
                      obsessive, obsessive
because if love is domination I just want
to be collected: hung
                                  askew & loved
for the stutter my color makes in a room’s
hum of time. Well you can’t always be
who you were in that other room
here. I’ve kept this fact for years
                                                   , a splinter

dark and harmless as a carp under the surface of
my skin. Sometimes I feed it hopeful
imagery:
              I picture myself living
back when no one imagined the earth as an ending
thing, on a raft with a nuclear briefcase
trying to relax, to forget the consuming and meaningless
destructions I have in me
                                        to enact.
I wanted to tell him I wanted
to pass. There’s nothing wrong with me
visible.
            But I just
stuck out my tongue, thinking how in the street
below I’d gone over the statement I’d make
if we spoke the same language:
                                                   I’d ask
will you still send me back if you
don’t assume I was home. I’d say
like an empty can at the dump
to the hand that held me
                                        , you think
when you throw something away
you throw it away   
Just because I study feelings doesn’t mean I’ve had them  all, you might’ve said, but thought I would come empty-handed  better, like a pair of children out for apples trusting there would be  riper fruit higher, climbing higher to behold the vast flat sheet of  sky cut up, the branches giving it a new immensity and them  a view of neighboring sheaves of grain unnumbered  as dust motes in one beam of sun and scintillant like the instant  you gain a belief, and so you gave me the benefit of  the doubt I knew there is no wisdom  in these things, each one a one- time blossom cultivated not  only to be pressed between the pages of two ages but envisioned  as a blur of pollen uplifted on infinite miniscule  wings and then wind-scattered, drifting down and downward, softly taking  hold under earth’s skin to be a part of the measure of things,  a hum in the fat dappled animal late afternoon, until you can’t  tell it from the light and you wouldn’t want to, the kind  of still point we climb up and up to find, though sure in nature it  never or only with extreme rarity arrives, that tight joy I  felt when you kissed the fine blue roots beneath my skin  and you said you to me like the name of a place. The first time, don’t remember. The next time, your blue eye spilt across the lens on the edge of the cut  glass coffee table, you can almost see the carpet-flowers now. That kid, the one spread-eagled on the mulch  scooped up pits-first by some other tot on the swingset’s mother, who wept, the scraped knee, the whole bit—  was you, duh. In third grade, paired with Angela, the blind girl, as she gripped your wrist in her fingerbones, wrenching it  over and over the finish line of the three-legged race, your chin split, coursed. Fast blood made a carnation  flower on your blouse. The nurse was one Miss Prinn. She stuffed a crumpled dollar into your red hand and hissed, stop crying.  Then mostly, for years, no one touched you.  A needle, a fork, a dog, a man in France —touched is not the right word— rearranged you under your life’s last skirt, kicked  you off the front steps—cobbles, scraped knee, the whole bit. Torn culotte. Your nose broke now and again, then hairy hands  of the doctor cupped your left breast, speculator over the holding, a cross between dinosaur egg and double-stuffed pastry, musing aloud, Can we  claim this as a medical necessity? The blue permanent marker making slashes—X across each nipple—you paid him extra  to put them back exactly where he found them. Crookedly, scar grins stitched under the stretched erasure yank each which way. Burn. Harden and sink  into the earth of flesh. One last cut left no mark—yet the milky negative testified that the intruders had entered. Vibrations, the rattle  of infinitesimal hammers driving ache nails deep in. The worn-down bone doors swivel open, each cavity gasps—as shards of air  wedge themselves in crevices between the tense of each act, weave your gait into the lapse of the horse who gallops, gallops endlessly, jumps  the fence, now you can’t stitch it back through your flesh, the thrill of impact as both feet hit  earth. Cut. Watch the past unspool  behind you in curls from its canister—you were her, a double, two daughter cells borne from the rip in the film of one woman and one man, spliced together. The summer palace was so full of people. Keep your mind occupied, my old tutor would say, or you will fall victim to your idleness. I kept busy. Unlike that fat, vain bitch Louise de la Vallière.  War is a messy business. I can’t imagine much wanting to think about it. My own son drove the Turks from Europe—a task  for which he was deeded a not unremarkable piece of land. I am not, by nature, averse to violence, though I prefer more intimate theatres.  In my exile, which is, admittedly, only partially self-imposed, I enjoy the company of my animals. A new litter just the other week. And the smallest, ugliest little hog-nosed dog. I think I will call him Louise. In those days, one visited through the curtain, unlocking the secret door  with a small key. One brought oils. Scented creams.  One wrote billets-doux— it was exhausting to expend oneself so freely. In the privacy  of one’s own apartments, one denied oneself. One waited patiently. Patience was not yet burdensome. The trick  was in the making love. That is to say, how both to fuck and to maintain the semblance  of one’s virginity and one’s good moral standing. Not that anyone expected to find innocence  among the loves of kings, did they? Never mind. Not all  of this is of consequence or will seem useful in this modern age. Twenty-seven years since the plague year I was born in, and the branches are shaking as usual—  sometimes it feels like a violent gesture and other times like a curtsy, because  the bushes under them look like round, gold pantaloons. The other trees  are angular and manscaped, but moss softens the statuary,  as in the royal cemetery, where machines tore at the bowels  of the city with mechanical claws, where we ate pears from a paper bag  and our chins shined as from the aftermath of lust. We met, we moved unshyly,  the shower hit our backs and faces like a shaft of light  in a religious painting, my whore-heart’s little monarchy  assigning me the subordinate roles I loved, even though I refused  to share you with others, our hairy legs still wet  as we passed ourselves between us, blunting our edges with our mouths. I hold a key as long as my body. There is a ribbon threaded through the hole. With all the other actors finally off-stage, I am posing as a putto in a neoclassical tableau.  The light expresses the boundary of the scene.  It is all part of a flashback to another time. (It is very difficult to negotiate these quick shifts between time periods  in the action of a single opera.)  I am shown in motion by a small floating cloth, which magically but unrealistically covers my penis. My nostrils are outlined for emphasis.  In the Fascist version, I am not a putto in a neoclassical tableau, but an Aryan boy on a poster.  The OTHER MALE FIGURES enter, wearing traditional fashions: harnesses made of leather belts and straps.  My words are full of desire. Then of envy (in the musical style of Salieri).  Then it is over. It isn’t the ovation I love. It’s the Maestro, petting my dark blond hair. Mother says history is all about ownership. My brother laughs, says  literally. I am visiting Mother’s hometown for the first time this winter.  In my suitcase, empty tote bags filled with the hope of relics, and lipstick  in three shades of red. I want to be beautiful when we arrive at our family’s grave.  Some say this land is love and days I believe them Mother  is beyond the glass, the tall stalks of grass guardians protecting her name.  Other days the wild green refuses Mother in their home—she hovers by the doorway,  uncertain. Why do I remain unpossessive? A long time ago her hair was long,  winding dark knots over the windows, locking the front door. We lived inside  and alone. Mornings I helped wash her hair in the kitchen sink. She called me her little  sweet bean. I grew this way for years, learned to spell citizen in the dark. Today I learn my father grew up without a mother. For 16 years he was told his mother was dead  when she wasn’t. Secrets don’t mean the same thing in China Mother says.  She uses the same logic to explain why the door to my childhood closet is left ajar,  why my brother’s unopened mail is an omen of crows.  Privacy is an American concern. Concern, construction. America, American.  As a child I slept inland, Mother the warm shore I never thought to venture past.  —  In China there’s a river that connects Beijing to the Bohai sea. Hai River, Hai He 海河  or when literally translated, Ocean River. I’m good at taking things literally.  I inherited that from my parents. At my mother’s first job, her boss told her  to have some fun over the weekend. Friday night at the grocery store,  my mother asked a clerk if he knew where she could find  “fun.” Confused, he lead her to a back aisle, pointed at a bag of balloons.  Helium is 6 cents a pop up front. He left her with the plastic bag, having fun.  —  Sometimes I’m tired of coaxing ghosts from the walls of my childhood home.  How did Father feel when he found out his mother was still alive? White paint. Faded frames.  Did he ever get to see her? Once. When he was 28, he visited her in Taiwan. Her hands clung like silver bracelets  around his wrists, convinced he might stay if he felt her on his skin.  When he died, Mother opened every window of the house. We slept beneath them, like mice  with faith in kitchen scraps. Father is that you? A floating wisp  of cat hair. Tonight I line orange rinds along the windowsill, arrange them  into a narrative. Truth is a house and commitment to the story—    someone tells me & sure enough another boards up     soon there won’t be  a need for places like these anymore there’s a word for what we lose  when we’ve gained our utopias have all been urban have all been set  like jewels across the coasts we’re from different elsewheres    evenings I sat  with my father to watch fish flick the pond until dark    I’ll never go back  there isn’t a queer pastoral for a reason though it doesn’t hurt anymore  does it I hold your hand through public parks the eucalyptus trees all  peel overhead into strips the koi flutter through we see another gay couple  making out on a bench & some days it seems we’ve found it    a holy city  swollen with light & sound on the back of the tongue so close  you could almost swallow it I know it won’t last I’ve read  every myth    somewhere a western wall still holds our prayers in its teeth  I want to be seen I want    to live like in Jerusalem right before or right after  it was sieged           It’s snowed twice now: once, the deep blue of kettle flames, that keeps the plow out late; the other, the stuff of a thousand names, snow-day snow, sledding snow, that caps the mailboxes, swallows up the cars. On Porter Hill, the lovers carved their names in ice, and schoolgirls brought brown boxes and laundry bins to send shooting down the road. By the church, the Duffys wrapped their snowman in a scarf, then lay on the ground for what seemed like hours, making angels. I walked around in wet boots, worried that you were cold, though of course you weren’t. Somehow, the diner stayed open, and the dog and I wandered in, knocking off snow. Paul glanced up from the game, briefly, and Nancy brewed a pot of coffee. I watched the grounds surface and sink in my cup. Everywhere, our neighbors kept skating over their little lives, like lakes. I didn’t know what to make of it. The whole walk home, past the houses, doubling and doubling with Christmas lights, there was something I couldn’t name. Whatever it was, it’s what made the deer meet my gaze, later that night, before she ran. It’s why the dog, on the front step, stopped for a moment, to sniff the air. In an attempt to look regal I lopped off the head of a black snake  The small tissues in my chest tore & patterned more beautifully  The sparkle of my boyhood rose, in my throat, & sang  When asked why I will say someone told me I am an ugly bag of bones  I will say yes, I split the snake against the promise of my own becoming  Let me explain: somewhere a boy swallows his own monstrous tongue  Somewhere a boy shatters another boy then kisses his knuckles, one by one  He is named the most beautiful boy in the whole goddamn country  He is more beautiful than the snake unwound in black on crabgrass  More beautiful than me: sweat & scales blessing my skin, Father  More beautiful than a thing that starts & ends broken  Look, I am jealous because you had a life  & I had two bodies, neither of which I knew how to use.   In summer, my father spoke German with Ms. Elka. I learned the word for dream, traume ,  slept clumsy in my white bed before the mirror. & the word for love: Elka’s son  with his tongue in my mouth. Perfect blonde boy from the city, skin flashlit with all his summers.  When Ms. Elka visited, I poured her water & brought her cookies on a plastic tray.  I greeted her in what little I knew, mouth searching for the wounding language.  I didn’t know how to say that I took her son into my mouth like a river, or that I held  a small lightbox in my chest that flashed when he touched my hairy inner thigh.  All I knew was escape: to sleep facedown, dream in a language I could not speak:  a land with no homes, no fathers or women: a lush swath of forest, its wrens nesting like wrens. Something frightened us—weight on weight of waves broke against the black cliffs— a breeze blew through  the open motel door— her dresses twitched like tired dancers.  I saw a sparse line of birds in the dark shapes on the unlit sign, she saw footprints of a girl with a missing leg.  When I was a boy there was one night each summer when everyone vanished, the bell chimes sounded the wrong hour, the traffic light flashed its signal, a lighthouse to an empty sea—  this was like that, fog walking in from the harbor, sirens from the invisible boats, a burning behind a wall of mist.  In the morning, the black beach, water rushing through a rock offshore—  we felt the scarred face of an ancient sphinx was waking beneath us, sand pouring off its shoulders as it rose. In June my dog died. By the sex shop on Belmont, a guy carried a sign with Last Days printed in fat block letters, and he could be forgiven for thinking so: the city was steaming; commuters shook open their papers; capitalism seemed to collapse, then didn’t; men howled from their jail cells all across the South. I wanted to feel real grief, and did, the way my mother lifted the dead dog off the vet’s metal slab, then held it to her chest as if it were a child, and merely sleeping. But driving home, she showed me the first house she lived in with my father. That night we cried, lit a candle, drank cold white wine on the dark back porch. What I mean is it felt good to sit there; it felt like I could feel time open outward like a swimmer opens water: in July, an ex-girlfriend called about a jacket she’d never given back. We made plans. By August I’d forgotten the sign but remembered the man standing under the flat sky, diminished, the grey traffic passing behind him. The heat broke; August kept on going. I drove my mother to the shore, scattered the dog’s ashes, dove in. and lived on in the moment of arousal when a surge of noradrenaline flooded the amygdala, the teacher put a condom on a banana. Inside each girl, he said, was a wall of shuddering muscle and an egg that each month dropped like a red gumball from the vending machine outside the liquor store. Semen, he said, was a protein matrix that could keep alive millions of almost- babies or a virus that could nest in your blood. He showed us pictures of men with sunken faces, skin gouged with sores. Adam and Eve, he said, not Adam and Steve. The boys who laughed loudest chucked rocks at the church bell beyond which acres thrummed with the brain chemistry of the cornfield. There was lightning, the teacher said, in our testicles, coyotes in our blood. At the 4-H fair, Nick kissed me outside the calving tent, his face at night the face of all the boys. If I reached out, I could touch it as gently as I’d once pulled a fishhook from my shivering calf. We could hear hooves in the stables, look past each other into the woods. Soon, we knew the heifers would be slaughtered, the tents torn down. For now: sawdust. For now: stars punched effortless through sky. In the dark, he drew a bird on his palm with a ballpoint pen, moved his hand to make it fly. Your grandfather was a murderer. I’m glad he’s dead.  He invented the toothbrush, But I don’t care to read his name  On the building I walk through  To avoid the rain. He raped women Who weren’t yet women.  I imagine the wealth he left When you turn red. I imagine you as a baby  Bouncing on a rapist’s knee. I like my teeth Clean. I like to stay warm  And healthy. I get it. Then I get it Again: my oral hygiene and your memory  Avoiding one another  Like a girl who walks the long way To miss the neighborhood bully  Who’d really rather just beat up on somebody New. I can’t help you. I can’t hug you.  I can’t grip your right hand, though It never held a gun, though it never  Covered a lovely mouth, and you can’t pay me To cross the ground floor without wishing  I could spit or mar some slick surface  And not think of who will have to do the cleaning. We’d all still be poor. I’d end up drenched  Going around. You’d end remembering What won’t lead to a smile that gleams  In dark places. I choose these two, bruised— Maybe too ripe to take, fondling Them as I toss them each Into my cart, the smaller With its stem somewhat Intact—because they remind me Of the girls who won’t be girls Much longer, both sealed And secured like a monarch’s Treasure in a basement below The basement of the house I inherited. I’ve worked hard and want To bring them something sweet So they know I’ve missed them More than anyone else. But first, I weigh the peaches, pay For them, make the short drive To my childhood Home of latches, mazes, And little locked doors. Every key Mine now, though I’ve hidden a few From myself. I pride myself On my gifts. I can fashion for you A place to play, and when you think It’s dark there, I hand you Fruit like two swollen bulbs Of light you can hold onto, Watch your eyes brighten as you eat. sam says you can’t name your book good boys without a dog but sam doesn’t know that i am the dog i am the ultimate mutt and i am telling him this story at the bar called college hill tavern which looks like a front for some operation where all the bar stools appear as if they were staged in under ten minutes and the girl with the fake lashes knows i like a double gin and i am telling sam that i am a dog who was converted when i was seventeen and my mother found an essay about how i was in love with a girl and there was a portishead reference in case you need me to date it and this was way before the liberation of the young and the white twins on youtube  who come out to their dad and everybody cries and transforms. when i see those kids all i think is that they never had parents who were immigrants and who sent you to a lady and told you that you had to solve it all in one session because this therapy was expensive. it wasn’t so traumatic. rather funny. and i remember the couch there were multiple couches and i had to choose a spot and i sat on the couch furthest from her and this wasn’t the first nice lady who looked at me like i was a dog and sam, when i said it is called good boys what i meant was that i was a good boy and loved good boys and good men and still love them but you see, i was seventeen and alone and nobody gave me anything except one book by dickinson and she was so neat, so precise, so human and i wasn’t. i just wasn’t. i was just a dog. i wasn’t even that good. Your shyness is like a science— a light lapsing, shoulders of stalk silk, small fruit where your ears should live and your eye, light like a current traveling across the wood of the table. When you talk in circles, it reminds me of Lonnie Johnson. You make small imitations of my voice. You turn my pout into a little character. Like a children’s book. Like the one about a tiger who came to tea right at a child’s bedtime. I let you do things. I let you order. I tell you about the tumors singing to each other in my mother’s brain. You say something about your sun, the son, the moonless spitting in the night, your sadness like a cradled apricot in the palm of my hands. Your hands are rough when I cup them, we compare lines— all healthy heartbreaks etched across our lunar palms, all captive pathways of animals and hairlines we have loved. What is a line anyways. A small horizon of age. A pursuit. Your leg gently in rest, the sweet citrus of drink between us. The air is vulnerable, like any small tease might hurt, so we are careful with each other’s pasts. We mostly talk about what is in front of us which is nothing we can really have, which must exist parallel to the lives we have built like a rabbit’s ear blushing in the night, the blood shooting upwards to its apex, its heaven, the twin celestial leaves atop its head. Here I am, your crisis in white. With flowers up and down my dress, with a gold cuff digging into my arm. What part of our bodies are not fauna. What part of us is actually here. The moon reminds me of the elongated moon of your body, the moon with its little cliché ass, the moon with its old notions of the soul. I forget the details  of my childhood but not the glacier-ironed fields I’ve retroactively placed you in like a bookmark in a memoir, hoping a bookmark could be read  as part of the story. What is it you’re made of there? The breath of a doe climbing a ladder of cold air. Something close to romantic  but untainted by the unreality of romance, by the rose holding love tight by the thorns, unable to be refreshed  even by the Modernists. Nor is your image ruined by our modern love of reality. So what is it you’re made of here? Something in-between,  a tale breathed back and forth so often that we’re finally telling the same mangled version, like our trip  to the redwoods where the sun grows steeply up from the ground  as if some kintsugi god had stitched the broken pot of the forest with gold. My own undressing bores me but it does not bore you. There is an economics to this. Heliotrope: the staging  of a pre-dawn field. Little  footsteps—4am—an even snow. Somewhere  a daughter is  abjected. It must go on record that such occurrences take place, disproportionately, at  the centre of a field. That said, there are fields we can choose from.  In one  she has frozen to death.  [ Paradoxical undressing: a phenomenon  [frequently seen in cases of lethal hypoth  [ermia in which, shortly before death, ind  [ividuals will remove all or most of their c  [lothing. Because of this, exposure casual  [ties are often misidentified as victims of  [a violent crime.  Another: plastic  forks. It is not unusual to dredge one’s hands through layer upon                   layer of unspeakable  whiteness and find something other  than wheat. To snap the prongs from a brittler frame. To hold them in one’s mouth.  The final field  is printless. Bare. She melts it  inside-out. I should confess none of this: that dog in blood on the curb won’t know an afterlife. Perhaps, this one, such as it is, will be enough. But it won’t be. In the night, in that benign darkness, I sing what I’m not able to bear. You left me, old love, in Tulsa. I dream of rain and animal grief and my arms, which themselves dream of other, unknowable lives. A forgettable career lifting onerous weight. Aesthetically pleasing musculature. I have never been here. Not before. I spent hours learning secret handshakes and regions of the map which show nothing here of worth or interest or life. I am dying, I think. I am hungry. I want to go home. What is open, at this hour, in this small place of the sad world? What is burning down and what is so sweet? What aches like a sick tooth in your mouth, planet Earth? Go slow, sun and moon, go slow. Give me this hour. This dance. That bird screaming forever. The thing is life gets in the pits, all yellow, all used. Get out of here with your dog-eared under-arms, baby.  You have to pretend to be dead or wear it for a good reason. So I wore it to the movies & I cried at the previews.  I wore it to the cafe & I asked for some alternative milk. I wore it to the protest & they took a picture of me without my permission. I spilled beer on it  at the punk show. I took the train going the wrong way. I learned my lesson & I took it back, tucked it into a box & then under my bed.  I wore it to space. I tried to be a star-fucker but I forgot protection. I wore it to a brand new city. I tried to live in the moment but my bank account overdrew.  I listened to “Heaven knows I’m miserable now” & it got stuck in the zipper. I hopped up & down & it didn’t come off. I went to the park & I pretended to read a classic on a bench.  I held flowers then I put them in my hair. I went to parades. I said “Woo!” because I’m a “Woo!” girl. I had a few drinks & I said “Esooo!” instead. I walked under the archways.  I threw pennies into the fountains. I went to the readings. I wrote down my favorite lines. I passed by all the mirrors.  I touched all of the sandals on sale. And it still got colder. And the leaves still changed color. And you still couldn’t see me. i want to prove the island’s ghetto a good birth site for new Americans. i have prepared in all ways available. a grandmother’s last wish before she became an eternal song. i have a line of treasures that bloom in place of my feet. each one rotting in the salt. you said i could call you kin. i am merely here to collect. everything i own is waiting in the car. its engine still warm. i am at your window, America. a wealth of your songs spilling from my tongue. tell me which is your favorite. tell me which star unfolds most brilliant tonight & i will pluck it for you by morning. your ravenous hands demand an offering & i want to afford this life as advertised. a house & a green green garden. unkillable wonderland. children with my eyes & your verse swelling in their mouths. i have catalogued each fruit of my labor & placed them here for you.  i am most desperate in this way & every way i spend my time. all midnight & after. both silly boy & ravenous child.  i have walked toward the dusk & nothing has offered to hold me. this is how i invented new ways to build a city. i do what i must to ward off your winter. i do what i must to be seen. i do what i must to become spectacular again. Some of us are missing. There’s a bride but not in white. My mother’s in blue, the slender straps, the rich  and rumpled linen. She’s a splinter.  Her sister’s chosen floral for her second wedding, she’s chosen a man  who wears camo to the Shop & Save, who listens to John Denver and cleans his guns in the unheated basement. As best as I remember,  he was kind. None of us knows what happens behind the locked doors of our neighbors’ houses. We were raised in the strip malls suburbs, land of  cul de sacs and smooth tan sidewalks. We were raised to believe that violence  was what happened elsewhere. When the camera finally catches us we’re blinking into the late-August sun, the forsythia by the side porch blooming  in a sickly sweetness, though it’s the wrong season  for that, so the memory bends and ripples. There’s a knot inside the synapse  where remembering should be. Years later, after so many other things went wrong, the groom’s son came into his father’s room  and shot him as he slept. They lived  close to us. I could, at thirteen, have walked there after school. I never did. It was the suburbs,  no one walked anywhere. There were guns in our house, too.           staring at beautiful men will       get me killed someday  let it be a good    glossy death over the phone I talk my shit  as the moon sinks       into its own velvet his bliss in my ear  like a cherry blossom            in real life I’m gangly and  graceless          Boy Long Legs I am asked to be       insecure  and not know I’m alive        but here’s sustained eye-contact  for you I reopen my petals   at least remember   their tender hue  neglected   the violets will not survive the night  is this  what fear tastes like      this acid metal    legs won’t go  where eyes go    I said carefree and not death wish  the blade gleams that we live so close to   I must obey  here life is short even though          everyone says life is short  today I feel I am holding. in this magnificent heat, and for this reason his legs are a gospel. A ringlet of black hair wound around the air’s crooked finger. I’m talking about power, current  events foster flashback: defibrillate. Embellish the gasp so it becomes a seam in the lung, a place to say it started, the learning of warmth a second time.  A bird perched on the scarecrow’s shoulder without hungry intent. So you realize you are alive, now what? You leave the sugar out and complain of ants. Tremble, I command. Then I ask, why do you tremble? Object in mirror may be uglier than it appears. Perhaps sadder.  Perhaps object in mirror is not in mirror at all. Share your loss, o quiet creature of thirst. I imagine a spark’s reflection should also electrify something. You are left with ants, a pilgrimage of them. On the pillow case,  in your wine glasses. On your way to class. In Twitter DMs. In your sleep. Sure, you can cauterize a void, but you have a gap even in your teeth. You cry into his pillow so he dreams of you at night. Sunny rain, lion cub. Delicate inertia. The mortician wakes up already drunk on bad wine.  All that is asked: what are you carrying, put it down. And this is why: when a wounded man comes home To die he must come in through the summer kitchen, Clutching his wound like a bunch of kindling. At the sight of him his mother faints. He catches her  Just in time and lays her down on the floor. When his sister comes in from slopping hogs to find her Brother at the table with his long legs kicked out And their mother senseless on the linoleum, she sighs  And unbuttons his shirt. The wound isn’t visible yet, It’s still drifting around inside his body, bouncing Under his skin like a man swimming under ice, Desperate to find the place where he fell through.  When the wound surfaces, that’s when she’ll know Whether he’ll live or die. For now, his eyes are calm And blue. He asks her which boys have been bothering her At school. She knows not to ask him where he’s been.  When their mother comes to, she insists she’s fine. “It’s just this heat is all,” she says. After putting a pot Of coffee on, she says, “Now if you’ll excuse me, I’m going upstairs and close my eyes awhile.”  There’s blood soaking through his white tee-shirt now. His sister pretends not to see it. They talk through the evening. Around midnight she tells him the sheets on his bed are clean. He thanks her and tells her he might sit on the porch,  Watch fireflies like he used to when he was little. In the morning his bed hasn’t been slept in. There’s no note On the kitchen table, just a few fireflies in a Mason jar, Holes punched in the tin lid so they can breathe.           In your right hand, a neat glass of Maker’s Mark sipped just enough to risk the sloshing. Your left grips  the headboard. Your feeling face: eyes closed. You navigate me with your hips. Sight so beautiful, I have to laugh:  Now that’s some blk shit . And we are old enough to know how true that is, to savor the elegant fuck-  it-all that somehow carried our mothers’ and fathers’ mothers and fathers forward in this country that tries  so hard to make us unseen. Baldwin said they may not know what we want, but they know they wouldn’t want  to be blk in this country. That that was all that needed understanding. But wouldn’t they want to be us in this  moment—two bodies as pleasure’s pure insistence, escaping in ways our mothers and fathers might think us  too old for? In the short spell before we rouse at 3AM to again rattle each other, we’ll call the concierge—twice—  and report the boisterous high schoolers flanking our room, as if we weren’t just ruckus ourselves. When security  arrives to rap on their doors, there’s the satisfaction of teaching those kids a lesson. Also the worry of wondering  what the guard will see when he sees their skin. But the kids aren’t brown—we can tell by the casual and wholly appropriate  tone the officer takes with them. They are just children, as we maybe once were, and they aren’t making the same noise  we are—the well-earned and lusty disturbance that is creation, a history you don’t dare interrupt with a knock. “there is blood in the morning egg  that makes me turn and weep”  ~Audre Lorde  Between the work at work and the work at home, I rush inside a grocery to buy the bits for quick breakfasts  that leave me hungry  by the time I return to my office.  It is an organic market,  and as I shop I can hear my mother—  her mouth full of pennies— mocking each cent I overpay for staples. But time’s expense burns black holes in pockets,  so no detour to a cheaper store.  So honey priced like wine.  So six eggs for what would  buy twelve. All in the name  of time. It will be days before I have a moment when I can pause my pre-commute to click on the electric kettle, boil  water for steeping rooibos  and poaching eggs. Eventually,  I reach inside the refrigerator,  revisit the words “cage-free”  “pasture-raised” which all read, in my earlier haste, like gibberish strings of dollar signs. Cracked open, what the brown pods  release into the ramekin is a yolk-  yellow so plump and lucent.  I tear up thinking of all the weak  or sallow suns I have dropped  into water, of the stressed existences that made those eggs. What of my thin shell or my own yoke unbroken within me  (both functions of money, time,  deficits)? And I know nothing  about industrial farms. And I  understand so much of blackness  as what I do in spite of my caging. But I know I cannot buy another egg not laid by a bird I believe foraged, walked freely  under the sun—deciding  how to value her motion, her blood.  A bourgeois privilege, I know.  But if not to make that choice,  why else am I grinding myself down for these wages? The first time we collected hen of the woods, I wondered if they would kill me. No reply.  They were delicious, bright as hunter’s caps, squeaky meat. How long does it take, I thought  at each sponge-full. I thought, had my nails turned blue? I was scared by my child. I was left  by his father. Left over and over in the way men leave before leaving, each affair a little  practice, each abuse a little closer out the door to I can’t … But I could. For a long time. There is a theory  that pain carries down from generations. Trauma will out. A scientist I knew shook  pregnant mice in a tube, then measured how, months later, the babies ran. This was a boy  who loved boys and also me. He photographed me smoking a cigar. I wish I had that shot.  He told me he was afraid of men, but later, married one. Sometimes I think what happened to us  didn’t really happen to us. Not to our bones, but to our blood. Now my lover knows  the dog breathing, my wild mud pupils that relax in the spring trap of a hand,  brows like a hill road. My body is a doorway through which pain may pass. My blood holds  the mothers, all of the girls of the yard, girls of the trees, girls of the closed doors. Girls in jail.  The experiment was to traumatize the mothers. The trees had no answer. The world  held no reference. I ate to find out would I die.      Murder  BY ALISON STINE    It was here I saw my first murder. It was here I hit a bird with my car,  one of the hundreds in the fields, their wings folded like tulips.  The crows in the corn took off together— and then they were only ink clouds,  some chattering in the branches in the woods where the men hunt.  It was here the man I loved left me. I asked for a token, and he emptied  out his hands: no ring, no white dress, no child—but a blade of straw,  bleached, broken-off. I put it in my eye. In time, my iris  knitted a scar, a flash across the cornea, a blurring in the corner, always  out of reach, a way of weeping, a way to remember him all of my days. Because I could not keep you safe, I’m on my stomach, a willow finger  blistering my back. Because I wasn’t born yet, there will be jangles wherever  I walk, and a leather line lead me. Cold bullet center me. The houses  by the river welcomed you with sticks. My mother and her sisters swept out  the pig sheds. I broke through a hedge at cul-de-sacs end. The houses you hid in  were abandoned, wallpaper rot from the river out the door. I almost  walked into that world upside down: the broom-skirted trees, the water  clear as hair. Could I live there? Did I want to live? The cops had my diary.  I never saw that man again. If there were steps into death, I would have  taken them. But there were not steps. The houses by the river and the ones  in the woods burned. Upstairs was for couples. Downstairs: bottles  and black stubs. You slept there, but it was not safe. We played cards  and played at kissing, but it was not safe. Someone started a fire. Somebody  told. My mother and her sisters waited for the meat trucks, believing each rattle  meant escape. The missile-headed cattails. The popcorn fields.  In the woven belly of willows I am safe. In the hot air balloon basket.  In the tree house the tornado will take. In the deer beds, unmade by morning.  In the nesting of closets. In the sickest thing. In the thing I say.  In the cage of our arms, we build a safe house. No closed doors,  no locks. At home in the animals, licked bleeding or bitter.  All I know is your eyes are sweaters. All I know is slave or queen. You take on  the bees, snap an arm off a willow— and in the other hand hold  purple phlox you have picked me. Once you whipped yourself raw  to know what it felt like for me. It is snowing from the rafters. We have an audience  of pigeons. And the men will take their time. Progress makes its white way through hills chiseled out to tracks, the long history of the double-stack  bringing everything we need, everything:  listen to the night, O wise ones, sleep is coming, a woman mutters as we pass.  There is no church here but I see steeples, I see bones and burials, all that is America  in stumps and the shimmering miasma of the reservoir under the dry hills, a speed boat’s single wake  rocking the water like geese in motion, the water we all must drink, or die.  The same train that took me from Portland to Chicago when I was young: ticket to the metropolis, to follow my ancestors  back the way they came out, when passage was protected by army, treaties nullified where they found gold.  Through the window the summer sun tears the color from the wooden tray and leaves it sandy, bleached bone:  America is in these rusted spokes, white-peeling trailers. Fire in the sage brush, a mattress  propped up backward, catching flame— America, you’ll die trying. Railroad tracks and hand-ties. Some inheritance  passed from the men before me to the man in me, a singular desire that burns this land down. We sail through Iowa as if it is meant for us, our passing:  miles and miles of corn a canvas to be painted against,  Jesus thrown into relief on the brick drives, flagpoles  calling out against the radio noise. We push through rainstorms  flattened on our windshield, through six tanks of fracked gas  hauled up from dinosaurs, mastodons pressed into carbon,  turned into speed. Signs urge us to choose life. We’re sure we have:  grocery stores amazing again, Spanish olives stuffed in jars  and bright whoopie pies. At night we sit under the ruined stars  as if we still belong to their myriad pings of light. When blue rose out from the horizon & purpled into diamond, dusk,  that hour when sunslant illuminated each thin stick & fenceline, I’d walk  surefooted again to the end of the dock where the burned plank  hid a small dead fish & stare out toward the water swirling with petals  some house-boater had dumped out, roses the color of milk tinged with blood on the green  solid surface moving turgid with oil, where once they’d found a car, gone under,  mother & child caught on metal, kept from the river’s gentle carrying, the muck’s keeping—  there I’d stop & stand, the unstill part of me crawling in the skin of my jacket,  toes pressed against the single two-by-four, curled space of my body’s  lean returning & returning to this kingdom of clay, of under-water wire & roe, mess of aluminum, algae & ruin. My name, plucked from my mother’s once barren womb: a desert split open. She spills out sand dunes, a city of salt for every child that could not latch onto umbilical cords.  My smile is a cesarean wound. A stitch for every sibling that did not burst from mama and cling to her bosom. for every daughter I could not be for my father. for the son I will never be.  //  When she looks at me all she sees is smoke, though she does not look at me often. Once, I am sure, she looked at my body swaddled in white fleece and wiped off of blood and said,  My God . Saw: a miracle, a torch, a burning bush telling her to bring the children to the land of milk. Cradled me to her breast and said,  Do not be afraid. You will not perish. I will be with you. My God.  //  My mom does not talk about her nine miscarriages, the lives she cultivated and felt wilt, plucked from her like pearls from an ocean bed.  I think she is too afraid to look back,  too afraid to watch the city she lived in burned,  too afraid to spill into salt.  Instead she looks through me, her brimstone child like one faces a wind,  wise of the season that has past.  //  Once I was young. This I know. Once she combed my hair.  She parted each section,  her fingers dancing through the thick, brimming.  Once she told me I would do great things. Once she said, I prayed to have my own children. Once she said, I’ll always love you.  I was her son,  dark and brimming with possibility. Once she cried and my hair thought it rain or an offering. Once she was done combing my hair, we went to church. This I know. This I have to know.  //  If the church says, Amen , it is a word.  And thus it was a word.  The reverb of a hollowing Amen  gnawed my ribs into prison bars.  What Reverend could have said instead of gay was Paper weight of the bible. Robber of the barren womb. Apocrypha.  Soon to vanish.  & what always can be said in place of faggot :  Singed Flesh.  //  Is it no surprise Sodom and Gomorrah were in the South? Along a river?  //  Needless to say, the church was in Mississippi. Needless to say, the river is full of bodies.  (We are not to forget history.) Needless to say, on a summer day, the sun can melt concrete.  Needless to say, a child, even if tucked inside a church, can melt under the weighted glare of sun .  //  I have forgotten who She is. I think her God now.  I have no holy father, only an anointed mother who can offer me salvation.  Instead of bone she broke flesh, and I am here,  a river of guilt.  A heart like Mississippi.  Full of dead brown bodies. Full of cities waiting for reckoning.  She watches me like a farmer watches rain, assessing what (damage) will be done.  //  “You know Sodom and Gomorrah burned for the desires of the flesh, boy.”  And God never looked back. Yet we drive through Mississippi as if it is holy ground.  //  Sometimes I stare in puddles, and see faceless children.  Their silhouettes inhale, and I beg them to give me back my breath,  My God!  //  “My mother,  who art in guilt.  Hallowed be thy Womb.”  I thought hallowed meant empty . I thought thy meant mine .  So forgive me of my selfishness.  I thought, Hallowed be thy name .  Meant my body was to be filled,  in the ways, by the people  who I pleased.  But again we do not pick our own names.  Again we do not own our own bodies.  Again I am sorry.  For taking the vessel of a real son away from you.  Amen .  //  For each city burnt, each child not conceived,  I offer a name. Plucked from my mom’s womb, a sea of C’s, for the real sons I am not. for the daughters I am too much like:  cecilia, cameron, carson, casey, c____, c____, c____, c_____, c_____  //  Once I burnt myself on the stove to see how hot flesh can get before melting. Needless to say, it was before church. Just picked petunias sweetkiss my knuckles Creating a genre of springtime. I succumb  To the urge to sing: what gift this small refuge In my palm; the soft city wind, a lodestar.  Sudden rain catches me and I cinch Like a ball of rubberbands, a noose thirsty  For air—then run, past an idle siren Posing as a red vase: an empty vessel  Looking to transform whatever beauty. It sees, in the skyline of my figure:  A smoking star; a token for what Can bend or be taken, but breaks.  It determines, like a light turning green That a wilderness    resides in me  One man says he saw god at the pain clinic on Lafayette.  Untucked shirt. Knife-white bandana, shadows boxing under each drowned eye socket. There’s never been a record  of his hands, but that’s never stopped me from painting my nails. Some days we still find water jugs  in the crawlspace, already licked clean. Once I watched  someone shoot a stray dog in the parking lot.  Across one page someone has only written Before the storm  How the neighbor boy felt pressed sweating against me.  Outside the liquor store, one of my cousins took a picture  of a cross-shaped water stain.  At last this lack of landscapes.  The moon rises, then wheels, then steps  into a bathtub, slick with its own shine.  Alligators laze in red mud, hunting their tails.  Emptied lakes. A wake of widening eyes.  On the bus back to the sticks, Uncle Buck met a girl with a back-length braid who claimed she could heal the sick.  A woman wrote that god shops at the Winn-Dixie in cowboy boots & likes to click his spurs  against the carts. Bullwhips of wind.  Don’t ask me about acrylics.  Between where he happens on my tongue & a window.  Battlefielding. Bone up.  Nobody saw my grandfather  cadaver himself. Even birds no longer sound  useful. When I pray for rain I pray  the trees die before it comes.  It was after the harvest. It was before the first frost. Everything living had something dead to thank. Bloody November, season of beasts. The boys sneak off to the forest, smoke anything, sharpen their teeth on bedrock. We know nothing, say nothing. Whittle down to our whites at the mouth of the river. We open our legs. The first frost. Everything living is dying. White November. The mouth of the boys & whatever crawls out. We know to say nothing, whittle down, open the legs of the river. If a girl screams in the forest & no one’s around to hear, did the tree fall? Do we make a sound? Everything living is dying. White, merciless beasts. The boys sneak off, a few hours. Bone against bedrock. We wait by the river, open our mouths, whittle our tongues. A girl screams & the trees fall. Everything dying. We know the sound. When the boys crawl out of the forest dangling dead things from their teeth they scream at the river. No one’s around. Days get swallowed into others how  the haunt of your frayed tufts peels  over the crests of my shoulders even long  after you’re gone. Incessant:  the baby’s cries before dark. This morning  deafened by the heron’s shrill  in the estuary it combed through, hushing  to preen its stringy neck in the fog  the moment a red-tailed hawk snatched  a hatchling from its nest.  Though I can’t remember the smell  of your cunt, I remember  other things: the way the yellowthroat washes  itself in the bird bath: the way  I watch on and will it to gag, a gentle wich-i-ty  wich-i-ty, wich-i-ty, a reminder  in song that each thing is a hunter. You  never heard the baby cry and I have  always wanted that kind of resilience.  One day my daughter will wish  she never knew me. What has this to do  with you except everyone is game?  When this day doesn’t give in to another,  when steeped into the bent kelp  reeds, the wilds, I will be spoken for, will be  swallowed up by—someone  has picked the azaleas from the grave.  The fat sphere pinked, lowering quick into a slack mouth. I watched it dip and with everything around me nearly already dead, you were somewhere between elements, dropping through a dark you did not ask for. I photographed the ice fields, the trash strewn at the roadside, the lint on my kneecap to remember how the world appeared in those moments before you leaked into it. Four nests froze in a bald tree. The winter sucked all of its color—even the sumac spared its cardinal. In the horizon’s soft fold, azures blushed into coral, then white. You slowly gained color, the slate of each your irises darkening, the gilt wet fur keeping you whole inside it, its nautilus that must have spun on your forehead, violet as the blood settling in your nailbeds. I pictured your face yet, what would be a fullness of a nose, what your voice would soon sound like, the first let of it shocking your body the way it would the small room. Across an ocean in a room a woman sunk in a blue fixed by lunar light to reverse the cycles of night-blooming jasmine. A man sought to refit the flower’s circadian rhythms, that they might blossom at day and did. Critics called it poetic but must have meant  a man imposed himself on the environment he wanted to subdue. As you fell crows retired from lines and I mistook the sound of a thigh being scratched for talons detaching from wire as when her grip loosened when the worst of it was over, thinking of nightjars: who suck the milk of goats and so are called by that action: who at the sense of threat migrate nests and carry their chicks in their mouth: that neither of these things are true but the jasmine still are sutured to my appraisal of your onset then, wondering if you wanted any of this at all, if you doubted the faculty to breathe, were guided by meaty breasts, knew light enough to know it was dark, if in the moment you opened you were cold, could feel the space around you emptied, could see the tiles above your head and know they were blue. One day I’ll drop you just so I might bend to you and say: give me all your wounds. I will carry them by mouth, one at a time. What more can be hoped for the body anyway. Give me the hose, so from you I’ll siphon little spells. So this is love. When it slows the rain touches everyone on their way home. Whatever was promised of pleasure costs the body more than it has.  Perhaps they were right putting love into books… to look at the sky without asking a question, to look at the sea and know you won’t drown today. Despite all our work, even the worst of life has a place in memory. And the fixed hours between two and five before evening are the aimless future with someone who cannot stay new. August returns us to a gap in history where our errors find the invention of a kinder regret. Almost possible: to believe these days will change more than us but the past too. Which is blue and without end. A long drive toward a remembered place. A secret left on a beach. Underwater where the voices of summer are tones of speech, requiring less of the mind. The familiar creaks in the old floorboards. Glasses left out in the storm. Our handwritten lists with every illegible worry and more. The person you think of despite their cruelty. The sun and its cruelty. How it’s kept its distance and kept us alive. Not needing to know anything about what we do with the rest of desire. On fire I’m unfuckable, I’m war bridegroom, the knife piloting the wound. I’m the eye  bleeding sight. The screen scabbing over me, the camera angled for entry. I hook you  like a lure. I storyboard origin: where a girl grows from god’s side wound & my mouth  mentors her pleasure. Turn down your eyes. I’ve little-spooned the moon & screwed the stars  back into my skull. Whoever said fear is a foothold has never climbed  me. Mount an axe where the sky should be. Mountains are named for their view, what you want to see  atop me. Expect to bleed today. I trade my feet for a landscape of losses:  a sea made of teeth, your nipples roaming my mouth. My thumbs wet thorns, my threefold thighs  & double-dog hunger, each barkless tree I skinned alive with my teeth. God bills me for my birth & I pay  back with my life. I’m alive now that I’m dead, I look like my mother’s mother, the one  who skipped her face like a stone across three seas, the one I receive like a bullet to the bone, my breasts blown  glass. My knock-out ass. You can’t convince me history isn’t pornography. I have a body  but nowhere to bury it. I have a harness but no horse to breed for it. What we call  tame you call talent. What you call country I call no one picking up. Tonight  my mother shipwrecks my fantasies, rains my bed into a riverbank, turns my girl back into a pyre, my body back  to a movie birth scene, false blood & stagelight, my mother calling cut  her out of me , the camera  my father & I its foundling. Once in a drought, I dropped  all my children down a well to make the water rise.  Mothers always choose their own  mouths over mourning. The myth of hunger begins like this:  in Tsingtao, the German army  stole rice & millet, fed our bodies to bullets. They built  churches to keep a god & barns  to keep their women. How many girls can be stolen from  the same body? I sold  myself to a soldier for the price of a fish.  I gutted out his green eyes,  gave them back to my children. Even a fish mistakes the sea  for safety, the fisherman’s  hook for god. I raised you like a river outrunning her land. I nursed you  native to thirst & rain  outsourced from a foreign sky. I taught you to butcher  a bird & convert its bones  into perches. I taught you every woman needs  a man like a weapon  needs motive. The nation I was born in now  belongs to burning. History starts  like a housefire & I braid smoke into your hair. I once beat you  for forgetting to pray  before bed. Remember to take the lord’s name  nightly like a pill. Kneel  now & remember I knot your tongue to mine  so you never drift far  from my hunger. I alphabetize my gods by country  of origin, America always  first. Daughter, count soldiers til you sleep. One of them  will hold you by the black  of your hair. One of them will father you & the other  is your son. There is no ridding  a sheet of blood. Grieve that your eyes are green. Surrender your skin  fasting into a white flag. Vernal Falls, Yosemite National Park  Never mind the 600 stairs carved in granite or my guide, a man with a mustache and no concept of “almost,” or my moaned  why are we going up this hill , at every hill, or his response that what comes up must go down, or the somewhere  we’ve almost reached. Mind instead the three freshmen who breached the safety rail for a picture on the rocks  and were swept over the falls by a river gorged with the melting snowpack. How they must have held each other  in their descent before the Merced broke them apart. That was some time ago.  An old man hiking with his son-in-law flatters me: You are only pretending  to be tired to make us feel  better . The truth: I have come here to learn how not to kill myself. My guide takes my picture many times  as we ascend. He captures Half Dome, El Capitan, Nevada Falls, and me, a sloped silhouette before the sun.  John Muir Trail, Yosemite National Park  Descent should be easy, but the granite molted like thunder and undid the trail.  The root: water and winter, then spring and water. The bloom: a cleaving. I picked over  the rocks and broken boughs and a ground mulched soft.  I carried you to the mouth of the trail when I meant to recover  only myself. You see, I was the ghost, and you rose to sing, to be torn to pieces.         Gusano (n): 1. Worm 2. Slur for Cuban exiles  In need                        of handling.
            Washrag.        Rancor.
The spittle      of Portuguese
on my father’s island        bleat.
Abuelita,    a nervous vessel.    She
pats my father
against her chest        like the sign
of the cross,    vows  to        never
            wear red again.
Blister.                    Escoria.
My father sleeps and wakes        a
              defector.
        His father,        stoic
and sharp        as                vetiver,
                 knuckles
the leather    of his weather-beaten
suitcase.    A year        later,
            Abuelito      will resuscitate
his pride        with a telegram
            addressed to Fidel: Feliz Cumplea ñ os.  I hope you never have another. Fidel responds: Come back to Cuba,  and we’ll talk. 1959.          My mother  is  the  size
of two ripe mangoes        when
  she is            smuggled
onto a Pan Am flight        to
                Jamaica.
She cries        in three octaves.
Her sisters twirl                the    soft
    bedding of her hair        into
  small violets,    and she forgets
the sound    of her mother’s    voice.
                Splinter.
A local priest      delivers  the young
girls        to a monastery,
where they        live        and go
    to school.    My mother    learns
the word absence and hangs it
on       the    roof       of her mouth.
She takes            her first steps  into
             the arms of a nun.
200 miles north,            men shuffle
into lines    against    el paredón.
              Wood    is             warped
to the human form.                  The
soil        bleached         as       bone.  
Orisha of fertility, femininity, love, and sensuality  Last Saturday, a woman asked me about the first time my body rerouted. If I allowed it to happen, if I moaned or covered my mouth. Yes , I said. And then again. She wanted to know how I knew. What subdued me, and why. I was truthful: it first appeared as a series of pulleys along my jaw. A yellow film beneath my eyelids before the sudden sprouting of flowers, sunflowers, from my hips. They weren’t very tall, just enough to press against him, leave a small imprint. Eventually, the florets began to barter: i f we shift left will you meet us there?  And he did. Like the flight pattern of vultures, unexpected circles along the thigh, the chest, the tongue. Night, night, day, day. We took turns trading sweet water. I puddled, I pushed, I peacocked. My vowels long as street names.  
Forgive me, Brother: I sinned. I laughed
        at the joke with the gay priest & the altar boy, missing

the punch-line: it’s 2018. People still think gay = pedo.
        In my old bedroom I lit incense sticks after fucking Abner

so you wouldn’t know. I played straight most of my high school
        years. When I think of Abner, I think

of that 90s Nickelodeon show which played in the background.
        My fist siphoned his blue

boxers until the cloth darkened. I tasted salt.
        At Sunday school, an older boy named Andy rocked

his hips furiously, walking. Behind him, boys shadowed
        the sway. Laughed. When he asked me if it was true

that Abner & I were lovers, I knuckled his face, bent
        cartilage, his snot smeared

on my fingers. I liked his face
        collapsed under my blow. I liked

the other boys’ cheering, behind us, their masculine claps
        convinced of the man I was, my red

hands unfolded & ready to praise God. This is one of seven lies. I grew to love the absence. A month before I was born, my mother says, a man came home to dig out the dead  maple tree in the backyard. Says when she was seven the branch that held her in a swing snapped, like her knee with the fall. I took  my shadow for a sibling for the longest time. I carried the dead in my tonsils. One dull midnight  in August, absence  boiled my skin to purple seeds: fevers high enough to stretch horizons in my face. My grandmother pressed  cold eggshell against my body. I felt her prayers shift the air, the candle’s burning in the nightstand, & her rosary crackling  as she broke free the tainted egg yolk into the glass. Mira ,  she said, & I looked: the yellow membrane  spilling across clear gel, & on it, the red dot of absence which I bore: my mother’s dead tree: loose soil in the backyard: my father’s face looking back. I say boy ​not sure if I mean myself or an undoing, a slippage of sex but always meaning a tender violence or child’s play, a way of becoming  I say boi ​and mean a small god of making—an appraisal of my bad shape, it’s favor of the blood that does & does not come  dysphoria ​ is what it is called when I say I​ don’t care for my breasts o​r is what I mean by they ​ get in the way  I say man ​ and mean hunger  or twin tongue; a kin taste for cruelty stalled at the site of the first wound I say h ​ eel ​ and mean to keep the dogged fear at bay as its hands  tear into my hefty frame, persistent until I feel a pit opening inside me I say​ girl ​ and mean Lord have mercy on those days where I didn’t deserve any of it, have mercy on how weak I believed I was. as in days I fall asleep before dusk,  when the blue difference between  two things is still plausible.  And wake after dawn, the blood  already mopped from the floors,  the sink already scoured. So much  is possible in my absence  that when I wake, I’m delighted,  lighter, prone to a crack of real laughter,  a snake run through me like a wire.  Or like a snake run through with a wire  run though me. As in I’m relieved,  can ease the tautness of my mouth  around the finger of the world.  The work of the conscious is risk,  plunging a hand into the red seagrass  to pull up a string of oysters, or taking  down from the mantle my mother’s pottery  for dusting, oil lamp by oil lamp. Tossed, somehow, into the morning like the fistful of pebbles I once threw from the edge of a blue ridge  and out into the miniature valley below, where forests encircled tiny white houses like troops surrounding  a defeated enemy, and rivers cut through Brueghel-green fields like open wounds in the bright fall  of Virginia sunlight, and the hawks swam through the ocean of air three thousand feet above the valley floor below,  and that same air swelled and rippled like the water it was not, and yet also like the water it was, yes, tossed  somehow like that, I went out, again, in search of a sign: I laced up my battered running shoes, and set out, slowly,  into the still-yawning morning. I passed through winding lanes of city traffic and the endless grey chatter  of sidewalks, until, sweating, I entered the forest, and allowed it to swallow me whole, like a sacrifice or a dry log tossed  into the fire. At first, all was dazzle and sunlight. The morning light showering through the translucent veins  of turning leaves, and turning them, in turn, to beaming golden jewelry. A rabbit flitted across my path like a shadow.  But as I ran I ran toward the center of the forest, down curving trails in heavy shade, until the light drained out  slowly. It was as if each step I took took me further away from the bright morning, and deeper into some terrible unspeakable  mystery, which lay hidden in the dark heart of the forest, where the leaves and trees and wooded walls conspire against light itself,  so that, even on that clear October morning, the darkness wrapped around me like a secret whispered into the night. in Texas rain sank the earth: the city sang its bayous: I learned the weight of humidity wrapping its legs around you: in Texas doctors removed my plastic heart: heat contaminated choice: I paid a professional to activate nerves between my legs: in Texas fear was a rising river a bright depression: all the bats died: I lost all sense of time: in Texas even animal meat wasn’t enough: I ate organs & pills & gave away blood: in Texas possums ran for shelter: I packed a bag for the roof: between my legs scar tissue a bayou slicing through industry: I was a ghost with domestic responsibilities: floodwater licked the front steps: marriage got hard: in Texas water from the spout ran dangerous & gold: I followed animals back to their home: held irresponsible anger irrepressible shame: in Texas a stranger asked if I had a community of faith: locked things exploded: I drank oil & gas: pomegranates on the counter rotten & black: in Texas I watched pelicans dive at the beach dropped to my knees that I might be as hungry as their open beaks: I had no new babies: kept bleeding: in Texas I pulled up floorboards found only bones & coins: a new jangling: in Texas grackles ate carcasses by the gas station: no one was there to talk about what happened before. For a long time the sky’s polluted white is a sheet pulled over my head  now a memoir of rain is falling unclear gray pellets, dust— I remember— petrichor —  my Greek teacher’s breath on my ear explaining how to give the scent of fresh water on rock a name  but the stench of low tide’s what reminds me of him  •  now the sea is extending its long arm across the territory  no gulls no single sheet in the unceasing match-blind wind      At Final Destination, 11:06 P.M.  BY JULIAN GEWIRTZ    My new country says drinks are cheap and I know what he wants, bartender folds her forefinger nine ninety kuai for two, about eleven dollars, now my country’s walking out and in the courtyard at least a hundred boys standing around shouting over music the jangle of Beijing even hidden away at Destination      but I whisper softly into his ear. Hold his hands wide, one little kiss on each cheek or full on the mouth, trace of L’Oreal      in Tang poems he and she are not distinguished and I see this new one everywhere      in a scroll’s landscape left blank where the figure’s eyes fall, in a bowl of half-eaten peaches, cut sleeve, any sleeping body turned away from view. In this corner of the end three men gather around a fourth, face on the ground mouth agape drooling sick or is it pleasure      that scent of tobacco smog dirt— Tell me what you want, night. Stick to the wall like a damp cotton shirt. Tell me what you want. I can talk fast or slow. I can recount the first time we met      centuries ago      five minutes I can stand still. I can recite any law you want to you. I can say it with passion, the end, listen, it sounds like absolutely nothing.  The summer of my seventeenth year. They shot a boy in the back in Cincinnati. A week later, they shot another boy, everywhere else. The Panthers showed up. Carried the casket down the church steps. My friends’ teammates’ mother told us if a cop tries  to pull you over, just drive all the way home, he ain’t bold enough to shoot you in your front yard . Henry Louis Gates, Ving Rhames. I’m not famous enough to almost die at the door I pay for, though I get mistaken for famous black men all the time. I get mistaken for still here. I get mistaken for intent. All endangered look alike. We had a tree in our front yard. After the lightning, we have half a tree. The backside of its bloom sanded down by time. We thought we’d have to uproot it. What is dead continues to die until everything else is dead. It is still here though, leaves falling from one side of its face. I am thankful for that half of Fall. It is still enough for us to rake, and bury and collect during the dying season. I lied about the lightning, or at least I don’t know if that’s what fell the tree. I wasn’t there, but I left out the part about everyone’s garbage cans scattered far from their homes. I’m not a betting man, the only thing I can ever put up is myself but I would wager the wind brought our tree low. Invisible and sudden. Like the time a cop appeared and asked me if I lived at the home I was punching my garage code into. I need it to happen again so that my story can be believed. Make me famous with trespass. 
In a room, we gathered around your bed
to stay in uncertainty. We brought you
soup & tulips. A year of blood,
vials filled & emptied & yellow
light. First time you let me see you
without makeup, your face lanterned,
fear casting to far shores. The first thing
to go, comforting thoughts of suicide.
The first thing to go bodies of animals
you would now eat again, your skin
luminous, green of the aurora, green
of chlorophyll pills you swallowed,
jars of water filled & unfilled. A new kind
of dancing. How we were then truly
your family. What can be said
for the house you were born/not born
into—place of no place?—house
where your child skin was hide sack,
turned over & shook for silver
that never fell—& almost every day
those first few months the doctors
reached their knowledge up into you
to turn a treasure & said they found
                nothing
even as you hallucinated smoke, blond
in hunks vaporing the shower: not there.
What is it to be believed? To show
the organisms a home because no one
else would name them? Welcome
a vampire in. Wall the devil out.
Soften 40 years of survivor in weeks.
How it took the shadow of blood
in your brain to open. A censer in my mouth
swinging, gold chain in my teeth.
I walk & the myrrh keeps burning.
In my hands, empress of air which is
                not nothing.
I’m giving you what I cannot give you.
My mouth drawing pictures around
your wounding. You tell me the poem
is my business with God. There to tap
into if I want it. I’m seeing us again
at the water, what you said you needed
to see—every mountain a home for you
—but not yet—still—keep this body
        hurt house though it is.    
Once, I loved what hurt me. No. That isn’t right. I loved what the people who hurt me might become— loved what belief could shape them—the frame I poured them into. Underneath this bright undoing  a sky of stars, a horse’s rough back. I stood in the field and let the goats run toward me, their bodies growing huge in the hot dawn, my feet sinking deeper in the mud. They were on me then,  tugging at my belt, my shorts, pulling my shirt, their hungry mouths, eyes glass stones, so like beloveds only I could feed, beggars who need in every direction.  Once, my mind full of scabs, I took myself to a beach and wept. I ate gravel and trusted myself for the first time. I looked out over a sea  of backs approaching, strike of a thousand hooves rushing and all I could feel was peace. Crucible of those first months after when I could not weep, couldn’t feel anything.  Stone in the belly of a ruminant, stone in my accuser’s mouth, wearing his teeth to flat planes. I want to tell you—I have loved the same man for seven years and almost every day I am restless,  and almost every day I love him as I have never loved anything else, ask myself if this is what love is meant to be. How do any of us learn the difference  between violence and visitation? Holy mouth, who wants only to swallow me, how is it I confused you for desire? Desire for love? On the surface  of the sky a thousand flies trim the hide of what I cannot leave behind. I hold my arms away from my body and let the muzzles press through me a door,  run my hand along the velvet between horns. T’kiyah, g’dolah, good boy, good boy, it isn’t every day I move towards what doesn’t want to kill me.‍ 
Once, when you were being born, someone held open the door
of your mother’s legs, called you by name, and waited for you as for honey from a glass jar— in the blackout of my before-life,

I filled my father’s body as he rounded the earth on an oil tanker.

And it was my body. I swear it. I heaved steel cables out of the sea
        and rigged myself to deck lines in squalls.

I charted the stars, scaled iron masts, and watched for land birds.
        I feared this body the way anchors fear a broken chain.  The day we lost our anchor to the ice off the coast of Antarctica,
        someone said: swim down .

If you fall overboard, the ship won’t stop or find you in time. Swim down. You’ll blackout faster. In this body, we’re never not swimming down, my father and I:

we sleep we rise we shit we pray we call heaven whatever comes
        at the end of violence , so we run like hell , keep running

like ‘ Lord hates a coward and we ain’t, so we haul on guns blazing

eyes wide faces blistered with fever and night— someone waited for you, pink crown pink skin, they eased you into light, held your head like a new apple, someone let you scream: the body’s first lesson is never not mercy.  Poem for How to Kill the Wolf  BY M. K. FOSTER      —the one that robs your barn, stalks your home, sniffs your door, the one too fast for a gun, too big for trap, the one that marks  your stables, watches the yellow of your kitchen window at dusk, wolf that waits for you like sleep, then follows you into sleep,  flooding your moon, breathing slowly, fogging your skin like glass, the wolf in your furnace, in your flock, in your chimney,  in your well, the one that lies down with you at night, fucks, and fucks you beautiful, you’re beautiful when you howl , startling  birds and bruising your lungs amethyst, wolf like the slender smoke of a dropped match, like the morning smell of blackened  firebrick, wolf like all your forks clean, suddenly back in their drawer, all those careful metal teeth in all those careful  metal rows, it’s the wolf that watches you walk to your car, knows where the parking deck is, knows the unlit stairwells,  remembers the street corners where there are no cameras, wolf that snapped its jaws at you in an elevator once when the lift  jammed, the lights flashed, and you looked up at the mirrored ceiling for an answer, then couldn’t look away from the body that  stared back, what are you that I am, wolf that’s eaten every song- bird in your chest and preyed away the larger animals, first to  know when to evacuate and last to leave when the damn finally breaks: —dip your knife into lamb blood, and freeze it. Dip the  knife in, freeze it, again. Repeat until you have a bloody icicle, then fix it to a stake and drive it point-up in the yard: this wolf  will have no choice but to eat until killed. You’ll be dying for more before you can stop yourself, expert hunters say,  you’ll mistake your blood on your face for another’s, that blade burning at the core, mouth-flesh flaming, swelling metallic,  for a heart: meat red, so throb-raw for once, you’ll wish it could beat as you feed, hammer you to ashes, crush you like rust. Do you pine for photograph-worthy limbs, slender hands? I asked about the soul & mom said God has tender hands.  I worried I’d need a ladder to climb up to heaven. Or a strong grip. Or an ancestor to send her hands.  I’ve watched them shatter window glass. I’ve watched them knead flour, water, grief. Render, hands.  Their earthly veneer tells time & the weather. Show us how love. How green. How remorse. O calendar hands.  What medicine for longing? Salt water lifting the breathing body. Sun, skin. Scent of lavender. Hands.  The child lets go, charges toward the sea alone. Come dark, she drifts to her mother’s touch, bends her hands.  The mother recites into the child’s palm: O bird how to eat you? Tickle. O apple tree leaves. Remember hands.  If you wave goodbye. If you wave come back. If you twirl enough, will you learn to welcome surrender, hands?  Summer at dusk was a hymn  before I knew what to.  Under my covers: a dozen fireflies, a dozen air-holes punched  by my dad’s screwdriver. Minnows in green water  swam behind the sticky white streaks of the pickle label I’d tried to peel  to make for them a perfect clear home. My mom’s hand in my hair:  Sweet boy, she purred,  They’ll die in there.  Outside, the trees screamed with pleasures I couldn’t name.  In the morning, the grass was soaked. The creek was clogged with frog eggs.  The boy from across the ravine led me through the culvert & into the woods.  He built us a fort from fallen branches. I pretended it was our home & lit a fire.  In one of my mom’s pots, I boiled crawdads in creek-water,  watched their bodies scuttle ever-backwards from danger. I knew better than to stare  when the boy hiked further in to piss, turned away, one hand caught in his black curls.  When he came back & sat by me, I plucked a tick from his smooth leg.  We watched the jesus bugs skim along the water’s skin.  It flooded that summer. Our ravine swamped itself to the brim.  The baby water-snakes hatched when no one was looking.  After my dad left for work, I stripped to my underwear,  extended one foot out over the flood, & closed my eyes. The muddy water  spurted up my nose. I scrambled out & tried again, my face all squinched up  with faith. I didn’t wait for God’s face to trouble the waters.  I thought a miracle took work, a jar & a quick hand.  Something you could catch or learn. Like skipping stones  or making a blade of grass sing. Each time I lurched back up for breath,  the water skaters were dancing with ease into a halo around themselves. If I could keep her company in the blue bed.  If I could join the assembled birds arrowed towards the greening park.    If I could desire a bowerbird instead of her, I could feel migration as instinct and follow it.  If I could desire a bowerbird instead of her, I could feel desire as instinct and follow it.    If I didn’t know her black brows move when she sleeps as if remembering and forgetting an idea.  If I didn’t know she sleeps unclothed, even in winter when the birds are gone.    If she said read to me , I would say how .  If she said please , I would say each female bowerbird mates only once. In school, the rabbi offered me the word spirit when I asked should I already hate my  body this much?  Spirit is a woman who cannot leave a woman.  Spirit has weights in her feet that keep her in her body.  (Later the rabbi said you’ve asked enough questions for today. )  Naomi, I write to you at thirty. I carry around this muscular bag.  Shouldn’t each spirit eventually accept her body?  I used to grab my inner thighs between my hands and clamp down until the spirit screamed.  I would study my purpling skin while I filled my mouth with gravel.  Today I imagine spirit like a woman asleep in a pile of bones.  I imagine love like gnawing.  I wanted a body equally like and unlike my own and never found her.  Do I wear my grief more like a suit or a skirt?  My hands shake at the buttons. They struggle with the wire hook-and-eye.  When I was a child, the doctor called my hands dainty .  He told my mother I had piano fingers . Ones that could span an octave, or cover an entire face in its grip, palm to mouth.  If nobody has died, why do I grieve?  How do I dress the body I will not meet? How do I dress the body I cannot love?  We Jews adorn even the mirror when we mourn.  Our bodies become unfathomable.  The men and the women wear black for a week, keen from the waist in the widow’s living room.  Every body looks the same for seven nights.  When I close my eyes at night, my hands grow to the size of your back.  I open my fingers in the silent room, fill the warming space between your shoulder blades.  When I close my eyes, Naomi, your body remains covered in light. 
Four months the swarm fattened the air
        with noise   with the wax membrane
of their wings    Now they’ve buried
        their young    silence opens its forceps

in the hollow of afternoon    Underfoot
        amber husks chime once more    Is it
wrong    god    to want a body
        emptied of memory    Here    rain

bloats an exposed beehive    A collarbone
        sinks    with the heft of its disappeared
necklace    & I’ve spent seventeen years
        translating the tymbals humming beneath

my tendon    muffled & promising
        as cricketsong heard underwater    My next
lover will call me her girl    watching
        as I molt dresses over doorknobs & bedposts

How do I explain the before—
        The prophets at the family barbecue
plucking tonguepink coals
        from the pit    How I swallowed

each one    searing    ready to dissolve
        into its answer    Or the plainer history
stippled down my flank    Its pockmarks
        & half-filled ditches—

I’ve been a student of ecstasy so long    I’ve
        neglected what comes after    Those words
we bury into mattresses    trusting they will
        return as butter congealing on dinner plates    
First comes the memory of the pastor, the family friend who once traced a goat’s head in the constellation of my freckles. Son , he warns,  you have the gift of visions . I leave hot water running, let steam occlude every mirror. But come evening, the serpent my father feared would seduce me  cinches a harness around my breasts, biting my neck till I sigh my darling ,  my provider, my Nyquil . By the third endearment,  the door splinters & a robber presses his knife beneath my chin. He demands diamonds but there are none left. As the blade enters,  I wake floating in the bathtub, a moth-winged angel overhead. Outlined in her fur, the faces of friends lost to madness. She extends  a palmful of percocet but I deny it three times. The fourth, I relent, weeping as each pill pupates, turns into living, silver hairs. After flushing them down  the drain, I wipe a patch of the mirror clean, forgetting my reflection. Stamen stalks erupt from her mouth as the face, paper-like, peels back  into a corona of petals. My lily-headed double raises her hand, scrawling a message in the filth-dusted glass:  We have rolled back the partition so you might  pass through . Fearful & sincere, I paint the mirror white, a frost no bulb could sprout from. The body, a bag of manna, gone stale & stolen from heaven.         R. We follow the searchlight like a rainbow To Moonlight Madness. Out on the street, The moon shines madly on the sale clothes. JCPenney’s is exciting; your hand on your wallet is exciting. You say if I find pants for $5 or less, you’ll buy them. The cheapest girls’ pants are $10. I try them on anyway, I keep them On, under my homemade jeans. It’s hard for you to spend money. You keep saying, What if I drop dead? What if I drop dead? You want to save money for us To spend when you’re dead. You dye Your hair black & have multiple birth certificates. No one knows you’re much Older than our friends’ fathers. No one knows you’re much Closer to death. When I’m older, You give me your old pants, your old shirts, your old shoes. I put myself inside them. My size 8 ½ feet, my white ovaries, my pert breasts. I wear your clothes to work & Boom. I’m a father. Boom. I’m a son. My heart beats inside your Oxford Like a bomb inside a cage. Years later, your DNA In the stained collar Touches my neck Lightly with its heft Throughout the day. I can’t reach you. You’re golden. I’m all I have left. 
Think of a number.
            Hold in your mind the age you were
when you first realized
                  your body couldn’t be trusted
to take care of you.
                      Maybe the first kiss, that boy
with a penknife, or maybe
              what came after.
                            Maybe it was bleeding
every month and then the month you didn’t.
                                              Or the running
                       leap and the short fall marked,
the pebble gravel spraying.
Or the bike tumbling
                              into the ditch and the long gash
                              in the leg’s meat.
The moment can vary.
The tells don’t.
                       The way your mouth moves
                       and I follow.
How you toss
your hair, as if to say, just get on with it. But waiting
is something I’d like
                             to teach you, just like I’d like
to teach you how to touch without touching,
             how I know
         which door you’ll walk through
                                      before you do,
the way you sweeten your coffee
                                       until it’s syrup.
Lying is wrong, and so I always tell you
the truth
about why you want
the things you want.
                        The easiest thoughts to find
                    are the ones that mean
               something, if only to you.
When you got up from that ditch
                 your sock was red with blood.
You walked home
               because you knew
                no one was coming, and the cars passed
with their bright headlights,
                      en route to warm houses
              where mothers pick up on the first ring
                      and fathers carry
                    girls with scraped knees home.
Maybe you didn’t know
                 your own number and that’s why
           no one answered. It was nothing , you say,
                  but nothing is also a number. “The dearth of information on faith-based camps led to [our] interest in exploring outcomes and impacts of the camp experience on youth who attend these religiously-affiliated camps…”  — Jacob Sorenson, Journal of Youth Development  /  On the singing grounds, I press light onto the blade of a guillotine and calcify prayer in the preacher’s belly.  The earth is so pale when we leave. A girl: her hands sacred, butchering a stolen mango from the breakfast table;  Eyelashes snagged on the water’s edge. Trademark of our ancestors , she says, you know how they like it.  The way she forges dirt around angles of a moving mouth. I circle the lake as vulture, limn the island into loneliness.  Soundless as sky drapes gasoline over the horizon, choking out a crooked existence. I language her spine against scaffolding,  silk on our cheeks as she scrapes blessing off my tongue and that night I dreamt of God: I imagined the pastor  on his knees and a thousand sun-stained bodies. Smoke rose from the half-opened trees like a shutter.  An angel in a kayak. A man glares across a bullet-rained beach, Ecclesiastes spilling from inside his throat. Heaven ready  to swallow everything behind the wired fence. And God: His body wading in the river reeds, grip around white antlers  and a voice: all the wrong chords for a hymn. And God knows where the flowers always fall. God eats my false testimony and knives  close our thighs. No apology. Nothing he could possibly do. there were three. i went to the man in the middle who knew the least english. bulbous cheeks like cherry snow cones. a laurel or hardy mustache.  Chicago had a polish radio station low in the am, an all-day murmur. the chatter of a different country in a neighborhood of new comers when Ukrainian Village was polish & Mexican.  Black combs bathed in electric blue. mirrors everywhere, an infinite endless reflection. grey smocks & grey haired barbers who brought their lunch to work; brown bags with pickled beets, cabbage stuffed with sausage & rice.  the blade, exacto knife precise, over my ear, clip the lip meticulous, a geometric concern. sculptors of chin, when i knew no one else, they took me in. i told them my bubbe was polish, cześć , we joked we were cousins, though the mother country rounded her kin into pogroms.  hands of oak & pipe tobacco, hold a knife at my throat. the sharp gallant scent of aftershave. baby powder on my neck like a kolaczki. they’d send me back into the world anew, lines sharper than the viaducts. feelin like a million bucks for twelve. i’d tip three, every two weeks      until the sign says closed  & the massage spa neon  glows.  squats in a storefront long enough to open a coffee shop/gallery called Yo Mama’s Cafe. he stretches the sun up in a doorway on the avenue. the ancients wake & stroll past. he’s shirtless in karate pants. lumberjack shirt, denim overalls & roller skates. tremendous locks race down his back. he shaves his head & wears snow goggles. in the summer he walks to the Arab store for drum & rolling papers. there’s an espresso constantly steaming at his elbow. a canary. he carries hardbound books in a belt strapped to his bicycle. Foucault & Public Enemy. Fear of a Black Planet un-ejectable from his walkman. he’s always alone in thunderous headphones & has a hundred girls on his arm. his bed lays in the middle of a furniture-less future. he stirs a pot of gumbo beneath the blue line & sells paintings he found in the alley embellished with crowns. he’s avenue royalty in a gas station onesie chuck taylors jackson pollacked & laceless. he’s 36 & a visionary. he’s 49 & a screwball. he’s from the south. he is from the south side. he’s skateboarding down the ave in adidas joggers & a gas mask three stripes & apocalypse, going nowhere in particular.      The Oil & Incense Man  BY KEVIN COVAL    you could smell from three blocks away. forest of sticks lit & burning. a smoke stack under-arm portable salesman able to skate if the cops come. rambo ammo holsters holding sweet roll-on bottles X-ed across his chest: amber, frankincense & myrrh. the wise man who woulda brought gifts to baby Jesus & brings holy odors to Jesus’s mother off 26th St. feng shui for the hood. kufi-ed & righteously perfumed. Malcolm’s paperback in one pocket. an accountant’s ledger in the other. a beautiful light blue button up beneath a khaki trench coat. slangin scents so the public stays fresh in all seasons. permitless & perpetually illegal. ancient off a red line near you. a mobile economy out the corner store. pink wands wafting from a card table, vials splayed in a park to anoint the neck. a bouquet of jasmine nag champa knapsack, a moveable feast of sandalwood. burnt offerings, hustler of culture, permitless & perpetually illegal.  The first time I let him go down on me, I was not telling the truth.  I didn’t praise that beige sky reddening at the tug of blood.  I didn’t gasp or rise. I emptied myself like a good vein & said  thank you . I meant it. What was I supposed to say? Bait & switch  the symptom / retire my tongue. My skull, a rattled cage, my brain  a blush engine coughing up coal. The first time I let him see me  naked, I was no god. I shook like bone. I lied / still as gospel. We name our bodies / anything that means to gather / flock & clique  into belonging / into the tamarack wood / into the mouths of January  the month I buy a bag of sweet / seedless / plum tamarind & leave  the fruit to rust / we stumble into our blood / wild animals yoking together  an inheritance / this country of unrest / where loss is shade beneath  every cracked tree / a frisson of terror / each time lightning embosses  the fields / the circumpolar boreal / & commodious prairie rippling  smaller on my tongue / we name our bodies / before they are unnamed  by the grassland smoke / & the feckless eyes / of those who mark us  with an x / this winter country / its season of amaranthine oranges  & tender mangoes / I eat the pith & boil the rinds / I hope the ghosts  of first languages / transpire in the vapour / I am drawn to every scattering  syllable / stammerings of Kutchi / & coifs of clove to split the sweet  of this memory / this version / an imagined Dar es Salaam in a story  passed down / we collect the fragments / gather together blanks  & birch / judge our own belonging / this dream is a basin of other  dreams / longing slips through like words / my tongue is a sieve. He stands at the doorway, tired Of the labyrinth’s granite passages, Lights another cigarette, coughs;  Younger now than I am, but worse For wear. Twice split by stroke, He has yet to relearn right-handedness  Or to speak with confidence without a slur. His face is not his own and yet I recognize him beneath his mask  That peels like the paper of a wasps’ nest. Like him, I neither fear nor serve The gods, but by their favor I am allowed  This audience. My grief, once rage, Is now more like the finest of splinters That goes unnoticed as it works  Its way to the surface of the skin. He does not recognize me—an old man Among the shades—and why would he?  I am an interloper hoping to curry favor, To have the past explained at last. It would be easier to foretell the future. My mother was a dead doll. I held her
                           hand in the land of the dead
              and did not turn away.  In the land where the animals made no sound,
        where the cows stood at the empty lake and wept
               dry tears, and the deer waited by the long stalks of dead grass,
                         and everything whitened in the heat, I did not
        turn away from my mother,
                her eyes, empty of their water.  *  My country: dark and flat like tar
   you could drown in,  dark as night with no moon,
     a lake with no bottom: nowhere to rest,
          and full of the bones of beasts no one knows the names of.  *  The distance between our countries sang.  The distance between us a song
       played on the strings of a great instrument
              we do not see but know is there  like the invisible particles that make up all matter,
         even the breath,
                even the breath fogging the glass behind which my mother waits,  the air suspended between us: no matter the distance. 