She was not cold and I was
still a girl. Okay, I'll never
recover that. She was tall. She
had black hair, her skin tanned fast,
dark blue eyes. I can't remember
her teeth. She liked to wear bright
colors, used the word sweetie
ironically. I'll be seventy,
her dead forty-three years, wake
angry and weeping still. She comes
down the stairs wearing black
and white. She comes down the stairs
smiling and the room swerves.
I'm tiny in her arms, as if
flat against a steep mountain.
The sky is strong, pulls at me,
but she holds. Understand I don't
believe this will ever change.

We find out the heart only by dismantling what
the heart knows. By redefining the morning,
we find a morning that comes just after darkness.
We can break through the marriage into marriage.
By insisting on love, we spoil it, get beyond
affection and wade mouth-deep into love.
We must unlearn the constellations to see the stars.
But turning back toward childhood will not help.
The village is not better than Pittsburgh.
Only Pittsburgh is more than Pittsburgh. Rome
is better than Rome in the same way the sound
of raccoon tongues licking the inside walls
of the steel garbage tub is more than the stir
of them in the much of garbage. Passion is not
enough. We die and are put into the earth forever.
We must insist while there is time. Must eat
through the wildness of the sweet body already
in our bed to reach the body within that body.

On a country porch a traveler in shadow
is such a darkness you could marry
 
one summer night a lament with a mild wind,
refrain to refrain. Drive the gravel to lyric,
 
and a movement never lies,
a fate takes shape, Noguchi's metal dress.
 
Bead your lashes with a wax candle,
compose a face
 
human and flawed like art out of nothing
and try for a few hours to live forever
 
though they'll cut you in two,
the river and the moon.
 
Live alone in time, each gesture
the ruth of a sudden rain,
 
a wind turning through a red farmhouse
flush with cloud, Appalachia,
 
cold air of the white camellia.
It's the human gait.
 
On the frontier a woman fell backwards
in a black evening gown,
 
her sinewy waist an enemy of snow.
Leaving an expanse so wide, sweet audience,
 
we did not want the night to end.
We did not want to leave the building.

If things don't work out
I'll buy the belt
with the fashionable silver buckle
we saw on Canyon Road.
If we can't make peace
I'll order the leather duster and swagger
across the plaza in Santa Fe
cross-dressing for the girls.
If you leave I'll go back
for the Navaho blanket
and the pawn ring, bargain
with the old woman who will know
I intend to buy.
If you pack your things,
if you undress in the bathroom,
if you see me for what I am,
I'll invest in the folk art mirror
with the leaping rabbits
on either side, I'll spring
for the Anasazi pot with the hole
in the bottom where the spirit
of the potter is said to escape
after her death.
If you say I never intended
to share my life, I'll haunt the museum
shops and flea markets,
I'll don the Spanish riding hat,
the buckskin gloves with fringe at the wrists,
I'll step into the cowboy boots
tanned crimson and designed to make
any woman feel like she owns the street.
If you never touch me again
we'll both survive this simmering summer—
you down to two boxes of books,
a standing lamp, and a portable closet.
I'll do what my mother did
after she buried my sister:
she outfitted herself in an elegant suit
for the rest of her life.

To indicate is to
turn off     in a world
away from ease.
Rotating in a mean format of oxygen.
First make and then
made all alone until
the end of a blank.
The smoke opens up and out
comes a word
in a new storage of love.
Turning off or
turning on the calcareous bases
we find our selves in 
are set there by IT.
Divine and more
divine each day, no control,
but in another world.

Others have described
the metal bull placed over fire,
it singing while the man inside it died.
Which emperor listened, in which country,
doesn't matter, though surely
the thing itself was built by slaves.
An unearthly music, all reports agree.
We—the civilized—hearing this story,
recoil from it in horror: Not us. Not ours.
But why does my heart look back at me,
reproachful? Why does the bull?

We're using every bit of your death.
We're making a vice of your mouth's clenching and loosening,
an engine of your labored breathing,
a furnace of your wide-open eyes.
 
We've reduced you to stock, fed you to the crown,
banked the pearl of your last anger,
stored the honey of your last smile.
 
Nothing's left in your mirror,
nothing's floating on your high ceiling.
We're combing pockets, turning sleeves,
shaking out bone and ash,
stripping you down to desire.
 
Your beloved has folded your house into his.
I'm wading in the Swift River, balancing on stones.

It was a dream and you were walking through a field of hosannas
and the immense sea rocked with the blue voices of the dead
when you stretched out supine to dream lotus dreams which I 
could not read.
 
A cathedral of sky arched overhead. I wanted to know
whether your eyes were closed. I wanted your dream or song or prayer,
o I wanted, and the sin grew brighter and the breeze fairer
that immaculate day
 
unfolding like a poem, like a song I half-remember and ask,
Did we sing it once a long time ago, did we sing it together, 
was it our hymnal, our beautiful tragic chorus, our anthem, 
the day like a new white canvas,
 
and here I add marine blue, and there cobalt blue, and a cloud in
    amber,
and the light is transparent yellow, and the brush makes a sound
like wind over sand, but there are no whitecaps, no sailboats,
only canvas and paint and the body’s dance.
 
No kite. No gull. No things. Everything goes.
No dream, no dreamer. No certainty, no doubt.
Only the infinitely blossoming hosannas of the emptiness within,
echoing the emptiness without. 
 
I’ve seen a ghost house in the street
loom up behind a man with lice wearing a blanket
who was someone I love, a father or a brother.
 
Do you know how it is to hold on to anything in the dark,
said the man who was the child of unspoken wishes
rattling the toys in the ghost house?
 
The velocity of fear overtakes the spin of a warring planet,
and the scent of urine reminds the house of the child in diapers
who fell asleep to the sound of his mother rustling
the sheets while evil took a turn in the house.
 
The sound emphasized songlessness
of a mother who could not watch and turned on the
television. She slept and slept while
the children grew in the house that slanted
toward the thing devouring it.
 
There’s no easy way to know this thing, said the man
who grew smaller in the shadow of the house as it leaned over
to smell the tender neck of the child as he sipped
wine with other strangers.
 
When the earth makes a particularly hard turn
someone can fall off—a house can tilt
toward the street or ride the hip of destruction.
 
To maneuver deftly can mean learning another angle
of motion to take the place of wine
and other spirits caught by shiny glass or powder
attracted by the wound of those who once knew how to sing.
 
I’m sorry, said the house who sat down by the man
who’d taken refuge in the street.
 
The inhabitants could be heard disappearing
through aluminum walls as the boy bent
to the slap and beating by the father who was charged 
with loving and nothing in him could answer to that angel.
 
I could not protect you, cried the house:
Though the house gleamed with appliances.
Though the house was built with postwar money
and hope.
Though the house was their haven after the war.
Though the war never ended.

This town. 1983.
Alabama’s dead logs sleep inside us.
At night Todd burns cars
For money. It’s slick.
In his mouth
The flowers of smoke
Burn their memories
Into his tongue so he will kiss me
And I will taste them.
 
And when he’s thrown into the jail
By some FBI small-man
And he’s laid up in a quality
Doom, and the grocery clerk’s
Miraculous smile hurts me,
And the supernatural talk show host,
And the dog that fleas on the couch:
I’ve inherited this life of ownership.
 
And when he gets out
He brings an island back with him
And dances me around it
On the kitchen floor.
I follow him into the wilderness
And empty myself
Into the Tequila jug.
He chews the worm and swallows it
And licks the salt off my neck,
 
And we cry out
To heaven’s container above us,
To the cement hell below us,
All our versions of small misery
Which are: his dogged out Cad
model 1972 and the engine
Couching a tongue of smoke,
 
And the seats inside like greased black wings,
And the tough thought I have
That we should drive our asses
To California,
That locomotion is love,
That locomotion is love,
 
And him coming home greased up
From the APR plant,
For hours I glimpse
A musical phrase
Made of parts and parts,
And later me listening
To the parking lights of his breathing,
And loving
The skin of dirt he left on the tub,
 
And the wig of our carpet
Branching outward,
And our lives moving
There in the piles,
And our whole human histories filled
With all that Goddamned loving-kindness.

Easy to see there's no living out there 
on that seeming solid continent 
the clouds make, but in it 
I am seeing figures I can recognise 
running like horses in shallow water 
and waving up at me, their dead weight cast off 
as if they ran on the baked strand at Bettystown 
that summer the sun never stopped shining-- 
my mother and my father racing 
by the sea's edge, splashing themselves 
and one another with light. They are light 
as air, bodies hardly touching any surface, 
white legs flashing, the bright water 
breaking up at them and tipping 
their ankles with platinum 
foamy wings. They are all arms and smiles, 
a ripple of skin and well-being, 
waving for the invisible camera 
and waving back to where the baby 
sits in his pram on the strand 
squinting out at their brilliant figures 
and the way they break light 
by waving back at him 
in his seat of judgement, 
tossing their voices over and over. Now 
from the plane window 
I can glimpse through cloud-breaks 
the scumbled water under us 
and soon we're in clear air 
and all the cloud angels are lighting out 
for other regions: they'll see us and 
gaze after us, friendly and remote 
as always, yawning a storm 
somewhere else or propitious gales, 
but keeping a mild weather eye 
on those young parents playing like children 
on the calling shore, who are restored 
to the pure possibility of their lives, 
the long good day unfolding for them 
slow as smoke in water, vivid as a pinch 
of crushed sea salt, and nothing to be forgiven.

The thing itself is odd
this nibbled touching
 
Contiguous thresholds
for the souls to pass
from porch to porch 
 
Each a pod
snugly shut
wishes to open then divide
and so beget a sibling
 
To match as mittens do
identical and different
 
Master and mistress each
Then I will be you and bee you
 
In membranes locked
a peach and peach
would sip each other
 
Why this shock?
Ignition makes of parallels a peak
of straights a sphere
 
Heads together here
two rocks
the same space-pocket fills
 
Impossible such occupation
yet your face is mine
I stand behind your eyes
 
But then apart (a part) again
like boxers in ballet
The silken gloves
have barely grazed
 
The flick
of the immediate vanishes
Coincidence is quick
 
Before it tarnishes
O realize the truth of Two
the I the also You

Walking the heaved cement sidewalk down Main Street,
I end up where the town bottoms out: a parking lot
thick with sea-fog. There's Wister, my boyhood friend.
 
parked on the passenger side of his old Dodge pick-up.
He's waiting for Lucia, the girl who drives him around
and feeds him, the one who takes care of him at home.
 
Wister got married late. Like me. Wifeless now, no kids,
we're near sixty-eight, watching the ebb, looking out into
the fog. Fog so thick that if you got shingling your roof
 
you'd shingle three or four courses out onto
the fog before you fell off or sun came. Wister knows
that old joke. Not much else, not any more. His mind drifts
 
every whichway. When I start over to his old pick-up,
he waves to my wave coming toward him, his window half up,
half down. He forgets how to work it. I put my head
 
up close. Wister, I say, you got your compass with you
to steer her home through this fog? Wister smiles at me with
all sorts of joy, nodding yes. He says I don't know.


What struck me first was their panic.
 
Some were pulled by the wind from moving
to the ends of the stacked cages,
some had their heads blown through the bars—
 
and could not get them in again.
Some hung there like that—dead—
their own feathers blowing, clotting
 
in their faces. Then
I saw the one that made me slow some—
I lingered there beside her for five miles.
 
She had pushed her head through the space
between bars—to get a better view.
She had the look of a dog in the back
 
of a pickup, that eager look of a dog
who knows she's being taken along.
She craned her neck.
 
She looked around, watched me, then
strained to see over the car—strained
to see what happened beyond.
 
That is the chicken I want to be.

Practicing some silent under-water drift,
molded in plastic primary blue and yellow
bus station seats; like paper cutouts,
scissored replicas snipped from folded newspapers
to entertain a child,
these homeless bodies of men.
Hunched in layers, ten of them
asleep in hard cup chairs;
their feet in rotting shoes,
the time three a.m., when suddenly one of them
stands up and stretches
and walks away yawning;
as if this is a decent home in the suburbs,
with children, arms and legs spread out
like baby star-fish in their acrylic blankets.
As if he is leaving the soft mound of his wife's
secret body,
and going into their kitchen
to fill his thermos with hot coffee.
As if nothing is impossible,
as if it is an ordinary day.

Here the things of the past
come to an end.
Useless longings
that give off such a whiff
of brimstone, from which
arms of flame once shot
hundreds of feet into the air,
alarming the populace
and laying waste to acres
of charming native vegetation...
well, let's just say these yearnings
have shriveled considerably.
While still kindled
in my, they're now composed
solely of secondhand light
not unlike the moon's:
silvery-grey,
damning as faint praise,
insipid as dishwater.
I have even less to offer 
than I did years ago,
when you disappeared.
My paltry effects include
a series of sacred earaches,
a styrofoam life preserver
lifted from an ocean liner,
a photo of King Kong
in a dress suit, and tales
from a wedding night
spent rolling around
in a famous confederate 
battlefield's scratchy
blood-fed weeds.
Erosion rakes the face
of a distant stone cliff
where an ancient master race
carved a vertical city.
They worshipped bearded
river gods hidden under
cattails and algae in deep
ravines miles below. Nature's
radiance flares and pales.
I have no intention of being
direct. Fearing the worst
I send you this missive—
an ill-tempered penance,
on stationery edged with motifs
of huge saw-toothed glaciers
and crunchy little runner beans.
The letterhead pictures
all I've tickled or sipped
since we parted. O landlord
of my heart, must love always
end with a thud? Won't you
appear in one of the gaping
holes in this prose—
stick your head out of a crater
in this minefield of writing,
so I can grab a handful
of your hair
and sink my teeth
through your ear like
some fleshy hors d'oeuvre?

Someone I love is dying, which is why, 
when I turn the key in the ignition 
and back the car out of the parking space 
in the underground garage, and the radio 
comes on, sudden and loud, something 
by Haydn, a diminishing fugue, and maneuver 
the car through the dimly lit tunnels 
with their low ceilings, following the yellow arrows 
stenciled at intervals on the gray cement walls, 
I think of him, moving slowly through the last 
hard days of his life and I can't stop crying. 
When I arrive at the toll gate I have to make myself
stop thinking as I dig in my pockets for the last 
of my coins, turn to the attendant, indifferent 
in his blue smock, his white hair curling like smoke 
around his weathered neck, and say Thank you, 
like an idiot, and drive into the blinding midday light. 
Everything is hideously symbolic, 
and everything reminds me of cancer: 
the Chevron truck, its rounded underbelly 
spattered with road grit and the sweat 
of last night's rain, the dumpster 
behind the flower shop, its sprung lid 
pressing down on dead wedding bouquets-- 
even the smell of something simple, coffee drifting 
from the open door of a cafe and my eyes 
glaze over, ache in their sockets. 
For months now all I've wanted is the blessing 
of inattention, to move carefully from room to room 
in my small house, numb with forgetfulness. 
To eat a bowl of cereal and not imagine him, 
scrubbed thin and pale, unable to swallow. 
How not to imagine the tumors 
ripening beneath his skin, flesh 
I have kissed, stroked with my fingertips, 
pressed my belly and breasts against, some nights 
so hard I thought I could enter him, open 
his back at the spine like a door or a curtain
and slip in like a small fish between his ribs, 
nudge the coral of his brain with my lips, 
brushing over the blue coils of his bowels 
with the fluted silk of my tail. 
Death is not romantic. He is dying, 
no matter how I see it, no matter 
what I believe, that fact is stark
and one dimensional, atonal, 
a black note on an empty staff. 
My feet are cold, but not as cold as his, 
and I hate this music that floods 
the cramped insides of my car, my head, 
slowing the world down with its 
lurid majesty, transforming everything I see
into some sort of memorial to life, 
no matter how ugly or senseless-- 
even the old Ford in front of me, 
its battered rear end thinning to scallops of rust, 
pumping black classical clouds of exhaust 
into the shimmering air-- even the tenacious 
nasturtiums clinging to a fence, vine and bloom 
of the insignificant, music spilling 
from their open faces, spooling upward, past
the last rim of blue and into the still pool 
of another galaxy, as if all that emptiness 
were a place of benevolence, a destination, 
a peace we could rise to.

One day in late summer 1982, twenty years after the flower shop first
delivered them, they will stop coming, but in 1968 Joe DiMaggio still has
half a dozen long-stemmed roses placed by Marilyn's crypt every Tuesday,
Thursday and Saturday. By Monday, June 3rd, the fresh-cut bunch left 
over the weekend has done its job. The year will be remembered for the
scent of flowers and gunpowder and a song with a passing reference to
Joltin' Joe. We're desperate and desperation makes us larger than life in
each other's eyes though life itself is not as large as we picture it. By this
time next year some of us will be packing for the moon, the rest of us will
be driving out to the country, and only the wounded will remember where
they were today.

Azalea
ought to be the name of someone you love.
it's why they come here, the tired brides, the men, the maids
so-called in ill-fitted dressed.
you'd almost like to see flamingos here
stepping to the bending of trees
and where the flower beds grow to, and then
the plaque that says who and what it's all about.
 
you know inside is the cataract of life. out
here is for photos, what to show your friends
because it's how to believe they love you
if they nod and squeeze your upper arm in delight
for the flowers all flamey for the flowers all swooney
are sure delightful
 
i don't know about flowers.
i can't think what i do know about really.
ok, none of the flowers have names.
the gardeners in green caps with big plastic buckets walk like they 
know something about something like they know what they need to know
but they don't speak english. pulling up old dead leaves
and you can't see the hands the way they're inside of stickering
batches. the hands the way they plunge into plastic. leaves! inside
of plastic! what's all this? sorry, no, no spik ingliz.
 
the cars hishwahhhh on kelly drive. blap blap go the shoes
of runners. deciduous means a whole lot more to me.
shake of tarp and sound of rake. fat kids bike thin paths.
and the brides, and the brides.
wish them the luck of the photographed. 

Of course she'll wave goodbye, the oceanliner's
melancholy size towering like Manhattan.
Of course she'll be obscure standing at the rail,
the only visible passenger, like someone
at a window so small she disappears
behind the beauty of her gesture,
her raised hand one of the waves that starts
at sea and builds. And later on of course
she'll stroll the high elliptic of the deck
while each immortal hour plows the colder,
deeper shades toward where the sun perpetually
sets its billion bullion lode and lays a gold
path leading west, easy to follow, within
whose wake, against the dark, this sail.

Weighing left-handedness on the canvas, 
                        Demonstrably yours, Cy. 
 
He let the line drop. He said: "Imagine that we have 
straightened the wire without stretching it." 
Below it, a number that may measure the wire 
while abstaining from it. 
                 In basic idoms 
of boundlessness, the canvas invites writing
a number in abstinence, 
or as though "out-to-lunch," which is a sure sign of
 inward boundlessness is Vico, 
                     who is elsewhere 
taking his forks, yet also and fundamentally, taking his fork 
with his left and transferring it to his right
in his children, his commitments. 
 
Of language and the prelinguistic 
left-handedness and "vocalissmus" at its source, he had something to say, 
would have apprehended the difficult fixative in. the words "speak it." 
Speak right-handedly, he advises. 
 
"If you ask me, that thundershower is through-composed." 
 
Meanwhile analysis grew and grew in the baby. 
"B" and then "B" and then "Brr." 
With performative scratches and eventual socialization, left to right, 
the roaring wind. The wind in vagaries
 let us stutter further 
            for a wealth of 
usage more analytical when left-handed than he seems in ratiocination. . ., 
reversing "B" in time 
to rest our conceptions. 
You left your watch to wind down. 
 
                    Pa-pa! 
From the lips of bed, P rolled out a beginning, drove a thundering 
    hangover 
from bed to earth. "May one begin where one pleases?" he asked. 

By the time
the low branches
riped the pigeons are fat,
and can be generous.
Just so, let
the gods take what they want
of this world and its high nectars—
Know they will leave
the stews and the nipple's erectness,
the unguarded, late-sweetening
pleasures.

Curled on the soda
in the fetal position, Jane wept day
    and night, night and day.
I could not touch her; I could do nothing.
    Melancholia fell
like the rain over Ireland for weeks
    without end.
            I never
belittled her sorrows or joshed at
    her dreads and miseries.
How admirable I found myself.

The second week of Lent I walked
under crows fine in their
calamity, the wide dark wings, the heavy
rusted hinge in their throats.
I heard them once,
twice, too many times. They were a cloud
of bad hooks coming down, complaining.
The path lay ahead and went up,
mostly mud, but water
moved quick under ice, the sound
of anyone crying, then door after door
closing against it. So the light
gauzed over early, from 4 o'clock on.
Lent because of that, or because
of the branches, still spiny and bare.
Into the old leaves of summer I read
oak and black willow pressed
into the furrows, the half-frozen bootprints.
Lent because I kept walking, or because
I hadn't slept. 
 
 Always, one is told things
after a death: the woods
will give way to a field, or grief
has its own sweetness, or
she will come to you in a dream
if you ask. But it was all thicket
where I walked, one woodpecker
circling and circling the same
dead tree, probing and listening.
He never left the high wood.
Finally is a word like stone, like
water. Or opening like water and closing
like stone. And finally the woods
opened to a field. I saw
a family there
before distance swallowed the,.
I saw their bright coats
get smaller, the children
lagging behind the mother
turning back to them and speaking.
 
It's lent, I told myself, as if
this were a reason. For a long time
I watched for larks in the half-light
where tall grass
was bent and tousled like the hair
of a child after sleep.
Love is a wheel and a weight. Once
I slept perfectly, not knowing.

Are you the owner of a seedy night club?
 
Are you its sole customer, sole bartender,
Sole water prowling around the empty tables?
 
Do you put on wee-hour girlie shows
With dead stars of black and white films?
 
Is your office upstairs over the neon lights,
Or down deep in the dank rat cellar?
 
Are bearded Russian thinkers your silent partners?
Do you have a doorman by the name of Dostoyevsky?
 
Is Fu Manchu coming tonight?
Is Miss Emily Dickinson?
 
Do you happen to have an immortal soul?
Do you have a sneaky suspicion that you have none?
 
Is that why you throw a white pair of dice,
In the dark, long after the joint closes?

Procession of death,
Day-glo death,
Potato death,
Death of strawberry,
Death strapped into a handi-six-pack
Death in vodka, scotch, the vitamin-fortified cigarette cough.
Juice of cow in a box,
Broccoli piled up man-felled trees
How long have I been in here?
Our faces look left, right, slow, so slow, so sleepy
We reach for the non-fat,
The boxes of breadsticks, the round glue of pregnancy.
No one ever says, really, anything.
Plastic bags from the roll rippp
Let's grab a lettuce from the stacks of lettuce,
Bee in the bonnet on the label of the jar of honey,
Darling: the non-world-yellow cheese,
the price,
the size chosen by a stranger's desire,
for my teeth.
Box of food for the pet at home, standing in our kitchen.
The shelves of canned fruit, yellow bullets of mustard jars
The piles of onions, the dusty garlic piles,
The triangular figure of tomatoes,
The baskets we lay our deaths down in
Fetching cans of halos.
Cry into your toliet paper,
your spray starch.
your light bulbs and lobsters in tanks near the cashier's booth
their claws held together by rubber bands
Cry into that water
Fish belly up on the Styrofoam surfaces
in refrigeration
headless feetless chickens
Turkeys across the aisle, lookalike big bodies, frozen.
Shelves of bread loaves like big leather shows of sad old clerks
not like
the smell of yeast and life's
an open wound, festering, and a feast of fools.
No dignity, my darling, 
in these last three hours of the world.

In my hometown it was like January,
like January in Oaxaca, in Fortin
 
de las Flores, like Fortin
in the mid-forties, like the 40s
 
in December, like December
on the river, a forest of willows
 
half in, half out of water,
like the river in the picture,
 
like the picture above your bureau,
like your bureau filled to over-flowing
 
with feathers every color of the spectrum,
feathers blown through vowels,
 
through curtains of bougainvilla, going
on forever, forever as it formerly was
 
in the lustre of a loved one's luggage,
baggage to carry lightly or solemnly
 
toss-off into the Bay of Fundy.
Thank you for your golden mice
 
who never wake me up at night,
for the pocket-size surveillance device,
 
for books which tell me nothing's unakin.
In January it was like my hometown
 
in the 1940s in the middle of December,
December a cool glass of water at noon
 
in the summer, a clinking of cowbells
to signal it's evening. I was seven,
 
four, eight, eleven, still unborn,
brother to my younger sister,
 
sister to my mother, father like a twin,
twins like vapor trails on clear nights
 
in October. You were my shadow
I dared not step into. You stood by
 
my shoulder, champion, angel, faithful
companion I dared not look in the eye.
 
What was it like for you?
Were you about to step into your skin,
 
like water poured from a pitcher,
like an ant into amber, like molten gold?
 
Was the gold like someone's fortune
or folly, folly a moving picture you'd get
 
into for a quarter, when a quarter meant
more than a dollar, a dollar a bit
 
of a future you'd be expected to furnish,
I'd be with you to finish
 
of a finish wearing the date of your birth,
polished with everyone's hopes,
 
polished with everyone's dreams,
lost in a basket of keepsakes.

Peacetime in brooklyn
when the cops close off the bridge for one reason or another
and I see a guy with a phone in his ear talking to jesus
like jesus was his sergeant
and maybe he's a cop too
in this time of peacetime
all over the borough of souls so caught up in god
everything is real under the brick
up by the gangsters social clubs and all them suckers
got beauty
whose still peeling onions in jail somewhere high up in the hills
during this time of peacetime in brooklyn
when I run across the bridge and am caught up in thought
about women and women
and the two men escaped from some upstate prison considered mad and
dangerous and all the while I'm thinking
this is flying

I tasted and spat
as the experts did
so I could taste again.
I put my nose in. I cleansed
my palate with bread.
I friend guided me;
he thought because I drank often
I drank well.
He thought I might be looking
for subtleties, as he was.
My vocabulary was "good"
and "not so good."
I was usually a drinker
looking for a mood.
We moved among the oak barrels
and private reserves,
the fine talk of the serious
performing their delicate
mysterious craft.
Yet about the art of aging
I found myself indifferent
nothing to say or ask.
We went outside,
walked among the woody vines
and fleshy, often violet,
sometimes green, prodigal,
smooth-skinned grapes.
The day was beautiful.
My friend was happy, sated.
There's never enough, I thought.
There never can be enough.

Are you angry at nature? said God to His woman.
Yes I am angry at nature I do not want nature stuck
up between my legs on your pink baton
 
or ladled out like geography whenever
your buckle needs a lick.
What do you mean Creation?
 
God circled her.
Fire. Time. Fire.
Choose, said God.

Yes, I say, I know
    what you mean.
        Then we’re off,
 
improvising on what
    ifs: can you imagine
        Langston & Lorca
 
hypnotized at a window
    in Nella Larsen’s
        apartment, pointing at
 
bridges & searchlights
    in a summer sky, can you
        see them? Their breath
 
clouds the windowpanes
    one puffed cloud
        indistinguishable from another.
 
They click their glasses
    of Jamaican rum. To you
        great King, says Lorca.
 
Prisoner in a janitor’s suit,
    adds Langston. Their laughter
        ferries them to a sidestreet
 
in the Alhambra,
    & at that moment
        they see old Chorrojumo.
 
King of the Gypsies
    clapping his hands
        & stamping his feet
 
along with a woman dancing
    a rhumba to a tom-tom’s
        rhythm. Is that Florence
 
Mills, or another face
    from the Cotton Club
        almost too handsome 
 
to look at? To keep
    a dream of Andulusian
        cante jondo alive, 
 
they agree to meet
    at Small’s Paradise
        the next night,
 
where the bells of trumpet
    breathe honeysuckle & reefer,
        where women & men make love
 
to the air. You can see
    them now, reclining
        into the Jazz
 
Age. You can hear Lorca
    saying he cured his fear
        of falling from the SS Olympic
 
by dreaming he was shot
    three times in the head
        near the Fuente Grande
 
on the road to Alfacar.
    But the word sex doesn’t
        flower in that heatwave
 
in 1929, only one man touching
    the other’s sleeve, & heads
        swaying to “Beele Street Blues.”

We fished for carp whose flesh would never find
out lips, the bottom feeds fathers said to kill.
We fished at night with bloody bait designed
to draw them up from river mid. Our will
was to possess a life not ours, to make
those glowing spirit bodies understand
our need for blood spilled simply for the sake
of what we thought it took to be a man.
I'll never understand that rage we knew,
that knife that someone gouged into the eyes
of carp we caught but didn't think to do
the killing right, and wasted lives despised
for reasons lost now in the blur of days.
Not boys, but something darker, something crazed.

We are walking our very public attraction
through eighteenth-century Philadelphia.
I am simultaneously butch girlfriend
and suburban child on a school trip,
Independence Hall, 1775, home
to the Second Continental Congress.
Although she is wearing her leather jacket,
although we have made love for the first time
in a hotel room on Rittenhouse Square,
I am preparing my teenage escape from Philadelphia,
from Elfreth’s Alley, the oldest continuously occupied
residential street in the nation,
from Carpenters’ Hall, from Congress Hall,
from Graff House where the young Thomas
Jefferson lived, summer of 1776. In my starched shirt
and waistcoat, in my leggings and buckled shoes,
in postmodern drag, as a young eighteenth-century statesman,
I am seventeen and tired of fighting for freedom
and the rights of men. I am already dreaming of Boston—
city of women, demonstrations, and revolution
on a grand and personal scale.
 
 
                                                       Then the maître d’
is pulling out our chairs for brunch, we have the
surprised look of people who have been kissing
and now find themselves dressed and dining
in a Locust Street townhouse turned café,
who do not know one another very well, who continue
with optimism to pursue relationship. Eternity
may simply be our mortal default mechanism
set on hope despite all evidence. In this mood,
I roll up my shirtsleeves and she touches my elbow.
I refuse the seedy view from the hotel window.
I picture instead their silver inkstands,
the hoopskirt factory on Arch Street,
the Wireworks, their eighteenth-century herb gardens,
their nineteenth-century row houses restored
with period door knockers.
Step outside.
We have been deeded the largest landscaped space
within a city anywhere in the world. In Fairmount Park,
on horseback, among the ancient ginkgoes, oaks, persimmons,
and magnolias, we are seventeen and imperishable, cutting classes
May of our senior year. And I am happy as the young
Tom Jefferson, unbuttoning my collar, imagining his power,
considering my healthy body, how I might use it in the service
of the country of my pleasure.

The Woman I love is a forest of enormous whispers
and her tongue smooths the petals after rain.
Her finger dreams of a garden and it is Spring.
A fast car lathers the mist like milk beneath a breast.
The puppy sleeps on top of a pink dress drooling
and a man said Think about cooking honey
delicious sausage beautiful luscious eggs please,
essential shadows drunk as diamonds in a sweet storm.
I take my cry and sing delicate girl what about this thing.
Can I leave the gift with you, swim
through peach and fiddle, chant and shine?

In the corrugated rungs
of rose-colored and canted sunset, 

bootsoles leave little hexes
on the sidewalk, I have forgotten what flag I fly. 

A dead queen from a rainy town
rides the somnambulate bat 

to the corner of the evening panic.
An old story paying a call in the wee hours. 

Lovers in third floor windows
with their backlit hair and boxes of geraniums 

have it out,
each in their own way 

masterful, like movies
playing silently from televisions. 

Fate, a siren, a wooden floor,
reticent chairs, becalmed objects, 

real kisses, kisses in daydreams,
fading horns of the city - a limousine retreats, 

I can hear the stopped tune of the workplace. Voices sink
into the intersection like a river marked 

in different colored inks, each route hidden
as in a crowded room where sounds and images 

float away, and no one can see
the hands at the piano. 

Time so full of speed and accuracy,
digital river. In neon 

a small word
magnifies, and shrinks back 

to its normal size,
infinitesimal. The urge 

toward transcendency
keeping us alive. 

You want to know where you are again?
Back in the middle of the interrupted everything
third side of the double album,
the start of the night shift
as eternity's waitress;
it's dusk, many years after the war,
you've crossed the same wild fields as before;
they've started selling uniforms of the new dead soldiers,
gone back to putting peace signs on t-shirts—;
you're stepping lightly in the dream
you can afford, the magic that was
and always must have been for you—

A dusk ago,—Remember? don't you?
Remember? Look. You had
an old soul. Killdeer
landed in the fields out there,
landed in their sounds,
in what's already happening,
dee, d-dee,
near your dormitory room,
you stretched once like an oak tree,
many times like a laurel;
the ones who would be drafted
came into your room

and you had an old soul.
You had started the same soul
five times, you were good at it;
the moon watched you one of those times
peering in at you
before you had lain down, peered in
behind the loaded cypress;
the moon horizoned herself,
you told her your sexual secrets,
loved what she could not help
being farther then—

The ones who would be drafted
came into the room (it's still possible,
the never happening); you thought
you'd been sent to earth to rescue them,
said, leave them alone, they already have tenses;
they draped blue workshirts over chairs—;
the moon was doing her best imitation,
old waitress, tilting herself like a tray,
said to the war, leave them alone,
they have what they want,
they don't need a future
when they have a soul . . . And why

shouldn't they have. (Headlights
shattered them. Loud
white damage of oncoming cars.)
You thought you'd been sent to earth
to help them not to fight—
when they rained with the rain,
when they clouded,
they were the little bit almost,
a little bit Sacramento, in love
with the magic of the active ground,
and you rode north or south with them,
on the backs of Triumphs, in the vans—

You afraid? Not really.
You afraid? Not really no.     OK OK
if you get afraid just tell me—
till you stopped in the middle of orchards
with little hard crosses, in love
with the magic of the active ground;
why, every seed moved!
Shook and shook.
Even the necklacey Woolworth's ones
the spiders loved—and why
shouldn't they have. Night
was coming on—

it was dusk
between the stages of the war. You
would save them. Dusk lifted you
with 2 fingers like a field mouse
and set you down 2 hawks from here
where you had done the other game,
pawn to queen four, the being
active till you loved
the mind and body of their world,
and lay in the low thin dormitory
boats of those beds of theirs,
their noisy hands all over you—;

you know how mercury shakes?
You know how mercury shivers
like tomorrow when you break
the end off the thermometer?
You see your own face in the silver.
Active magic. You could
become like that.
They gave you a body
before they left, made love to you
so easily it felt like spending money;
after the marching and the shouting
they left the voices in your flesh . . .

Some of them got free. Some left. Some died.
One fought the war in you.
When they rained with the rain,
when they clouded, in eaches
and whens, the water streaming
from their bodies as they left,
when their faces lay,
when your mouth lay, when their
mouths lay down in the it
with you . . . You were home
from that time, and why
shouldn't you have been?

Imperialism failed. Such
startled years for the world.
Medium countries swelling,
little countries bleeding, big
countries turning into little countries
as they have since the start of time.
You stared out at the coast—
radio flowers of sound from Los Angeles,
boats dragging accidents
that hadn't happened . . . A gull flies
through two thirds of the shadow
of another gull . . .

You can't keep another person,
you know that. You had
to give them up—couldn't save them;
You lean left in the hut
and right in the magic. It's years
since you have missed them,
missed them most of all
while you were with them.
You broke free and spilled out
all the unreflected light they left
like the moon who has already
healed her nothing—

wasn't she triumphant 
in her slim smile,
like one stripe peeled off a lighthouse;
they had added to your shadow
where you were,
you had become a little bit them
and were proud of the reflection,
proud of the crossing,
could expect to be recognized
where the day was undoing the day
and let the magic spread—


A few days to turn the pages.
Eyes worse by a half dioptor.
 
News furrowed on land or forehead. 
It is spring; none is returning.
 
Flesh pierced, unabated.
Doubled over yet straightened.

Cold coffee. In the wintertime he would've
Grimaced and spat it out. Yet now in June,
The middle of the month with a dark sky
Lowering around his house, with flicks of lightning,
Nicking the horizon across the wide valley, he
Picks up his half-forgotten cup and the dregs
Are cool and savory. He smiles. The first raindrops
Go plop, plop on the roof of his room. He closes
His eyes. The naked goddess whose perfume
So teases him is plucking the harp she clasps
Between her knees. And the thunder tolls.

I wish I had a copy
of Pushkin's poem
"I loved you once"
which is said to achieve 
the intended effect—
"wishful resignation
half-concealing half-
revealing a still
smouldering passion"
"without having recourse
to figures of speech."
O it would be clear to you then
there could be such a thing—
I would leave you a copy.

As all the ballast of familiar life
Floated away from the hot air balloon
That was taking me in far-travelling mood
Over vast still mountains once glimpsed in dreams
I felt my foolishness in the domain
Of the air like a kind of punctuation
Applied to a page before a word's written
By that great Friend who, scattered everywhere
In the universe, seems to piece together
The floorplans of the endarkened rooms
Of this great city by negative design
Until the shapes before my eyes became
Obscure as all those lost relationships,
As all the ballast of familiar life

From the rim of a Mayan pit
I looked for the remains of the sacrificed,
wanting to see them as they had died,
half strangled and stabbed, left
to claw for the top of the stack,
for air.
 
And their screeching's what
aroused me; their necks—
smooth as mine, aroused me—
young girls, even babies,
barely tooth'd, each daughter
asleep between parents,
sweetly asleep, only
seconds away from her father
discovering how wonderfully,
how easily, he might pull his girl
from her mother's folds;
 
it's just at that moment my armies
arrive, house by house,
thrusting the girls,
fresh from their mamas,
into my carts,
centuries of girls,
naked and golden.

Behind the glass door
stands a babushka,
a grandmother doll.
It unscrews. There's another
inside, a size smaller,
that unscrews, and so on.
 
A pipe called a hookah
with a malachite bowl...
 
The gramophone wheezes,
scratches, and speaks:
"Avalon. Fox Trot."
White flannels and knees
intently two-stepping
step onto the floor.
 
At four there's a breeze.
The bamboo trunks creak
and talk in the lane.
A house lizard hops
from the vine to the rail...
cock his head at me.
 
"Remember?" he croaks.
Dear brother, I do! 

I
 
The shortest day of the year, and she—
he? all right, I—count up the days,
count up the days till the oh my lord the end
of the year, penetrant with cold,
such is the climate of solitude,
and one's own story—one's? whose?
his? hers? nearly told.
Prefaced, postfaced, edited
with time's red pencil, then enclosed
in a self—addressed correctly? stamped,
wrinkling envelope.
The new year smiles, a jogging starlet,
and will, mark my words, outshine the old,
and the older stories—outs, theirs—
get darker with each year they're told.
 
II
 
Only to music
do our lives leave their tenses, like shoes,
outside the door.
Leave their gender on racks above the seat;
our skeletons keep us from lurching.
Only to music
unwrapping our senses, do yesterday, after, before,
this year, next year, morning or night,
imply more than our own extinction
as they rotate
with the heavenly bodies,
as music's time helps us endure
our time, its pauses,
while we sit facing one direction,
 
or stand conducting to no one
but ourselves becharmed,
to etch it on grooves in our brain.
Themes gestated in another,
we feel born of our outpourings,
our own wrist and index finger.
Notes take their places in black-tie
or white, like an orchestra, one by one;
curtsy to music's Rome, 
bow to its Jerusalem,
all bells a-gong.
Rhythm grabbed by its feet—                       gotcha!
running in some ancient Ambrosian hymn,
Berlioz, Gershwin or lullaby,
 
as humanly simple, unforced a gesture
as licking a thread on the tongue
to ease it through a needle's eye/
 
III
 
The shortest day.
Solitude talks itself hoarse.
People are going home
with their perfect and pitiful human plumbing,
with their pleasure havens, sewage, gender, blood
pressure, time.
Theirs, yours, whosever, mine.
 
One's story—whose? does it matter?
one's gets set
in meters composed
of the years that lived with their narrator
till presto then largo they finally burst
the self's glued envelope.
I hear their cries compact the air.
 
And yet they—only I?—can just feel hope,
feel it, know it will declare itself—
feel it like the hoof
in a pregnant mare.
 
Though stories get darker each year
and darker
they're told.
 
How do trees grieve?
Clichés tell us
the double-over willow
weeps subtle tears
which flavor the lake
as her trailing branches
tickle its waters, grazing
the occasional drowned hand.
Perhaps this stand of liquid amber
inwardly wilts as adult trees sway
above hacked saplings,
mauled shrubs, trampled grasses—
I've told that gardener
more than once he's got
a butcher's handshake.
Ancient, headstrong elms
drool clear juices
humans aren't astute enough
to transfuse,
after tree surgeons
ignorant of trunk or leaf anesthesia
perform chainsaw amputations.
Ever sensitive, the soul
of a broadleafed maple
felled for veneer sleeps
fitfully within my coffee table.
Once its cells ate light
and manufactured green sweetness.
I grip this form, napkin on my lap,
daunted by wronged objects.
This enraged verse. The sawtoothed
spirit gleaming in my grapefruit spoon.
I can't even have breakfast
without laying waste. It's my
nature. Grain ground to flour,
molded into loaves
for toast: forgive me.
We never learned to tread gently.
Now our dwindling joys 
are mass-produced or imagined. 
Stolen clothes muffle us,
cloaks and turbans mask
our earthly scents. Travel by camel.
Subsist on bacon drippings. Do no harm.
The bamboo bench thirsts and creaks
at floodtime. So do I,
though for the past several generations
I've been editing my amends:
this many-paged treatise
on the color of seawater.

The centaur wants his hairy haunches
kissed. And a girl's beautiful lips
approach. Hesitate. The black flies
circling. Out of one log story
many short ones. She closes
her eyes. She kisses.
 
No one knows the past through the garden
that leads to the wild world. Old women
point—Here! here!—but if they knew
they'd be gone. They've squandered their weight
in breadcrumbs to the big-mouthed crows.
 
Tiny graves, and this month's deluge
of slim crosses. Bandages soaked in vinegar
for our foreheads. A talk of the centaur's
pure trickery. Not to love the girl, but to ride
off with her. The way out of the garden
was always up. Her white petticoats wrap him,
her gown a trough through the wind.
 
Vanished. Gone from us as so long
predicted. No one stops the executioner/
We can't deny we were told.

Urban wanderers,
    unhoused and unhinged, they are rapt in
        a perpetual motion of paraphernalia
 
trundling from Kendall to Central, Harvard to Porter.
    One in a gentleman’s greatcoat—
       worsted gabardine and fur collar—
 
holds a sidebar conference with herself, pushes her metal
    shopping cart, argues with the invisible
       censorious judge of Mass Ave.
 
Parallel to traffic, she retains a centrifugal
    relationship to the lanes she occupies, strides
       away from the main, parent axis of rotation,
 
abjures public transportation or charity and returns,
    early evening, cold, coincident with those of us
       not charged with a dilemma of streets. 
 
She sleeps in undocumented doorways and on grates and
    in neighborhood parks on benches and propped
       on soiled cushions she pushes,
 
and even her sleep toboggans through the cantonments
    of temporary habitation. I wake in a white Victorian.
       She wheels her cart in time-lapse storefront glare.
 
Sponge of pocked foam bedding. Torn lining of a brown coat.
    Thus I remember my sister, her unbuilt days
    of compulsive walking before she decamped
 
to clinics and psych wards. Her walkabouts. Her unfettered speech.
    Her terrorist phone calls and the tyranny 
       of her jurisdiction: thus, beleaguered,
 
she engineered a siege and won. Timber up a frame dwelling
   I said. Explain yourself to yourself. In the end,
    the cops broke down the door of an empty house to find her.

Was it something uncleaved, clean-cut you wanted?
Something cheerleader, vacuumed, clean-shaven?
Before the truck stop marred stands of cedar. Before father
succumbed to the secretary, scribbled a note or two on his tie? 

It says something about us
that we no longer read Ovid. Of course, 

some don't like to be shunned, stepped on,
spurned, excluded, don't like to be shuttled back and forth
between the barge and the mansion, serving him
hot milk while he reads Stendahl by the fire.
They like to be admired, chauffeured, they like silver,
fellatio, they like to be stirred, to stray from the herd,
called not just when they're needed but missed. 

You wanted something whole. One God.
What's wrong with that? In the paintings, the Gods
are happy. Why shouldn't they be? Beauty
had a certain volume. The cracked foot of the statue David.
When windows were still church windows,
before stained-glass would disintegrate into slag and gravel
if you brought back the blitzkrieg, those shiny pornographic photos. . . . 

Lingerie shred in the hall. A party
you hardly remember.
It was like this. You had a few ideas about women.
A few women gave you ideas.
But why indulge in the shattered lampshade,
the painting askew on the inner wall?
What matters is what always mattered.
Standards. The station of the cross. Grace. The good
shucked from the bad with a good sharp knife.
The time before the the. The first time. The first wife. 

I hide in the river
with a reed to breathe through.
The river carries me
slowly downstream.
 
Nina calls it the bit
where I converse with slime.
She says it's just a part
of a larger step, she says
 
she can't believe
I don't know how the dance goes.

It takes more than a door painted blue
to keep the ghosts away. All you have to do
is live long enough and they will come.
 
Beside the interstate the old road still ran,
though it ended abruptly in a field of sage and mist.
That road seemed like the future: an emptiness
 
that could turn, at any moment, into beauty.
I stopped in a small town in Oklahoma—
a liquor store in a bad neighborhood,
 
old men and teenagers standing around out front,
a radio crackling in the dry wind.
Did the old men come this far and stop?
 
Smoke from their cigarettes disappeared an instant later.
In the darkness nothing was visible but the darkness.
By dawn the road was the color of silk
 
gone orchid or violet when tilted to the light,
the trees on the side of the road permanently twisted
from the wind off the plains. On that leg they bent
 
toward me. I stood some distance from the car and felt
the dry air whipping my skirt around my legs.
I realize I’d forgotten too little about my life,
 
that there was in sleep and inattention a kind of salvation
and I wanted to be saved because I no longer believed
any one place was different from any other.
 
Being haunted means you never feel wholly abandoned,
and as I drove past the blinded diners and the shells of old trucks,
I gathered it close to me, all of it, and went on.

The Hampshire ewes standing in their wooden pens,
Their shiny black hooves close to each other,
 
Had to pay with their wool, with their wombs,
With their eating, with their fear of the dogs.
 
Every animal had to pay. Horses paid all day;
They pulled stone-boats and the ground pulled back.
 
And the pigs? They paid with their squealing
When the knife entered the throat and the blood
 
Followed it out. The blood, steaming and personal,
Paid it. Any debt left over the intestines paid.
 
"I am what I am." The pig could not say that.
The women paid with their bowed heads, and the men,
 
My father among them, paid with their drinking.
Demons shouted: "Pay to the last drop!" I paid
 
The debt another way. Because I did not pay
In the farm way, I am writing this poem today.

Many favor sunflowers seeding
I choose two lovers late September sharing sorbet
one can always choose to imagine
their fingers through each other's curls
without an image
of their heads bleeding & shouts all around
unnatural lighting & sour air
no small wonder there are deep voices
the wonderful red tiles of the South
an opera in the courtyard
& someone will be responsible for this
muggy lavender field
of vegetal & hay light climaxed in storm
& the stone towers too those
years vanished in an afternoon
the bronze figurines on the door to nowhere
someone remembers them
conjures rows of citizens before the campfire
pig blazing
 
All these days I've thought of myself
as a poet there's that halo 
around intimate matters
in language where impulse rules
intuition too has a habit of romancing
before it's shaded & twilit
as the slow bellow of afternoon breathes
in the shadow of the Duomo
we drive our daydream around
switching up narrow streets
a light rain breaks in on the fortification
heat mingles with evening
the world is noble & familiar
 
Language is barren before it is toned
by diction & syntax diction especially
& then meaning
musings amusements & nuance
create by the momentum of play & thought
feelings & settings
I feel for you
at home or away whenever
a century or a day goes by
as a creature of love speechless
with no other place to go
at the time we admit it
we ourselves are admitted
into the soft landscape
I study every day & fall behind a cloud
 
The cattleguard of the invisible ranch opens
a fringe of piñon & juniper stirs among the canyon rim
alabaster cows float in tall grass
cornstalks & sunflowers look like two-pump gas stations
a torn billboard in the middle of nowhere drops from sight
you halt before vertical walls of red rock
the tops of cottonwoods trade birds
 
Everywhere we've ever been
children & chickens & bells
the dew of the valley rises into stone streets
drawn uphill to the central square for the day
the squash blossoms of summer have their long nap
disrupted by a motorbike coughing & clanging
an age of brilliant spring greens burns into weeds
you walk in sandals unimpeded 

The Schnittke quarter…Let me hear it again
It the tape still works. A slow start,
Faraway chords—or is it the dust and static
Traveling, in my Sony, even further
Than these disembodied sounds
Out of Russia, the pluckings,
The pizzicatos, the mad mazurkas
Shot through with sadness, the great sadness
Of northern plains, of freezing skies
Unceasingly grey, for months on end,
Of wooden cattle-barns collapsed on themselves
And silver birches, lining the road
To the horizon…
        That was the first time—
And I listen again, more carefully.
Invisible fingers, plucking imaginary chords.
Coldness, depth. Great spaces,
None of them physical. I am here,
Alone, in the warmth of another kitchen,
And for all I know, the baking fish,
The steamed potatoes, the blue and white tiles
Snug as a Russian stove, to while away
Winter in, my seventh winter
Of apprenticeship, might be telling me
To let go at last, to be free. A drizzle of violins—
Or is it the batteries bleeding?
A snow of quotations, ironic of course,
From the fathers of harmony,
Melting, melting away
To everyday chaos, and through it a phone
Insistently ringing, a sound from another world—
My longdistance call. I knew I was waiting for something.

Clinging to the shark 
(or sometimes to submarine, buoy, seaturtle)
is a sucker shark,
attached to which
and feeding off its crumbs
is one still tinier,
inch or two,
and on top of that one
one the size of a nick of gauze;
smaller and smaller
(moron, idiot, imbecile, nincompoop)
until on top of that
is the last, a micro-dot sucker shark
a filament's tip sliced off, a mote
with a heartbeat, and the great sea
all around feeding
his host and thus him.
He's too small
to be eaten himself
(but by accident: some things swim
with open mouths)
so he just rides along in the blue current,
the invisible tip of the pyramid,
the top beneath all else. 

How do you account for things: take night
before last, a dry night, still, leaves from
 
the maple by the driveway worked a solid
semicircle on the driveway, really pretty but
 
thick: I raked it up in the afternoon: but
last night around midnight a drizzle that
 
turned slowly into a quiet rain started and
kept up till day and after day: but not more
 
than a few leaves fell, and plenty are still on
the tree: except right at the tip of some
 
branches, now stick sprays, where, by the way,
the hornets' nest rides right out in the open,
 
stiller than a balloon: but, I mean, why
didn't the weighted wet leaves come down, even
 
in bigger droves than on the dry night: my theory
founded on guesswork is that the dry night got
 
so dry it got crisp, and crisp cracked off the
stems from the branches: and so the leaves
 
just fell off: they didn't need any breeze or
rain: is that wonderful: do you suppose it's
 
so: who knows: maybe the night of the crisp
fall was really no more than a bear climbing
 
up there and shivering the tree, shaking them
down: I would just as soon know the answer to
 
some things as how a galaxy turns...

I barged into a crowded room
angrily searching for a phone
to place a call to an old friend
who'd passed me on the grounds outside,
shrugging and turning away when I waved.
But when I lifted the receiver
a stranger in an evening gown
shook her head and tapped the ear piece
with her long black fingernails.
Someone was chatting on the line
in what sounded like Italian.
I hung up and stepped outside
through glass French doors into the garden
where couples strolled on lighted paths
or sipped champagne in semi-darkness
by the fountain whose loud plashing
made it hard to overhear them.
Below the tinkle of false laughter
I heard the low hum of real grief
as one couple talked in whispers
while she shredded wadded kleenex
and her partner rattled change
deep in his tuxedo pocket.
Death or divorce must be their subject,
I guessed as I edged closer to them,
but when I got in hearing range,
the man receded in the shadows,
looking for his wife or mistress,
leaving the woman alone and weeping.
Shaken by her sobs, a strap
from her black silk cocktail dress
slipped from her shoulder. Scusa senora
I ached to say as I reached to fix it,
but paralysis gripped my art and throat.
She plucked it nervously back in place
on the softest marbly white skin on earth,
then walked through me, into the night.
I saw, then, that I had no substance
as well as no voice—I was a ghost
among rich, beautiful, black and white ghosts
whose sadness moved me more than my sadness
at being ignored by my once loved friend.
What was she doing in my dream,
I wondered as I fought to stay under
the surface of my unconsciousness.
I knew that waking, I'd remember the movie
by Antonioni or Fellini
I saw with my friend when we were young
and trembled with passion, like the scarlet,
not suspecting that it was false,
while the shallow, bored sophistication
of the minor roles would tall to us
starring in the films of our separate lives.

I had never before seen anything die.
Maybe a squirrel struck by a car,
or a bird caught by a cat, but nothing
so vivid, so slow, so thorough as this,
 
so little changing from day to day
we hardly noticed the thickening
algae, the yellow-y green of it sick
for weeks with the absence of water,
 
till we suddenly found ourselves walking
where always only water ever had been.
Only the holes held water now, and the holes
grew smaller, the holes grew crowded,
 
the fish grew frantic until they could
only lie on their sides in the mud
gulping at water that wasn’t there,
and even the mud in the deepest holes
 
would be brittle tomorrow, the fish
encrusted with blue bottle flies, each fly
as big as a thumbnail, hungry, the only
sounds our feet on the creek bed snapping
 
like rivets in iron heat, and the buzzsaw
buzzing of tens of thousands of flies
feasting on death, even our memories
of water too cruel to be spoken aloud.

For a while we lived in a commune
above a liquor store in Oakland.
Everyone took turns making oatmeal
and toast. We drank powdered milk
from stoneware jugs and spent most
of the day on our knees. In exchange
for a bed, we stuffed envelopes and
folded their newspaper. RIGHT ON:
a raised fist, clenched around a crucifix.
They were radicals who'd seen the light.
Marx, they said, never claimed he came 
to save anyone. They knew their Nietzsche,
they'd been Hari-Krishnad,
electric kool-aid acid tested,
EST'd and LSD'd.
They thought they had been everywhere,
and that they were righteous in coming down
to rest in this valley of sighs,
amidst the murmur of untranslatable tongues.
When we stood in their circle,
our eyes closed in prayer,
we could have been anywhere,
we could have been anyone.

I met Ted at two parties at the same house
at first he insulted me because, he said later,
he was mad at girls that night; at the second we danced
an elaborate foxtrot with dipping—he had taken one lesson
at an Arthur Murray’s. First I went into an empty
room and waited for him to follow me. I liked the way
his poems look on the page open but delicately arranged.
 
I like him because he’s funny he talks more like
me that like books or words: he likes my knowledge and
accepts its sources. I know that there are Channel swimmers
and that they keep warm with grease because of
an Esther Williams movie. We differ as to what kind
of grease it is I suggest bacon he says it’s bear
really in the movie it was dark brown like grease from a car
Who’s ever greased a car? Not him I find he prefers to white out
all the speech balloons in a Tarzan comic
and print in her words for the characters. Do you want
to do some? he says—No—We go to a movie where Raquel welch
and Jim Brown are Mexican revolutionaries I make him
laugh he says something about a turning point in the plot
 
Do you mean, I say, when she said We shood have keeled him long ago?
Finally a man knows that I’m being funny
 
He’s eleven years older than me and takes pills
I take some a few months later and write
I think it’s eighty-three poems I forget about Plath and James Wright
he warns me about pills in a slantwise way See this
nose? he says, It’s the ruins of civilization
I notice some broken capillaries who cares
 
I wonder who I am now myself though I haven’t
anticipated me entirely I have such an appetite
to write not to live I’m certainly living quite fully
We’re good together he says because we can be like
little boy and little girl I give him much later a
girl’s cheap Dutch brooch Delft blue and white
a girl and a boy holding hands and windmills
But now it’s summer in Iowa City he leaves for
Europe gives me the key to his library stored
in a room at The Writers Workshop
I write mildly yet oh there’s a phrase “the Gilbert curve”
how a street turns that sensation to make it permanent
a daily transition as the curve opens and is walked on
of the kinds of experience still in between the ones
talked about in literature and even in Ted’s library
which finally makes poetry possible for me but I’ve 
not read a voice like my own like my own voice will be

On five miles out of Decatur
a grey building, dog on the side,
red letters on a plastic awning
and in the yard bucket of souls.
 
You get on board, paid at the counter,
the driver's a gold ball in the East,
sometimes the driver's a white disk
between grey clouds, sometimes the souls are diseased.
 
All the way over, the dog's barking—
could be one side of Missoula
to the gulph of Chi, could be
from barking water, till all the mists of soul be gone.
 
Sometimes it just over a little water
sometimes the moon still in the sky
sometimes the tin can rattle like a cocktail shaker
and all the souls come out the other end dry.
 
Moving at night through the great horizon
all you can hear is one long—low groans,
and babies, old men with their prayerbaskets;
young men throw stones from the dirt at the bucket of souls.

This knife is as long as my wife in the pool
and I am as dark as the sun
The silence from the moon is dark as we sleep
 
I always bring my captives here
and let the grapevines choke them
 
The starts will crash and last for years
I grin at them and give them fruit
I am an expert at my job
I am their home
 
I spend the morning writing letters
while the machines crush the priest
I remember their flat runways
when they stripped for weddings
 
It was the death of all the warriors
and their enemies
When the wind screamed around their feet
I would listen to my knife
 
It was the time to pull their hearts out
and give them to the children
 
I have given them the wings to heaven
and they are my last legend
frozen like the hands of a small monkey
 
We call their last sounds the wind
This sound brings us childhood
as if it were life
These are the days of our calendar
 
Our children pray to them
and play with their hearts with sticks
We pray to the children and their sticks
and it rains for hours on the crops
 
Lightning makes the trees smell like my knife
As long as the heart is quiet we are waterproof
 
I am the king of the shade in the green jungle
The people hurry to see my accidents
 
The mothers among them hold their children
up to me as ixiptlas
Their small bones make very little noises
and their small eyes will become
beans for Texcatlipoca
 
They exchange gifts
Some of them have not seen
each other since the last rain.

I was most interested in what they looked like dead
and I could learn to love them so I waited
for three or four days until the brown set in
and there was a certain reverse curl to the leaf by
which in putting my finger on the main artery
beside the throat I knew the blood had passed on
to someplace else and he was talking to two
demons from the afterlife although it was
just like the mountains in New York State since there was
smoke in the sky and they were yelping and he was
speaking in his telltale New Jersey English
and saying the same thing over and over the way he
did when he was on stage and his white shirt was
perfect and the lack of air and of light
aged the lilacs but he was sitting on a lily
in one or two seconds and he forgot about Eighth Street
and fame and cancer and bent down to pick a loose
diamond but more important than that he talked
to the demons in French and sang with his tinny voice
nor did he go on about his yellowing sickness
but counted the clusters and said they were only stars
and there were two universes intertwined, the
white and the purple, or they were just crumbs or specks
that he could sprinkle on his pie nor could he
exactly remember his sorrow except when he pressed
the lilacs to his face or when he stooped
to bury himself in the bush, then for a moment
he almost did, for lilacs clear the mind
and all the elaborations are possible in their
dear smell and even his death which was so
good and thoughtful became, for a moment, sorrowful.

In the beginning, everything is mingled
and joined, all the halves hooked up,
nothing reft or twain, no missing buttons,
no lone baby shoes lying by the off-ramps.
In the beginning everything’s combined
smaller than an atom and that’s the first
happiness which makes all the later happinesses
like threads snagged from a tapestry.
So, fine: everything’s all smashed together
but then along comes coyote and pisses on it
then the ticking starts and the dark arabesques,
the scarlet wheels and none of us can get
far enough away from each other
and none of us can get close enough
so these two desires lie on top of each other
and make more desires but some come out
mangled, missing wings, with angry mouths.
They’re the despairs. So all these desires
and despairs are zipping around looking for
parking spaces, crashing into each other
so it’s like a big party with ambulances
where some signifiers are weeping in the bushes,
some are eating the cake’s giant sugar rose
and one drinks too much ambrosia and vomits
Jimi Hendrix who helps make pain beautiful
and later more and more gold hammers
are called in to make pain really beautiful.
Which gets Zeus’s attention so he throws down
some lightning bolts which is pretty much
his response to everything, vaporizing some
cheerleaders but mostly just blasting holes
in the ground which people use as basements
for buildings where they go and invent ways
to kill dandelions that also kill ants and
the warblers who eat the ants then the warblers
fall into the river and the river loses consciousness
and has to be put on life support. Then the nurse,
who is trying to raise two boys and actualize
herself, one night opens a window in the river’s
semi-private room and there’s the Void.
Uh-oh. She feels pretty dumb opening
a window on the Void but now she can’t
get it closed and it’s making a high
lisping she can’t get out of her head so
she tells her group and they try to sympathize
but each is obviously relieved not to be
that fucked up. So she gets used to it,
starts to hum along a little and the place
is looking tidier and she feels almost relaxed.
Those appointments - what were they?
But all this time the universe is flitting
away, cotton swab by cotton swab,
salamander by salamander, Woolworths,
old movie stars, whole blocks’ of the town
she was born in and the window keeps
getting wider until it’s the whole wall,
the ward, East and then everyone
who’s left can feel things missing
but not what, just a sense of empty
velvet-lined indentations, sighs in halls,
tissue paper, loose chains clanking in streets
that lunge into fog and then there’s a lurch
and the word lurch floats off the last page
leaving behind a single blue line then
the line becomes a dot and the dot becomes
a hole and no one knows if that’s the first
happiness come back or not but you won’t have to
lie, your hands won’t swell up, you won’t
have to pee into a plastic cup, blood
won’t fill your mouth as strangers
ask your name. You won’t have to carry
anything. It will be like sleeping and
you won’t have to worry if you are really loved.

My body, laid out on a marble slab.
Naked but for a linen sheet tucked under
Its chin, as though to keep the patient warm.
 
A solemn band approached; identified
The late departed with what looked like mingled
Relief, mild satisfaction, and bereavement.
 
One of them took away an arm—the right,
Was it?—and loped off with a spring in his step.
Which prompted others to do likewise: here
 
A shoulder (suitable for crying on),
there a foot, there an eye and there an ear.
Plump already, one scooped out the belly.
 
Just who you’d imagine claimed the head.
Not the one I hoped tugged loose a rib.
Some, by no means all, I knew as friends;
 
But felt no bitterness, instead, acceptance.
This, while watching their several withdrawals,
Travelers moving farther out and deeper
 
Into the ringing distance—who all began
To flourish, somehow more intently themselves
Than they had earlier resolved to be.
 
Was glad of that, despite a fit of shivers
(Simple human nature still presiding)
When I took note of the rummage that remained,
 
Wishing a greener plot had been marked out
For what had breathed with so much spark and promise.
My turn, then, to come forward for a closer
 
Look; and, since no one else had carried off
That steady, flexibly strung pump at rest
Beneath the sternum, take it for my own,
 
Sensing its mute but anchored trust that parts
Lucky for others would befriend as well—
Oh love—even the heir that flesh once named.

The sandy road, the bright green two-inch lizard
little light on the road
 
the pen that writes by itself
the mist that blows by, through itself
 
the gourd I drink from in my sleep
that also drinks from me
 
—Who taught me to know instead of not
    to know?
And this pen    its thought
 
lying on the thought of the table
a bow lying across the strings 
 
not moving
held

Prairie dog, totem pole, cluster of grapes: do we choose our omens 
or they us? I think I see tunnels, painted faces turning wooden, 
dew on each perfect globe. (Industry, artifice, sexlovefood?) 
I see the way we're speeding up and they're breaking down. 
This year on its way to us on greased rails your father will die 
and my mother will worsen. A year faces forward like a paper doll 
 
but all the color's on the back side. Which is worse: 
that he will die again next year and the year after or that she will
    not, 
sliding and sliding? I see a piano in yawning stillness, then a
     daughter 
whose music fills the house. A glassed aviary circled by wheel chairs. 
I will light small fires to thaw the slippery slope. Steep I can handle 
and dirty. The solace of sweaty work and lemonade. Our bodies 
 
will become mirrors, heaving to the same hurt. This we can like, 
and how our centerpiece gives off light, our good fruit. I keep seeing 
that kitten mothered by Roxie the Great Dane. I keep smelling that 
    hallway, 
room after room of TV noise and withered hands dabbing at eyes 
    no one wants 
to look into really. A year is like a fortune cookie and do you have to 
    eat it, 
every bit, for it to come true? Spun sugar folded around the outcome 
    but where 
 
has Confucius gone - nowadays only flattery and your lucky numbers                 
     in a red 
string. Just like a new girlfriend, you keep thinking you've got to 
    pretend 
each year is prettier than all the ones before. I'm keeping my eyes 
    out for 
the perfect early warning system, a wooden remembrance, anything 
    purple. 
This year niece number three will tiptoe—we will this to be so—
    towards 
survival, relearning to take, eat, this food is broken for you, for 
    you not 
 
to be broken, even if your mother binds more than your feet. There is 
    so much 
we don't know. I'm thinking we should wear our welcoming faces so
     the year 
 
can slip into us whatever way it wants to. Like the night somebody 
    else's 
two-year-old found the way from his private dark to our unfamiliar 
    bodies 
in his parents' bed, blinked at us, puzzled, and then decided to close 
    his eyes, burrow 
a place between us - his warm, unexpected weight - that kind of gift. 

We were high on our dopamine and norephenedrine
Looking for the endorphin afterblast,
The serotonin afterglow.
Why was that?
The brain chemistry was slow,
So we revved up on coffee, cigarettes, alcohol, the sound of our own
    voices
And we fell into the groove of good listening-eye contact.
Adjudicating music with melancholy undertones.
We welcomed our respective hallucinations,
Mine, I described them, were sitting in the outer office where I
    worked, were ghosts.
Someone else, her room spun and she never slept.
Teacups flew around the ceiling—
—Like a ride at Disneyland— I reminded her, though she had never
    seen Disneyland.
That was what I had seen on the ceiling as a child,
So I knew teacups were nothing to sneer at.
She nodded sagely, anyway, as this was the nature of our
    conversations.
They were stupid conversations.
We made out and kissed people, rolled around on the grass, came
    down
Alone in our rented apartments. For me that was full of fear, like this:
A feeling like someone is tapping me on the shoulder to wake me up.
My back to the door or about to fall asleep: that tap.
But I lived alone,
So I was just creating a spirit-companion.
It was very dark the evening I decided I would just let go, see how far
    into the end I could take myself.
The others, the ones I had talked to, were gone now.
We had scattered from the sacred place where we had found each
    other.
Now we were into our ministries.
So there I was, saying, take me
The night darkening Pleasant Valley Road,
The street I lived off of. I could see down it forever. So
I waited for dark crows, or dark death, whatever. . .
But I woke up the next day.
The veins inside my forehead pounded
The cramps inside my belly laid it on.
And that was it.
Oh sure, I was changed.
Oh sure, I had fulfilled my tasks.
Yes, I was given the gift to see things,
And yes, when I saw them, I was stupefied with fear and wonder.  

What could she say? Little money,
little chance for work, a drunk for
a husband she no longer lover,
and now she leaves her winter hat
on the train. Trains feel vast.
Devon's room—not so vast. But it
doesn't move, so she's sitting
there before he comes home smashed
and angry, or maybe he will just
fall down. She reads a few pages
of a book half-backwards. A
hopeless attempt to snap to, to
have something in this life pull
her out of this, like the moon,
the moon's a puller. Like the train:
the train's a puller of forgetfulness
and power and destination far into
the reaches of the forests. What
could she say? Oh she can talk to
herself, but now she's got to get
out, and words won't do this. Al-
most as it words make you stay more.
She doesn't even have a hat to reach
for so can she make the door? Oh
prayer for the hat to be a puller
for her even as it circles the city
or enters someone else's flat, hat
have an arm to keep her from his fist,
moon and train, moon and train, moon
and train: pull her, pull her, pull her.

I'm sitting in a room with K-9 dogs.
One more ugly person in the world.
A mother has claimed she's not my queen.
 
The lobe of an ear costs ten-weeks' paychecks.
Two hippies and a faggot.
Useless questions eloquently posed.
 
A posse cannot but what it seems.
One more pair of jeans with a hole in it.
An extension cord hanging from the ceiling.
 
A cellist stoops to take a bow.
His cropped skull has no scars to mar it.
Although his nose has just been punched.
 
I drank two beers and ate a pretzel.
Two Mozarts flank me on both sides.
Across the room is the Dalai Lama.
 
His immaculate head has been spit shined.
How many more times must I say this.
Nowhere but here can it matter.

Any day soon the sudden pictures I tip into the linguistic eye,
images I print having litho-intense surface,
a man with a woman, he naked with her beside
a tree its bark clothes. Look, a ginger money
spider climbing. God is now. The vicar
who likes fingers of toast raises Him to congregated eyes.
And the rabbi, heated to a pitch of hatred, being afraid,
I also am a Jew, hating and afraid,
they each raise Him, the universe’s tenderest heart,
to eyes forsaken in and enduring midsummer radiance.
It hurts, and it is true it will not cease.
In what phase of this will I be dying into your creation?

Saturday grieves
    Puritan seeking more weight
Machines look unhappy in the desert
    “you can’t tell me
he didn’t do it”
    no one there and it’s true
Her hands against the window
Her breath
The empty backs of trucks are screaming
what more do you want from me
I’ll be as clear as I can
My son knows the puddle is an ocean
Our camera killed Her
He fell by himself
Imperfection is everywhere. I wear her star.
Africa is a long scar in my head.
Sad grass.
Lovely mud ocean.
I’m seeing a world, no, a room, or
    a space like a musical phase
princess, sister/s’aint & tribe
    imperfect under funeral flowers
P/ity        Merc(I)(Y)        Peace
             &
           luve
All alone in our boats

The world has dealt (nothing personal)
outrageously with me: now, I deal back: it's
 
like arguing with the head-chopper though,
where can it get me: I guess I could get to where I'd
 
be saying, look, sir, do you fully realize what
you're doing: is there any room for
 
negotiation here, like, your head or mine:
(when an artist, say, striving to be normal,
 
isn't, there you have genuine stuff: not
necessarily the best stuff: but, how much
 
better to replace the unachievable with the
inadvertent: this is what an artist means
 
when he says he's not responsible for his
genius, it just happens: but, alas, if the
 
artist quite normal enough strives to be
weird, the shocking falsity wears so thin a
 
sheen it's soon hardly shocking and far more
dismissible:) (the material in the preceding
 
parenthesis is worth thinking on): (to go the
other way further out into the periphery is
 
to lose hold on the central issues and
become thin, manneristic, too arty, and
 
mere).

If they’d told me to recapture
     the rhododendron glaze narrowly,
 
or to chaperone the night’s
    answer, I would have,
 
I could have, easily. But how to lure myself away
 
from my own body—that I didn’t know.
 
    Afternoon stroked
me (the hedonist), then there was a blur
 
like persuasive wisteria. Where
 
was the accident to get me out? Body after
    body—oversexed for nothing but a scrim,
 
a stir. I stretched into the instructions, the foreign
words (they licked my skin), stretched past
 
    their thresholds,
stretched further into their vestibules. Lucky grammar.
 
Honestly, I lived inside a ghost country,
 
    caught up in a candied lunacy.
      Power haloes.
 
Caught like a cluster of bells.
    Hear them?
 
Hear them winging it, making up
 
    a step for absence amiss?
      We were a figure for someone’s
 
apology or scandal, uncollected gifts, frays
 
to pray by, necks forming
 
    an erotic choir. Two of us
shared a smoke, looked for a moment
 
to take a roadtrip, a deep-set scenario. (She talked
against the blue mock-shade
    of the dressing room with its fabrics
and stretch of mesh). One
 
of many shes trying to find the right music
 
    for her vintage jacket brooch.
 
      Another stood in front of me, her hair
 
Like waxy fruit. We were nudes in a row
    speckled with seed pearls. What flourishing
 
we thought we’d mastered, but I wanted anything
 
to replace gray elastic, the branches fluid
    and poised at the window,
 
anything to lie in wait for me.

1
To have seen you exactly, once:
red hair over cold cheeks fresh from the freeway
your lingo, your daunting and dauntless
eyes. But then to lift toward home, mile upon mile
back where they'd barely heard your name
—neither as terrorist nor as genius would they detain
                                                                           you—
to wing it back to my country bearing
your war-flecked protocols—
 
that was a mission, surely: my art's pouch
crammed with your bristling juices
sweet dark drops of your spirit
that streaked the pouch, the shirt I wore
and the bench on which I leaned.
 
2
It's only a branch like any other
green with the flare of life in it
and if I hold this end, you the other
that means it's broken
 
broken between us, broken despite us
broken and therefore dying
broken by force, broken by lying
green, with the flare of life in it
 
3
But say we're crouching on the ground like children
over a mess of marbles, soda caps, foil, old foreign
                                                                        coins
—the first truly precious objects. Rusty hooks,
                                                                    glass.
Say I saw the earring first but you wanted it.
Then you wanted the words I'd found. I'd give you
the earring, crushed lapis if it were,
 
I would look long at the beach glass and the sharded self
of the lightbulb. Long I'd look into your hand
at the obsolete copper profile, the cat's-eye, the
                                                                      lapis.
 
Like a thief I would deny the words, deny they ever
existed, were spoken, or could be spoken,
like a thief I'd bury them and remember where.
 
4
The trade names follow trade
the translators stopped at passport control:
Occupation: no such designation—
Journalist, maybe spy?
 
That the books are for personal use
only—could I swear it?
That not a word of them
is contraband—how could I prove it?

One can not have two souls
and stay at the window dark.
Orange windows at morning,
pink at dusk.
Summer, the scrubbed kitchen,
already the garden gate humming,
pining, sining.
 
And that's when the white horse
returns. Only years later
when the white horse returns
do I remember the Summer story
now that the white horse comes
again, my house a can't help,
where sleep darks the banister.
 
The creaking of the house
asks me to listen, my scrub rag
hung on its peg, pail of water
pumped at the cistern back porch,
ill of spirit, twins of the floor
cleaned, the spirit shaken hold,
not expected, but whose presence
 
the can't help honors, the pieces
of the heart a havoc still.
Lain down on the floor together
after the pumping at the cistern
when the dusk's west dissolves,
where, when it was said, "Oh, look!"
her soul crashes into the house
 
and the other hurries to wrap her arms
around the thing that is so long coming
between them. Kitchen, the long night speaks,
the wrought iron gate tweaking
at the edge, setting fire,
having the last work, dying down,
even the wind wicked out.

This is what I know today and will know
again tomorrow. A canopy bed
 
two wing-back chairs, our belongings
in a small suitcase tucked away in the closet.
 
In the framed print hanging above the bed,
a young girl has stopped
 
to feed rabbits. I count twelve.
She seems content in the cool green woods.
 
I look to the telephone and realize I have not
called my two small daughters since we arrived
 
last night. Lobster for supper and this morning
fresh blueberries, raspberries, and homemade muffins.
 
If I stay here long enough, will I stop remembering 
them, the way I hardly remember my mother,
 
dead now almost twenty years, unless I hear
September Song, or see white hair
 
brushed smartly back from a forehead, corn-
flower blue eyes. My father died
 
two years ago and already he fades like late day
sun. I can't remember the exact birth date
 
of the daughter I gave up for adoption.
I think it must be like this, prisoners
 
forget their families and memorize the eyes
of guards, what changes outside a window.

Tommy's on the rowing machine.
He pulls back and skids forward.
"Not so good," he says, "I'm older;
there's the guilt."
Meryl took me to meet him and Joe,
his lover. I wore a grey knit mini-skirt,
grey tights and blue suede boots.
I'd never been kissed by a woman before.
Face down between her legs, who was I? 

His biceps fresh from the tanning salon,
gloved, he bends over, squirting liquids.
Dribbling teas make my hair change color:
peach to honey, caramel; once it was pale butter.
He pinned my hair in configurations
that made men stare. Our roots
are the same color. "Even I," he says,
"slept with women." 

Seth was here in December.
Traced my eyebrows, outlined my lips
with his finger. I lay with my head
in his lap for an hour. I'm teaching Berger's
chapter on the nude. My throat
constricts in the shower; I blink
back tears in the sauna. 

I buy yellow chocolate ducks, cozy,
in their nest of shredded paper.
Inside its sugar, dome another duck
cruises a green wave's squiggle.
Hard pink icing encircles the aperture.
On top: a pressed blue rosette.
On my parents' bed, we picked, from green
grass cellophane, yellow marshmallow chicks. 

I dream I pull a baby's carriage,
pillows in the bottom rack. Each one
is an alphabet block, embroidered
with letters: "a," "p," "e."
I turn the last one over,
the "r," a secret no one has seen. 

Mornings I check the mirror to see
if my breasts no one's touched since December
have tilted lower. In Joe's photographs,
little chinese spirits, skirted like Casper,
tinted, superimposed, flock in cherub formation
at a mustached man's shoulder.
A couple argues on a couch, a smoke
genie interposed. Where Tommy lounges,
little ones, fork-tongued,
carry gold gilt pitchforks. 

Last week he cut my bangs,
showed me a photo of his 20 year old. Today he
and the black-haired kouros sauntered past me.
Ingres' is the nude I cannot
forget: her back a smooth white terrain.
I once held an ivory tusk.
So heavy, so small, to kill
the rest of the elephant for.
Demons, that painters make cupids,
turn me, spin me. Tommy and I
lift every mask at the ball
seeking the boy with a bow.
We offer our little hearts boxed up. 

Writing my name twenty-two times, I think of you
writing my name in the silly frame of love 

you's. My cursive is loopy, archaic, a lost art,
and you suspect you were never in the subject 

position, so you've given up the ghost on the catbird seat,
and you know I could write everything you're afraid of, 

and that too, you're afraid of. You blithely tossed
my name into the tiny pulses of l's and o's. Could I 

have stopped you, would I have ta-ta-ed you before
you sent the photograph? Tall drink of a kid in a pale 

tutu, deliberate shadow cupping your jaw on a day
you were screaming with fiasco, I offer you 

gravity in an envelope from Indonesia, patience
from a spring in Missouri, and that bewildered flock 

of shady lovers, a lesson in courtly love, a handful
of words in languages you don't want to know. 

I've bid my bones dance too hard for you, boy
of my heart the blue moon brought and took off 

in all of one day - but not before I got you as image:
a man reduced to a boy parading as a girl, wrapping 

himself into the fleshy envelope we call fetal position,
all your straight bones in the inevitable knot. 

Traveler's cheques, of course, why else would one
sign away so many loops and angles. The point of the pen 

is that I'm buying money with my name on it
for the trip to you, and I'm bringing Keats on a string, 

Pope on a stick, Wordsworth on ten dollars a day.
You're still talking about sex, though the weather likes to taunt 
 

us that nothing stays pretty. You've taken the old doctor to heart,
his long poem of letters and declarations you imagine neglected. 

No one your age is reading it. Eliot's a bore, and Dickinson's
hip for the hundredth time. Bitterness is a nice touch, 

but only a pinch or the rosemary will be overwhelmed.
Trucks grind their gears hard below my window 

at this moment, this confluence of sound, weather, signs
and time which is part of what we call a day. And it's 

different now that you are. My dear, I'm down to bones,
bones only for you. From here on out, it should be poems, 

poems only for you. You've just discovered giving up
the ghost, though you think it means dying. It doesn't, 

I've used it for years: the ghost is merely an elusive
project, difficult and wearying, something one hasn't 

enough burning or breath to see through to an end.
I'm your ghost, dear, your skeletal girl, your woman 

on the edge of middle age, your cliche, your impossible
touch, your new baby of the mind. I'm conjured and injured 

and not about to die of it. Think of it, the malice I could bear
you, the way I might wear you as long as I live—

You could be my blue boutonniere from a long ago year,
dried and beribboned, faded and faddish. Oh honey-pie 

can you rise above your pond green Gap shirt, Boss belt
and Bean jacket? I'll lend you a string tie a little wadded 

from the barrel I found it in. I'll give you no more stories,
though, than what you've got, summer light dazzling a page, 

little chokes of lightning in a dull sky. We're going
everywhere fast - and you're coming with. Ten times 

on the twenties, twelve times on the fifties—that's still
how it's done. At my age, heartbreak's hardly what 

we die of. Snide remarks heal any wound, believe me.
I'm full of whatdidya expect's and 18th century quips. 

Love it or leave it, but don't watch too long. It's a dance
that burns the poor soles of your feet. They're black and cold 

already— like the old trance dancer's toes.
He can't shake his trance as the lights come up and the tourists 

move in with their murmurs and cameras. His pony's a stick
with a raffia mane, snubbed by sparks. The younger ones can't 

do the solo dance on coals, but they're good at the Kechak chants—
they're the monkey army who perform in perfect franchise, 

all boys with red frangipani blossoms stuffed over their ears.
It's Bali after all—and a good hundred German women 

in brand new sarongs comb their damp hanks of hair in rooms
open over rice paddies. They wait for the end of the Kechak dance, 

for the boys to return in their crisp, white shirts, destar wrapped
brows and long batiks. They'll come with bamboo trays 

of tea and sure fingers into lamplit rooms where desire
is simply a sweet dish, a prickle of breeze in a hot spot: 

yes, no, come, go, here and there, gecko and clove,
who needs more words when the body's so fluent? 

If this is a ghost, why does it pack its bags so carefully—
clean underwear, maps, and all of the music you recommended. 

There's a flask of grief in here somewhere too. And sweetie
if you can find it, I might let you live. You're this missing poem 

in the book on the absence of men and the presence
of women in postmodern life. You have to know that everyone 

who's anyone has always already said, Hurry up please, it's time. 

The crease on the map
where we met
still crosses that state,
but the August air vanished,
lost on a calendar,
no telling date in history,
just the road,
a ribbon on a package
that will never be opened.
Half-dressed summer stood apart
from the rest of the year,
a manikin in lingerie
with whom we had
a briefly wrenching rendezvous
before a brittle wind
brushed us away
like dozing bees
slapped from the zinnias
of frost.
One direction takes vengeance
upon another,
and the routine of the way home
eventually escapes
down a stuttering path
to the stuttering sea
which breaks
in a succession of coughs.
I saw your profile
from the shore,
the surf congested
with naked mothers
and fathers squirming free
of each other's arms.
Your only profile, Egyptian, 
smooth as a sanded tomb,
your ease among
the circling weeds,
and your pleasure
at the baitfish
turning crazy
in the shallows,
tossing their pale inches
toward the sun,
chased there
by whatever preys upon them.

He forced their mother, many years ago,
to submit to the honeymoon conditions.
She had to climb mountains in the daytime,
he held her over a cliff —
 
he dangled her,
making her swear she wasn't frightened,
that she was a woman and she trusted him.
 
If she combed her long, honey-blonde hair,
she had to climb the high mountains with him,
be dangled over cliffs,
with a Valentine waistline and heavy-lidded eyes.
 
(she must despise him now)
No, she must depend on him now,
like a voice and its echo.
 
She trusted him night and morning
and had managed to walk
across the high, narrow footbridge of his life
away from the grief, and the confusions
of her own life.
 
And so,
so,
she must depend on him now.

In the Rainbow Grille.
(a dark, white bar with a country box)
a rock salt-and-pepper corn
 
bearded tri-colored Blood
in worm camouflage, town
jeans, wearing broken, deep brown
shades, grimey baseball cap
and old, colorless cowboy boots,
 
played Kline's "CRAZY" over
and over. Spent all his gree,
food stamps and rent
on sweet, warming, meriney wine
chased by burning, fluid amber.
Bought the house many rounds...
 
Shots
 
leave him
cold, red-eyed
and blue, fingering the gold bands
the dog tags on the steel bead chain
 
hanging from his
 
...over and over. The record changes.
The old tone arm moves
from left to right; he stands, stumbles
raises his glass as though to toast
someone, something.
 
Stares.
 
Muscles jerk. Bent
over, he jukes
the joint, over and over, he hunches
heaving undigested supper,
lunch's sour mash
corned beef and cabbage,
breakfast's hash, fried egg
on toasted rye. He drops his empty glass.
 
Glassy stares like shards
in blood and faces
watch it and him, "...go
 
to pieces." Someone
 
says, Greenie? He was
a two-tour Beret!
Hell, he'll be o.k.

I am a small African woman
who opens her mouth and screams
into the dense burning foliage where
in a night made bright
I hide
 
from bucktoothed slaughter.
Weapons click in harmony
not far enough off. To say
I flee suggests I know my way.
I step over
 
sleeping students
who won't survive the fire
that, leaping in and out behind me,
they have set themselves.
Then I am mute
 
in front of an elevator which opens
to a column of whiteness in a suit,
and a woman less like my sex
than a bitch is. The big guns are now
in service
 
and I am not the only one
who hears, though I say nothing:
my jaws ache to eat death
like a eat its litter.
Swallowing.
 
I wish whiteness all over me,
and I am all white, the man offers
his tunnel out, the woman his hankie.
I am about to open my mouth Yes!
when what's approaching
 
makes them forget, leaves me
with myself, my white, white, white,
leaves me to the spit of the mob
that asks only
if I burn.

Ghost light, haze, a choking
or an embrace long from
hiding? Fog, the formidable hand
coats every surface, impairs
the block. Old paint bubbles
from boards while inside
we shrink at our tables, comfort
ourselves with out own stiff arms,
turn on the light. Earth outside
stretches forth as a still blind
pup to the tit it must, it must,
have.

He says if the natural work is natural next week—meaning his natural world
of course and there's no way to tell about that—if the natural world is natural
then there won't be any reason to worry will there and she says yes. She means
no and it is taken so and she appears to be going back to her fine work and it
appears that everything is normal. And then later when they are alone he says
if the genuine attitude of not knowing weren't real—but of course it is, he
comments, and what can she say—if that weren't real then maybe if all the
other things fell in place—but of course they couldn't, he comments, and she
agrees in part at least and she says so, briefly—but just if all of that were true,
maybe...

A bird first, then a snake, then a toad,
my evening walk.
Whatever comes next, friendly to creation.
 
A slammed cardoor alerts the wilderness.
A slow raising of heads.
The moon watched by Leopardi governs.
 
An axle settles in a budding grove.
Somewhere in the anthill is just right.
The 19th century's leaning against trees is over.
 
Oil flowers on the pools.
The zoo's bear at the zoo.
 
A bottle in Maine.
 
Virgin Maine.
 
The woods now are all garden.
Not even sandgrains are clones, nor snowflakes.
We travel to the moon in silver clothes.
 
The car, after mountainclimbing seen, how foursquare!
Ant-meets-wall-its-six-feet-never-miss-a-step.
The rubythroated Clytemnestra.
 
Chernobyl's spread stain.
The soundlessness of fat paws.
The Maine bear in a dream.
 
Old Sam-Behind-The-Trees
keeps threading around us,
red tag stapled to his ear. Collage.
 
One cylinder has its eye closed
for dreaming. Slow but sure
in the woods, that old car.
 
And next? The terminal's new
for me, if not for the train.
Onna no ko  devotchka.
 
As the spider said,
having longrolled his fly, "Well,
that about wraps this up!"

I may sit down one night and die.
I may sit in a big green chair with a glass of water in one hand and a pencil 
    in the other
and leave this world.
You may not be in the room and the heart might not be the thing to turn
    on me
but I will still feel you the way I felt you when I walked up Lafayette Street
    tonight
with my shirt blowing in the late May wind
while I sang four lines of one song backwards
and thought about the whispering creek I used to hop
when I was a six year old boy
chasing the first girl I ever fell in love with
through the trees on her family’s woods.
Her name was Deborah and the only time I ever kissed her she was
    Cinderella
and a great mass of purple cheeks begging me not to stop
because I was a famous man.
And tonight I am not Moses or Charlton Heston
or even a Greek boy named Nicko.
I am just Matthew in my mother’s house
feeling born out of a bottle of green t-shirts I have stitched myself
through the avenues of the evening
and the pressures of lilacs
as they push up against the sides of my calf
while I walk these miles through the sea and otherwise.
I am just Matthew and this is not my night to die,
to sit down with a glass of water in one hand and pencil in the other
without you here.
You are here
and I have found you after a long road through an apple orchard in
    the middle of Iowa
on the most green and yellow late May afternoon a hundred million 
    miles ago
when you pulled down your pants to offer me something so small
that the second I heard your name, Deborah,
I knew the trouble had been given to me to be stripped.
So tonight in the calm caves of my mother’s home
I have a piece of you in me
while the lilac pushes up against the side of my leg
as I sit in this solid oak chair
and listen to the large city sing its own song
to the ambulance horns and fire engines that have long since taken their
    own toll.

I am tired of forgiving like
At night. A forum for seriousness is like
An intervention. Pleased to be cast
As a serious aid like a pretty thing to the memory.
Like a belligerent thing in the memory true.
An attachment like trees is not like
A human attachment at all.
To hear a bell ring and then put a bell in it
Is like trees that hear the sun and then
Put a sun in it like thirst.

a colored girl had no days free
she cooked cleaned all year round
colored girl had no place to flee
she children duty bound
 
she took what work came and swept
had sweet sweet honeycombs
had to day work, night work, accept
had she babies at home
 
left them at cracking of daybreak
tripped home running the dark
left them with coughs and tummy aches
stumbled home running dark
 
took the late train, goodies in purse
turned the corner and smelled the flames
took the late bus, goodies in purse
turned the corner and smelled the flames
 
the babies' scents hung lynching air
sweet sweet honeycomb screams
the babies' scents hung in the air
sweet sweet honeycomb dreams
 
no need to cook the babies gone
no longer day works, night
no need to clean the babies gone
no longer day works, flight
 
sweet sweet babies gone

Every few months still a dream
tries to set things right between us—
not how it ended, but the loss of the feeling
you had some inestimable inner treasure
you can now again bring me, despite the months
your talk seemed flat to me, your soul an absence,
and I only your most ingenious, relentless critic—
 
I think of the light-metal factory
you loved so, when it floated
out of the cold November fog 
north from San Jose,
with a hundred miniature-minaret
smokestacks, so new and flimsy
I couldn't imagine anyone loving it, or hating...

Already the spring lilacs are failing,
in pieces and chunks, the way rust
ruins metal everywhere.
It doesn't take much of that before
she begins not to care. Which makes her
want to rip the flawed flowers
maliciously from the bushes, seeing how
wind and butterflies and blossoming
can be confused with feeling.
Love lies on the mountain with calm
and counterweight. In the center,
with the presence, in the sunlight.

Amidst this haste and filth
beside river's black violin
 
its sluggish summer tune
should I tell you how
 
you hide the dead
without singing
 
Dear Ungovernable Lament
Are you like a log
 
abandoned on a road of young trees
Or is your life a stone
 
smashed
to bits
 
About the one of yourself
and the one of the one
 
that is not you
but is the memory of what you wanted
 
I have only this to say
how is your life with an image
 
Or has your memory started fading
until what you can pry loose
 
from the sea
is an island
 
etched in blue smoke
Dear Steam
 
How is your life with a stranger
from this world
 
the one we once walked in
argued over
 
and tried to burn

Shoulders knobbed against   
a slat-backed chair,   
the temples tugged, a pull
 
 
at the nape, you felt the up-
sweep as she smoothed the fine   
wisps back and tucked
 
yank into yank
and a third into that   
until the consecutive
 
dodges of thumbs and first   
fingers gathered,   
fraying and filing
 
to their end—ended
in an ornament that, suspended,   
looked ridiculous, even
 
on a child who mostly   
set forth with   
what was called
 
a “finished” look, some   
loose ends in order where   
others were not
 
and a slight weight below   
the nape’s pull. The view   
others had of it
 
was invisible to you.
It made something there   
where there would have been
 
a blank—now instead   
a kind of face   
sent from woman to
 
woman like a duty,   
an obstinate   
duty to pattern.
 
It’s too simple to see   
one thing rather   
than another, a wish
 
protruding once it’s been   
suppressed, a vise that holds   
a thought in its proper
 
place until it bobs   
to the surface
of a generally balmy
 
sea. Women and   
woman only a letter   
away—a strand gets
 
mixed, then mixed   
right out of the heaven   
of perfect fit;
 
one kind of accident   
turns into another.
The whole head throbs for days.
 
Black and white are woven   
into gray the way   
hyperbole has no chance
 
once it’s juxtaposed   
to reason—negation   
just a thread among
 
the available options   
and hope itself apparent   
there in the very
 
notion a made thing can last.   
Tougher, coarser, split   
weave in the years. Shorter,
 
longer, shorter, the brain   
bound to its anchor.   
The brushed-out waves
 
with their rick-rack   
shadows, a thread   
inside the case,
 
the case inside
the locket, the locket   
beneath the yoke.
 
All the effort   
to save in itself   
a form of loss.
 
You can tell a story
many ways. You can leave   
something out or put
 
something in; you can fool   
yourself and hide.   
You can shake out
 
the form or try
to manage every wisp,   
but the latter will
 
only bring you pain.   
You went under
the hand and eye of another
 
and the tether cannot   
be undone.

I've spent the last few years with an eraser,
trying to uncover the masterpiece under the canvas,
scratching at the crusted-over surfaces:
 
were there windows? Certainly
there were gaping spaces and cherubim on bicycles
painted over with a dog and a few affairs...
 
The old subjects were the good subjects.
Love, greed, a stultifying awareness of your arms
need replenishing. The paradise of shifting traumas
 
slivered into a chorus of bickering interior voices—
everyone had a defect, a mismatched seam, a flaw
you could see through, a pencil thin crack in the cup.
 
So whatever was distinct about us, bright or sensual,
became sordid, unworthy, a visit to the doctor
where the cancer's fastened to a rib, a series of periods
 
on an old piece of carbon paper. The twisted
machinations of childhood were nothing more
than a few coughs at the office, to be discounted later,
 
so while one was changing the channel,
another was soaking the dishes and the third
stood behind her, waiting to sexualize the moment.
 
Those who had maids understood slavery.
Those who had wives, bosses, those who decorated
according to magazines, those who sat in a chair
 
while a parent guided their pencil to the right answer,
the dead draped in flags, they also served.
While on the other side of town, on a more personal level
 
we didn't want to be more nothing, so we slummed
at the chicken shack, where the dead flies on the counter
that looked like jewels were really roaches.

Is my shit correct?
Is my vine correct?
Are my kicks country or correct?
Is my “do” down?
Is my shit correct?
 
Is my rusty black diction correct?
Should my ever more erudite
utterances be in “The Vernacular?”
Should my presentation be
theatrical and spectacular?
 
Is my shit correct?
 
Should my manner be mannered
and laid back?
Is my poetry Posey?
Does it go to too far into haute couture
noire?
Does it come from hard facts
and Fanon,
or does it refer repeatedly
to The Canon trippin’
in Trickster Mode, tryin’
to Trope-A-Dope????
 
Is my shit correct?
 
But, hey, black poetry’s got more
than one good way.
The other day I asked a young Blood
poet if my stuff was correct, if it was
happenin’.
 
He said, Breaklight becomes dawn,
Ol’ Head.  The word “happenin”
ain’t happenin’, ain’t “where it’s at.”
Today it’s on. Word!
Our work is all that.

1. 

Who oversees this congregation, this collect of caws, this clamor of rooks, gathered by grace around a carcass?. 

2. 

Alas, our narrator is despondent [from the Latin, despondere, meaning 'solemnly to undertake a promise'] and having given his word, has nothing else to give. 

3. 

It is not the rain that set the star-of-Bethlehem white above the valley. Hath the rain a father? It is not the rain, but a hillside of white flowers. 

4. 

Now is the hour for dousing the fire. The curfew. "Too much whiskey these days, late getting up/I lie and watch the western hills, give up on unfinished poems." 

5. 

Thomas Merton: "A postulant said this morning, 'How deep do they dig a grave? They have been at it all morning.'" 

6. 

A sudden wind through the summerhouse. The constellations of autumn. The landscape a box of air, an empty reliquary. Error not erased but crossed out. 

7. 

Aquinas believes poetry the lowliest of the sciences--it has very little truth about it. I walk the road and argue with Aquinas. Point out the thistle, the cornflowers. 

8. 

Who would not curse the snake and its shadowy reflection? Who in finding its papery skin snagged in brambles does not begin to believe the Resurrection? 

9. 

When the roll is called up yonder [ldots] When the roll is called up yonder [ldots] When the roll is called up yonder I'll be there. 

10. 

Too much whiskey these days. Late in getting up. I lie and watch the western hills. The sun all haze. Read the poems of my teachers and go back to bed. 

falling so hard it wakes 

office workers in their windowless cubicles 

so they co me running out 

into the parking lot to put up the tops 

of convertibles and roll the windows up 

and go back inside soaked. 

The storm came out of the blue, 

unpredicted. Now light appears 

like a tear in the edge of the gray, 

and the sound subsides, muffled 

like drums moving away 

to another skirmish 

in man endless war. 


What is one life when there are, so many, 

a few strained faces 

walking to the curb, every day 

a different house a different family 

dressing for a funeral. 
 

The papers left in the station, 

or blowing in the links of a fence 

are already days away, 
 
 
the ink and soggy pages together 

soak and sink. 


The water carried indoors as darkness 

on clothing, or lightness on skin, 

is a memory of the memory 

that begins before we become 

who we briefly pretend we are. 

The simple things.
The simple life.
Can we buy one? Can we give it time?
The yard is sunny, on top of a hill. I’m amazed.
Don’t worry, the sun makes heat.
The little flowers that need shade will not thrive here.
The deep pink gash, thrash, stainless beauty of the bougainvillea will
    survive
Bloom and rebloom all year. Thorns along the side.
The petals fall onto the kelly-green grass, into the clear clean glass-green
    water of the pool onto
the warm cement. Lie down there. And the wind
throws the petals all through the air.
They turn pink-to-brown under the rake.
Maybe you were alive someplace, in the East.
But this is not the East. Don’t bring it around here.

The boy's glasses were very very thick. 

He was thinking of this life and the next and the next. 

The yellow city bus drove by the blue-by-morning river 

but the boy did not see the bus from this perspective. 

Two blackbirds have more space than they can handle. 

No one knows time this way the way the blackbirds do. 

No one knows no one: a blade of grass 

is the blade in the grass. The boy stands in his ghost. 

One of the blackbirds is now thick with the river. 

Some of the branches make love like an awkward couple. 

Or like a couple juxtaposed against the window, which 

isn't unusual, but the window is juxtaposed against 

branches, 

and the branches are making more sounds than usual. 

Things become is. 

We don't have to make a sentence if we don't want to. 

Because of the pull I ended up swimming in the grasses
a hundred yards from nowhere my beloveds
ready to jump in after me a black willow
rushing in to save me—my kind of dolphin—you
think I struggled a yard at a time but I was
nudged a little that’s why my lips were red
instead of blue that’s why I had the words
to the Disney Doodle still on my tongue and I was
waltzing under your huge white towel your bathrobe
over my head hot tea already burning
my throat that’s why I loved the two labradors
so much that’s why I kissed you so desperately.

Some guy in red-and-white hooded jacket,
beard in bedraggled dress,
stood on a corner in Chicago's Magnificent Mile
during peak Christmas shopping days
as wet show drifted about his ears
and the red in his cheeks froze on his face:
In his hands was a sign that read:
Will sell books for food.
And every once in a while he'd look at the sign
as if something were missing,
wondering why nobody
was taking him up on the offer.

The one in a ponytail, the other in a loosened tie; friends;
A mythic weathery day: rain from the west, and from the east, fog.
 
Friends: clothes and hair: present details; the breakfast they had together,
Past details: paper napkins, everything bagels;
 
The fact that from now on they’ll have every meal apart: tiny furniture detail.
Over are each of the years when one would say, “I can stay a long time
    today!”
 
And the other would say, “Great!”;
Gone are any of the moments when one of them could have said,
 
“I’d rather live with you. Why can’t things be arranged around that?”
They are poets, and they will never see each other again.
 
Two poets, and they know they will never see each other again.
Both poets, and what they can think of to say is, “Okay,” and “All right.”

We know that the fires will all meet up
in darkness.
At that hour
you must repeat once more the formula of life
before the wrinkled almost extinguished sky.
Lost stars burn as they come down.
Every voice while it sings is much the same.
Every spirit climbs higher
along a single mountain path,
the trees shaking in the breeze from below.
Half way up all those ill timed meetings.
Life's houses torn out like teeth—
just a few holes left in the earth
and nothing in them.
One minute where absolute stillness holds.
The silence before last darkness.
 
On the hardly visible goat track
the shephard went off having lost his sheep.
He looked as if he would cry as he moved his head
before his flock of clouds
and everything that remains of this world
after the storm.

I don’t expect the anxiety to go away
    but I want the anxiety to know
its place in the scheme of things
    of which I seem to consist.
I want the anxiety to be
    not an attention-getter or star
but faceless, like a butler bring trays,
    whose old hand has turned down my bed,
who knows when to take his leave,
    the one I could even come to pity,
this trembling retainer I keep on,
    as my father before me,
out of some long-standing
    loyalty to the anxiety family,
whose fortunes have been bound up
    with ours for so long.

January: interesting to see the corpse light that, so oddly lovely,
there in peace. Had never seen (or is it felt once) that before.
 
January; one is forever an ending. Woods, clouds. I could have
said words about the corpse. One can see through.
 
January: to use maps of the world: in this country and in other
countires children and women (these always in particular)
are being shot at like memory is shot at in discussion of
ideas among those not on the line but probably on line, like
memory of those who have never been shot at.
 
January: point isn’t that they don’t shoot. Identities find walls
and ears and arms missing. One corpse is rolled over to see
what page of light to identify the corpse by now.
 
January: rites ending. My temple. Breath. A migrant moon.
 
January: not going to make faith of an echo. But one is
given a mirror. One is given a ghost. One will give up only
the forgiveness: the rain, the woods, the clouds, the breath
of a friend.
January: John and I were seeing something by sea’s surface that
maybe we were not meant to see. We mention his face after
two decades. We don’t want to talk about it or walk about it.
The Coast Guard house literally in harbor at Provincetown,
waiting out rough weather/winter before being “shipped”
to Race Point.
 
January: camera. Window. Small glee to see Grace in Chelsea
window. Windows where I could come from is the thought.
Windows I know in a heart’s eye, a heart’s ear.

I am going to tell you he is my brother but he isn’t. But there isn’t (is not) any way I am going to talk about what I need to talk about unless I tell you he is my brother. So I have to start there (here). Talking is painful, but it feels sometimes as if that is all there ever was, that it isn’t (is not) as painful at all.
 
If I dream of you. I want to go back to sleep.
 
I never had a friend in childhood whose brain had to be removed. But I knew of someone by the time I was thirteen or fourteen who had a rare disease of the brain.
 
My brother painted. I watched. He gave up painting for one year for photography (black and white). But when he ran out of subjects (he said he ran out of subjects) he went back to painting. By this time I was not watching nearly as much.
 
I don’t know if I have ever dreamed about talking. Just talking. Talking as the subject for a dream. Although talking could disguise itself as a subject for, say, being drawing. Space. Drawing space. Disguised for talking.
 
My brother is painful sometimes. Coalition.
 
I tell you he is talking.
 
Is not.
 
One time he washed the moon and put it in his pocket. One time he washed the moon and it didn’t dry right and it appeared to be all crushed.
 
Sometimes as if that is all there ever was.
 
Now you are angry at me and it is pointless to deny the anger. But you are not really angry at me. You are angry at your brother, or for the fact that I said something to you that would indicate, if only for a second or two, how very close to each other we are, how very close to each other we have always been. And this intimacy is simply something you can’t handle. Or I can’t handle this, but your anger is a disguise for me. This would make some sense. We are having one of those Let’s-play-unconscious-roles-today-and-trouble-one-another-by-denying-or-moving-through-emotional-life-sideways-Yes.
 
Three stones from the mountain in France. Three answers hidden on a page in a book.
 
Your brother’s hatred of thick paint. Your brother (not mine).
 
But I was close to him because he felt to me like he could be the brother I sought.
 
We misuse words much too often.
 
I can only speak for me.
 
We threw the moon out. The next night another moon turned up.
 
When my mother died the nurse told us not to feel we had to hurry to leave her body, that my mother would seem alive/asleep for awhile and that sometimes it was comforting to stay awhile. She would not seem dead right away. And she didn’t. Seem dead. And we stayed for what seemed like a minute or two minutes. We did unusual things: I took a photograph and a drawing off of the nursing home wall on her side of the room. We were concerned for her “roommate” who had no legs really and was not ambulatory of course and could not just leave. We thanked her for “being with” my mother, although neither had a choice.
 
Do I know what my mother thought of my brother or of the moon? Not much.
 
My mother was terribly uncomfortable with words. Maybe even depressed by them.

We were afraid of everything: earthquakes,
strangers, smoke above the canyon, the fire
that would come running and eat up our house,
the Claymore girls, big-boned, rough, razor blades
tucked in the ratted hair. We were terrified
of polio, tuberculosis, being found out, the tent
full of boys two blocks over, the kick ball, the asphalt,
the pain-filled rocks, the glass-littered canyon, the deep
cave gouged in its side, the wheelbarrow crammed
with dirty magazines, beer cans, spit-laced butts.
We were afraid of hands, screen doors slammed
by angry mothers, abandoned cars, their slumped
back seats, the chain-link fence we couldn’t climb
fast enough, electrical storms, blackouts, girl fights
behind the pancake house, Original Sin, sidewalk
cracks and the corner crematorium, loose brakes
on the handlebar of our bikes. It came alive
behind our eyes: ant mounds, wasp nests, the bird
half-eaten on the scratchy grass, chained dogs,
the boggy creekbed, the sewer main that fed it,
the game where you had to hold your breath
until you passed out. We were afraid of being
poor, dumb, yelled at, ignored, invisible
as the nuclear dust we were told to wipe
from lids before we opened them in the kitchen,
the fat roll of meat that slid into the pot, sleep,
dreams, the soundless swing of the father’s
ringed fist, the mother’s face turned away,
the wet bed, anything red, the slow leak,
the stain on the driveway, oily gears soaking
in a shallow pan, busted chairs stuffed
in the rafters of the neighbor’s garage,
the Chevy’s twisted undersides jacked up
on blocks, wrenches left scattered in the dirt.
It was what we knew best, understood least,
it whipped through our bodies like fire or sleet.
We were lured by the Dumpster behind the liquor store,
fissures in the baked earth, the smell of singed hair,
the brassy hum of high-tension towers, train tracks,
buzzards over a ditch, black widows, the cat
with one eye, the red spot on the back of the skirt,
the fallout shelter’s metal door hinged ot the rusty
grass, the back way, the wrong path, the night’s
wide back, the coiled bedsprings of the sister’s
top bunk, the wheezing, the cousin in the next room
tapipng on the wall, anything small.
We were afraid of clotheslines, curtain rods, the worn
hairbrush, the good-for-nothings we were about to become,
reform school, the long ride to the ocean on the bus,
the man at the back of the bus, the underpass.
We were afraid of fingers of pickleweed crawling
over the embankment, the French Kiss, the profound
silence of dead fish, burning sand, rotting elastic
in the waistbands of our underpants, jellyfish, riptides,
eucalyptus bark unraveling, the pink flesh beneath
the stink of seaweed, seagulls landing near our feet,
their hateful eyes, their orange-tipped beaks stabbing
the sand, the crumbling edge of the continent we stood on,
waiting to be saved, the endless, wind-driven waves.

How behind the fly mask
the eyes of a horse
overflow? And how the lather
rising from its flesh?
How the white shrouds
hanging from the lake?
How when you look away
does a cloud divide in two?
How mitosis, how divorce,
crows afloat on a patch of snow?
How the black wicks, waiting to be lit?
How the moss, with its love of mist?
How the stones, covered in moss,
the earth, covered in stones,
sky under the cover of stars
sliding over the hood of a car?
And the mobs, the strange bombs
dropping through the night
with women painted on their chests,
the cloud-cover, the nimbostratus,
the laughter echoing in a darkened
stairway, the song, the whisper,
the half-whispered password of a stream
swollen underground with rain
—and then the greeting,
and then the kiss, how the kiss?

How many thousands of years have you been there?
Why sometimes slender, sometimes full?
How old is the White Rabbit?
How many children belong to Moon-Girl?
Why do you circle the purple loneliness of night
and seldom blush before the sun?
Weary, past midnight, who are you searching for?
Are you in love with these rivers and hills?

Dante and Beatrice
(at forty-seven)
are kitsch six inches of a gold bronze toy
sculpture on my wife’s dead grandmother’s
delicate endtables ours
separated by a red grace and pink
candles and some smaller
horribly-shaped vegetable-like candles pointing
Dante looks like the mayor showing not pointing
of a small-town corruption
in a small cap he wears not against the
winter a cruel righteous careerist
grim as glucose and morose to boot
boasting of pride like a tiger on a street
Beatrice in nightgown her sin hope
a girl always about to go to bed
by herself and her long ringlets
as voluptuous as her nightgown
She is sexual and sad and refuses
to look at that businessman of words
all this is a gift from Mickey Mouse who
said when he saw them it had to be
for me Goofy who took the sleep
out of the Comedy and took the
flowers and took the fathers, too
until what was left for a fatuous cento
like a student who translates
all vulgarity into ancient Greek a mistake
So if a person loves you they could say
I want to be in Hell with you forever
like two bats summoned on a windy
word by a poet having a mid-life decision
Both are ready for bed after six centuries
of poetry and epic youth and new songs
but I don’t think they will do much
in bitter Riverdale like intense butterflies
She’s perhaps too much the mother of Christ
and he’s had a bad day in exile’s
office writing to Miss Stone a stone himsefl in grass
he has a vague memory of this golden
sister her beginning breasts like end-words
But his mind is intent on astronomical
details like halakhic investigations
She turns out to be my melancholy mother
hoping working for better schools for
black children in South Africa
and justice like a child’s story
This is a monstrous mixed marriage
and should be put an end to like a too-
accompanied sonata and before a dream
he’s a generation too old and she
should indeed sleep with Romeo/Marat dying
in her glorious lap like a bronze invasion
He is the terror of the last old poet alive
diplomat of letters and lives
plunging the real prayer into the unreal earth
And I in love with each word and her wordlessness
Her shadow on the white world down the wall
God is a candle
 
It’s a neutral day.
     No sky and no atmosphere.
     No emotions and no oxygen.
     And no memory. And no future
     beyond the plane’s broad wing.
     Yet: a scissor-flash of sun
     and I’m seeing again sun
     beating on the strawberry patch
     of my grandfather’s lost farm
     as a warning pulse beats
     on the underside of an eye.
Here I am kneeling in sunshine. Sunshine beating
on my bare head. None of us wore hats. On my grand-
father’s farm picking strawberries. Filling quart
baskets. Up and down the rows filling quart baskets.
ten cents a quart. Thirteen years old. Quick, deft
motions of my stained fingers. Hypnotic. Dreamy.
In stained work-clothes kneeling. In sunshine kneeling.
You pick, you reach, you reach farther, an ache between
the shoulder blades like a nail entering flesh so you
know it’s time to shift your knees, to inch forward
smelling your heated body. Pulsebeat, pain. Pulse-
beat, pain. In the next row, Linda Birkenhead and
Ginny Dunston, two older girls, are picking. Jesus,
I hate strawberries! Could puke, strawberries! Linda’s
loud hoarse voice. We’re laughing, calling to one
another, you’d think our throats would be scratched
by now, shrieking with laughter, and it’s only 10 A.M.
and we started at 7 A.M. and we’re exhausted, we’re dead,
except noisy and giggling in the shimmering heat
of June in my grandfather’s strawberry patch where rows
go on forever no beginning no end. Pulsebeat,
pain. Yet I believe I will live forever.
True pain, like grief, is for solitude only.
Not picking strawberries, ten cents a quart,
with Linda and Ginny. Not picking strawberries,
row after row, no stems, no leaves, cobwebs sticky
on my fingers in shimmering heat in June these
endless rows on my grandfather’s farm.
Only last year, these girls tormented me.
At school, they teased and chased me.
Older boys twined their fingers in my hair, why?
Dirty fingers in my hair and when I cried,
they laughed, why? First the pulsebeat, then
the pain.
Heat-haze of summer, the world’s smiling.
Unless it’s weak eyes needing glasses.
That year I’d begun to wonder how do we come
to an accurate knowledge of ourselves
my question to bear through life, unanswered.
Picking strawberries, I’m the fastest, frantic
to finish a row careless as in a race, always
to be the first, and careless, bruising fruit,
picking stems, leaves, coming to abhor the touch
of strawberries, how seeds are stippled
in the flesh, rough as a cat’s tongue and some
of the strawberries are weirdly shaped, greeny-
white and never to ripen, other strawberries
are soft-rotted from the inside, female fruit
leaking watery-runny red juice. Within hours,
a box can go bad. My grandfather hated straw-
berries, so perishable, not like apples, pears,
quince, cherries, a strawberry ripening
is a strawberry close to rot.
Kneeling in sunshine. Sunshine beating
on my bare head. And my friends Linda nd Ginny.
Who’d been so cruel. They’d hated me at school,
maybe I was too fast with my answers, maybe
too smart, and too young, now I’m like the others
dumb and suntanned and my small breasts hard
as green pears and my fingers groping quick
in the strawberry plants blinking away pain,
swallowing down nausea, no I wasn’t going to think
of how they’d tormented me, chased me, jeering
pelted me with horse chestnuts, clumps of mud,
chased me through cornfields on the Tonawanda Creek
but I’d outrun them so it was a game,
yes probably it was a game, laughing, shouting,
maybe a sign of crude liking so reasonably I might
tell myself They don’t mean harm. Not like, poking
me with an elbow in the eye, they’d mean to gouge
out the eye. For there’d come, unexpected, that day
last September, returning to school and the oldest
Birkenhead girl Linda stared at me, and smiled, and
later there was Ginny Dunston and her brother, and
others, so suddenly it was O.K. Why, don’t ask,
if the world’s suddenly O.K. don’t ask, don’t inquire
into motives for there are no motives ofr maybe
it was somthing simple: I’d grown over the summer,
I was lanky, funny, tall and suntanned and tough
and fast as ever except now it was O.K. which is why
kneeling in sunshine picking strawberries for ten cents
a quart I’m happy. I love my friends, that’s all
you want at thirteen but it’s a gift you don’t
always get. The sky is a great mirror
mirroring all-time-to-come.
Always I’ll remember how suddenly meanness
turned sweet. What ripened, and wasn’t rot.
How grateful, and how quick to smile, laugh-
ing like the others in the shimmering heat
of June, happy. Those summers of no beginnings
and no ends and one day a biographer will note
below a photograph Oates lived on her grandfather’s
farm until the age of 18. She believed she was happy.

Lucinda said she was going to take a shower.
I said, “Do you mind if I watch?” She looked at me
as if i were crazy, or some kind of pervert. “We’ve
lived together for ten years and I’ve never seen you
take a shower,” I added. She scratched her head and
looked at her feet. “A shower is kind of a private
thing, don’t you think?” she said. “So is making love,
but we do it,” I said. She thought that over for a
minute. “Well, you’ll be disappointed, a shower is
just a shower,” she said. She made me wait outside
while she undressed. After the curtain was pulled
and the water was running, I was permitted to enter.
There were hundreds of native boys chanting in a
tongue I couldn’t comprehend, dancing in a circle 
around her. She soaped her breasts and ignored them.
They worshipped her. She continued soaping her breasts.
They whooped and cried for joy. More soap for the
breasts. I was afraid for my life. Then the soap
travelled south.

Alone. And alone. The pencil knows
its lots. Of loss it’s a lot.
The placemat never gambles, though.
All bets covered, all crumbs off.
The pencil points in impression’s direction,
pissed off to be thought encompassing.
A tea bag wrapper turns its back, points its lap
elsewhere. Miss Hap. A pencil can’t writ(h)e
for the lead inside. Its head is made
to rub its own ideas away. Against its word
to disappear. And disappear: give is to take
as dream is to wake—same message as ever:
Send Word.


Now that you all have gathered here to talk with me,
Let’s bring everything out into the open.
It’s almost too exciting to have all of you here—
One of you physically and another spiritually inside me,
Another worn into me by my upbringing, another a quality
I picked up someplace west of here, and two of you at least fixed things outside me,
Paris and trees. Who would like to ask the first question?
Silence. Noble, eternal-seeming silence? Well, destiny, what do you think?
Did you bring Jewishness here or did it bring you, or what?
You two are simply smiling and stay close together. Well, trees and Paris
You have been together before. What do you make of being here
With Jewishness, my heart, ambition, and destiny? It’s a frightening, even awe-inspiring thing,
Don’t you think so? Ambition you’ve been moving my heart
For a long time—will you take some time off now?
Should we go to lunch? Just sit here? or, perhaps, sing
A song about all of you. “Including you?” one of you speaks for the first time
And it is you, my heart, a great chatterbox all the same! And now you, Jewishness, chime in
With a Hebrew melody you’d like us to enjoy and you Paris and you trees stop out
Of the shadows of each other and say “Look
At these beautiful purple and white blossoms!” Destiny you wink at me and shrug
A shoulder toward ambition who (you) now begin to sing
“Yes, yes it will include all of us, and it is about time!”
Jewishness and ambition go off to a tree-greened-out corner
And start their confab. Destiny walks with Paris and me
To a house where an old friend is living. You, heart, in the padded dark as usual,
Seem nonetheless to be making a very good effort. “Oh, this stirs me,” you say, excitedly—
“To be with Jewishness and trees and destiny at the same time makes me leap up!”
And you do. Ambition, you return but don’t take hold. 
Destiny, you have taken my heart to Paris, you have hidden it among these trees.
Heart, the rest of this story is yours. Let it go forward in any way it needs to go.

West. The direction of oblivion. The sea.
Water throwing itself down, senselessly
banging. And remember,
when you do the thing you want to,
you may hurt some one. Here, for instance, is
a breast, and beneath it a heart, senselessly
beating, and here a hand—like mine
it wants to do only good—and now what is that
sound? The contralto of someone
sobbing. And then there are
the poor, for whom we have orchestrated
a hell of their own. Anyone can see
their brief children, falling otward the water, flakes
of snow. Everything
is given. Everything is taken away. Here is the body
in which we are solitary, and here the sea, undulent
territory without a floor or ceiling,
                                                            and here
its unleashed edge, beating down the door
of sand. For these reasons, I reach across
the cups, the plates, the napkins,
and take hold of your hand,

Whose clouds are those? Whose nematodes?
Whose clover?
What enters your mind when you put on your coat?
There’s a story I’m longing to whisper in your ear.
Isn’t it a story you’ve already heard?
Will you stop and be with me awhile over the dewpoint?
Will you touch me?
Is it you who brings terror to lonely places?
Did you take the snapshot of the second before the Last
Judgment, the moment when the lids have lifted from all
the coffins but the dead haven’t noticed yet?
Did you coin the expression, sleep with the angels?
Did you know how the living would fight over the dearly departed?
Why did you hide consolation in a crack in the trunk
of an olive tree on an island hardly anyone gets to anymore?
Was it you who tanned me in sumac and bound me to a book?
Did you blind the cat so the mouse could return to its nest?
Is it you I can’t hold enough of in my galvanized hands?
Did you direct sunlight to shape a grazing horse’s neck
so that no one can look at it and not say they ache?
Did you understand how difficult it would be to think
of hair growing or birds in flight or a moon turning?
Did you turn a bushel upside-down in a corner so that
light could hide in it?
Is it you who treated air as if it were a broth
fragrant with alleys of bay leaves and so clear you saw
your own face in it?
Is it you holding the keys for the locks on the doors
to the beautiful empty room?

In your version of heaven I am blond, thinner
but not so witty. In the movie version of your version
of heaven you fight God to come back to me.
It is a box office hit because you are an unbelievable character.
Nothing is real except the well-timed traffic accident
which costs 226 thousand dollars.
In real life, I am on a small bridge over a small creek.
Then it isn’t a bridge but a stadium. Then a low table.
A sense of knowing the future.
There is no clear location of fear.
I want you to say you will abandon your dissertation.
I want you to ask the man in the green scrubs if I was pregnant.
Put on the preservers! they announce. They are under your seats!
Time to tell your wife a few last things. People are puking
in the rows around us. The jackets sweaty and too big.
We are, in this version, an image of hope.
The broadcasters are just now sniffing us out.
I am pregnant but don’t know it and can’t know
that the fetus would have been, in any event, not viable.
No one survives. No one comes down with cancer.
The fade-out leaves a black screen over the sound of water.
The review says it is a film noir. The letter to the editor
says the reviewer should go back to college. The reviewer
is in graduate school writing a thesis about movies
that were never made. If they are made he will not get tenure.
If we die he has a small chance at success. A young woman
writes in: it should, more properly, have been called an embryo.
You say I have a dark vision. You buy me coffee and muffins
and cross the street safely. In this version you are there
when I come home. Night after night in bed
beside me. By day I watch the world your eyes watch:
the blondes, the redheads, the light blue baby jogger.
In this version the camera has a tiny light leak, and the film,
after reediting, has no blond and no plane and no preservers.
No metaphysical struggle, no hero, no chance for financial success.

"Who told you
you were visible?”
God said,
meaning naked
or powerless.
 
*
 
We had planned this meeting
in advance,
how we’d address each other,
how we’d stand
or kneel.
Thus our intentions
are different
from our bodies,
something extra,
though transparent
like a negligee.
 
*
 
Though a bit sketchy,
like this palm’s
impression of a tree—
flashing scales,
on the point of
retraction.
But sweet.
You don’t understand!
Like a lariat made of scalloped bricks
circling a patch
of grass

As
she looked at me, or through me, trying to photograph
the rain, and said the present doesn’t really exist, the fetching
present, as the sky pushed open clouds, birthing rags
of light like snow, as she said this, her face a cameo of fire, the camera’s
hinged greedy eye feeding on the bloated seconds as she
spoke filmy words, backing away, snapping shot after shot, I watched
the steps through trees the light makes, and then the darkness, thegradual
feathering shadows, a silence that seemed to want to fly.

Now we gather worshipful.
The gears in his legs shine down.
He lifts his head.
Here he comes!
We’re erecting a maypole with green ribbons.
His legs are four probes.
And his back is a ship and his eyes are holes in the curtain.
We’re eating cookies in the shape of him.
The icing is gold and silver.
He’s’ shedding gears, here he comes tripping!
He is casting off the elastic bindings.
Now we’re hanging giant flags.
The wind-up key sticks in his side like a blade.
The wind rocks him on his wheels.
Here he comes, crawling!
The bright obvious shines in his body.
Here comes the electric, the burning mystery!

And the acids came and washed him, yea, I was making the little man.
With tweezers and tongs from the lead I burned him,
       scoured, boiled, salted, moistened.
Hello in there I said to the Dragon, I made him fume with pins
I fixed him I made him cry in sulphur and copper I was making
       the little man—
Golden lion with smoke for wings, melted, powdered, fat and liquid,
I built him up, I washed him down, I brushed himn with bristles
       from the back of a mare,
I made him fume, the golden man, his eyes his mouth his golden head,
Hello in there I said to the Dragon, I pinched him close, I pinched his mouth,
       I stoppered him up, I shut his smoke.
Look I said pressing my chest to the glass, My heart, my blistered hands.

Love couldn’t have been sweeter, when you were
Writing about it in your glorious opera about the sea: the waves.
      Were your mannerisms and illnesses a mask?
Mine are, at least, partially. A flight from such desperation
      Was needed. Or is that only an illusion for us?
The real world exists in a circle, the turn of a sentence.
      Clear, slow, funny, precise: yes. In italics,
Between the neatly printed lines, lie silence. Not yours,
Or his or hers. A common planet divides us. “The ant’s a
      Centaur in his dragon world.” Those aren’t words
You dreamed up, but you could have put them down. It’s
Amusing to realize how insignificant we are, or what a small
      Part, of the everything you cherished more than
      Your voice; its resonance. “Pull down thy vanity.”
“A swollen magpie is a fitful sun.” Again Mr. Pound. You
      Despised him, understandably; but these stolen phrases
Echo a concern you knew well. How to be, nay, say—or rather express
      One’s own absurdity, without stroking the self.
And to come out not on top: but, a roof under a rainbow on a lake
And house and street. I’ll hold your hand gladly, mouse. Signed off.

But what if, as is
often the case, it takes
months, years even for that
specific tree to finish
falling, and furthermore
all during that time
lots of birds nest
in that tree, and the tree
and the birds call each other
into existence, mutually,—
meaning what if we really
aren’t the center of
our spectacularly uncentered
universe but, rather, the tree,
the sound of it falling is what
calls us forth, and then here it is,
taking us months, years even—
beginning with its creaking
in the whispering wind, working
up to the tiniest of crackings—
and then another patient waiting
for the song of eleven strong
rains, a magic number of fogs
and a certain added heaviness
of moss, until finally, and right
between two of the smallest
units of time (the size of which
of course do not exist, yet are
hauled back now for this occasion
from the land where a duck set out
across a pond and was left
in eternal exhaustion to his own
personal so-close-but-yet-so-far)
what if, that is, it’s months
before the split tree splits
a little farther (twice as far,
exactly say, as the first split)
and it does this splitting almost
soundlessly, save for a branch
that hits its neighbor’s branch,
sounding like a distant .22,
and what if the decisive crack
will come in a future emptied
completely of the likes of us
(by the very likes of us)
yet, still, I am here now, near that
aforementioned and graceless
shifting and it takes me
back to the guns of my childhood—
and what if I want that to count,
that little crack, so that the memory
now, and therefore the childhood
are called with me into existence,
meaning back into existence,
and another memory tags along,
for it is a part of that same
childhood, the memory of imagining
a tree and a forest to give some life
to a question, couldn’t it somehow
all add up, the trees, the moss,
the puny cracking, to me—
existing, every atom of me
so that I might have this chance
to ask you (who are a problem
for another day) what brand
of confusion it would take
for what manner of pervert to ask
that particular question
of a potentially invisible child?

Say “bells” say “buckskin leggings” say “drumstick” say “domestic” say “throb” say “cautionary” say “quit it” say “I don’t” say “gray sky, mountain shadow” say “men are working” say “women are sleeping” say “there are messages coming in” say “for you” say “there’s so much to do” say “they want you doing a rhumba for the Chiapas benefit” say “I’ll do it” “with a pretty dress (red) on” “we can wiggle our hips” she says & “catch a man.” Say we can. “We can.” Say “women come on weekends to give themselves to lovers” say “army camp” say “they married before he went to war” say “he died in war” say “She lived many years beyond” say “they were killed in the church,” whole families say “they took out the men” in the other place. Say “Joan of Arc married to her faith” say “we are being tested.” Say “many voices” say “many trials” say “polyphonic” say “human” say “the pathless forest” say “we enter the kinetic” “the virtual dumb-show” say “we go hand in hand.”
                  —rhumba
 
Mother-in-law is absolute tyrannical law is dietary law is the vittles on the table law. Law of any land a mother claims a sentence. Or motherhood mar her paragraph. We could be in Italy. We could be in Ireland. Love, a penance. Marriage a transience. Nuances of every gesture accompany your child-borne mood. Nuances are odd & prepared to you by tyranny’s food. Buy her humor being store bought. When she was an old country handmaiden she could make those dumplings by hand. Before she was a new country librarian she would have time on her kitchen hands. When you are married words at an inlawed table beecome weightier nuance. Outlawed you are out on the street again in Bulgaria. In Poland. In Russia. In Buchenwald. And resist being eaten. You bite on words you chew on them you spit them out you sort them out you exile them from the kitchen. You ransom them from holidays. And sing around the holidays extolling the virtues of ceremonial food. You will eat that blessed cracker. Or wreath of chilli. You will you will. A child will ask questions. You will pray at a table for the rain to fall for the ship to come in. We are thankful for this inter-married food the work of many beings & the suffering of other forms of life.
                —mother grace
 
Whose whose property property is whose whose in the origin origin of marriage marriage. In in the the not not always always but sometimes sometimes gloom & doom gloom & doom of marriage marriage. Would would a person perosn buy buy another another. Could could a person person buy buy another another arrange arrange another another & be another’s another’s sometime sometime body body captor captor. When Diego held the paintbrushes? A rapture maybe. Mister Mister. A rupture. And make it a bond for arrangement of the other’s mind & body parts. Hearts. Mrs. Mrs. and soul. And black market organs organs. And sexual psyche. Might be. Could another buy another in such a way as to own a sexual soul psyche. You who are a buying kind tell me. Joint accounts are a trusting way to go some think others are burned in the shopping spree of broad daylight. And if if separation separation set sets in in beware beware the turning turning tide tide. Start labeling. This this is mine mine no no this this is mine mine. The child is mine. This this is surely surely mine mine. I don’t think so it used to be mine mine before you were mine mine. You were never a goldmine you might add although you were mine. Things things mount up up to chastise you in their frenzy frenzy. Custody custody is brutal brutal. (one voice) Custody is brutal.
               —shopping spree

1 Hat
As soon as I put it on,
Brooklyn went dark,
but when I took it off
my wooden horse stared at me
with dazzling glass eyes.
 
2 Coat
The shirred hem
swished on the floor.
Huge shoulders sloped
like pines under snow.
A panel in the lapel
read: Kuut, Tallinn
in thread letters.
I hid at the center
behind jet buttons
too round to undo.
That coarse-nap wool
outlasted Estonian winter
but now the moths
left a trellis of holes
so it was never dark
when I curled up
hugging my knees.
My mother cried out:
Who are you? I answered
in my deepest voice:
His coat.
 
3 Shoes
I shoved my hands in
and taught hem to walk:
now stumble: no march
against your will, left, right,
to the Narva Front:
now dance:
                and somewhere
in that immense city
where snow trembled
in high lit windows
a footstep receded,
rapid, urgent,
indelible as a name.

“Talk about curving” “I would like to die with you”
“Talk about the sky” “A nun in a turquoise habit
but the turquoise is blue and the nun the air”
“Talk about trees” “There is only one kind”
“Talk about trees curving into the sky”
“Just now the world stopped” “And
where it stopped it also began” “And
where it began I am jealous of poetry”
“Talk of jealousy and ten of poetry”
“A guitar, indifferent, played by a nun,
but the guitar is a tree and the nun air
and the joy we can’t have everywhere”
“Then we are not philosophers” “No, we are not”
“Then why is this letter in the crotch of the tree”
“Then why two branches departing departing”

Streaming into a sky through string, solitary
child swoops on a rail tag and paper ailerons
what if she could fly, open the back of her heart
into wings, what sky then, what blue
she wants most to float into would float
into her, so why did teacher have to say
Pharoah’s daughter could not see blue
no word for it, no hieroglyph
river only mudddy from under the muddled shade
of canopy swagged over barge
how could she have trawled her regal fingers
through green or brown to say what Nile was
the child could not say ocean unless blue
current ocean flowed through
could not say sky, paper eagle
plunging, no wind unless blue

Out of nowhere came the ravenous sound and I knew she had returned:
the pheasant escaped from the pheasant farm down the road:
wire, the cage of sun through the rafters, hay, dried corn, the smell
of dampness, the incubation of light. Patient hens perched
over their clutch of eggs, their eyes fierce, maternal; heads bent
as if in reverence to the fragility of the unborn.
Winter hardy, able to withstand bitter cold, plumage faded, pecking
her bill against our deck like a careless mother
no longer living in fear of dishonor, no longer ashamed,
abandoning her eggs to feast on scraps of our evening barbecue.
In the half life of an interior room and the wilderness outdoors,
the papery-thin soul of one being and another, we hear her:
the sound of persistence against our wood echoing its desperate
acoustic, the leave-taking and the return. The horrible hatching.

In the movie theatre one night, you whispered,
                                     “It is easier to watch than live”
and on the street outside, you thought,
                                       “If this was a book, I would skip this part”
Remember when you opened the fortune cookie in March?
                                       It said, “Ideology is bad for you.”
Remember when you called Anabelle
                                       “an encyclopedia of self-perpetuating pain”?
On Tuesday you said “I’m a small wooden boat,
                                      caught in the space between storms”
& On Wednesday you said, “I should go to the gym more often.”
Then you killed the spider with the heel of your shoe,
and said “I can’t take care of all sentient beings!”
But when the girl with pink hair brought her sniffles to class,
you found a kleenex in your purse for her.
This is how it happens: one at a time,
the minutes come out of the box where they were hidden:
              the witty ones with yellow feathers,
                              the thick grey ones with no horizon.
But once you swore, “I want to see it all, unsentimentally”
Once you wrote in your green notebook,
                             “Let me start in the middle, again”
What stopped you that night
                              when you stood with your hand on the door?
When you flipped through the pages of the travel magazine,
                              where did you think you were going?

Do not defend the itinerant speech of the hero,
that boy’s crazy.
Just because he knocks, he thinks the door’s open.
I know shame follows me, shame for shame, soft call in my ear,
repeated offerings of watered-down milk
some insane parting of rose-petals,
why, when the tight fist of new bloom
is so much more becoming.
I sleep in the coil of one made for mourning.
Eyes of fish, dull as alkaline junk,
my hand running through my hair.
When my father calls out, I know not to answer
—as the hair splits, as the road opens to rut—
don’t you see, I turned on myself because I had to.

When he takes off his clothes
I think of a stick of butter being unwrapped,
the milky, fattish smoothness of it
when it’s taken from the fridge still hard
the way his body is hard, the high
tight pectorals, the new dimes of the nipples pressed
into his chest, the fan shape of the muscles underneath.
I look at his arms, shaped as though a knife
has slid along the curves to carve them out,
deltoids, biceps, triceps, I almost can’t believe
that he is human—latissimus dorsi, hip flexors,
gluteals, gastrocnemius—he is so perfectly made.
He stands naked in my bedroom and nothing
has harmed him yet, though he is going
to be armed. He is going to have a gut one day
and wiry gray hairs where the soft dark filaments
flow out of him, the cream of his skin is going
to loosen and separate slowly, over a low steady flame
and he has no idea, as I had no idea,
and I am not going to speak of this to him ever,
I am going to let him stretch out on my bed
so I can take the heavy richness of him in
and in, I am going to have it back the only way I can.

I saw my soul become flesh        breaking open
the linseed oil breaking over the paper
running down               pouring
no one to catch it            my life breaking open
no one to contain it            my
pelvis thinning out into God

one day
the black birds of this hour
will turn back into leaves;
their cries and screams
become again the noise of traffic.
And if ever recalled
it will be as a childish dream,
unfulfilled and set aside,
and never as a life line
flung from god-knows-where.

There’s a replica of Him writhing on the cross
they cart across the square, and what’s the meaning there,
crossing your path? It’s years ago, black and white tiles
in center city, where yesterday and today mean less
than coughs in a handkerchief. You can circumscribe
the fortress that saved them from the Florentines,
or didn’t save them, I forget so much even as I try
to paint who’s with me. I don’t want her there,
I want the replica, where the hysteria’s all theater:
there’s an act or two followed by applause, a stroll
through a churchyard, an orchard, a sweet bloody glass
of Dolcetto D’alba…now I try to retain the closeness,
keeping it vivid but not letting it overwhelm,
sticking with it, letting it shake me, going back to
she was available when I drifted toward her,
then it’s so late, I still don’t know where I’m going,
where to turn my attention next, what to lean on, going back
to the flash point, twisting it, granting its full weight.
Or else I could be sensible, make it smaller,
give it perspective, let daily life stake out its erasures
at the same time it heaps on the new. Then
where do the voices go, the seconds, the sex parts,
the window into someone else’s life, the window wide open
for hours at a time, the breeze going through it,
you going through it, you going through
with that person what almost no one’s been through,
before they have to…what’s on their list of things to do?
Drive around the neighborhood, pointing to
the church you attended as a child, the bed where your child slept,
the kitchen table where you can discuss the mortgage:
can you afford this pleasure, what’s the cost of looking?
What if you can’t find the house you want,
all those hours expended? Then there’s the paint
chipping off like small change, the door off its hinge,
the ugly stain where the tub once overflowed.
How urgent is it? To repair or let things decay as they are.
To Him, no question fo a choice: it meant
loving everyone, taking on their suffering as yours,
shaving in their mirror, saving every scrap of paper.
The story’s so familiar you’re almost married to it,
you go shopping with it,, you aregue over who, yes who
could have possibly…when the blistering heat of that afternoon
suddenly flushes your cheek, and the person beside you asks,
“What’s wrong?” You hardly hear them as their voice
wheels around the heart chamber, mingling, flooding to a stop.

Haze in the wheel
Sun in the spokes
Pulled the bad horse backwards
Pulled the wings from my side
Haze in the wheel
Sun on the surface spokes
Pulled your wings from my side
Knew obedience
Feet kept dragging on the earth
Pulled the wings
From the shiny wheel
Feathers in the spokes
Pulled the bad horse backwards
Untethered disobedience
Haze in the wheel
Sun in the spokes

So, you vaulted the back of a deer as it plunged into the river.
Was that a confession?
Was it a moon-white gloat? Was it the splintered glass
of your spirit? Was it a mothy scrap to be stuck
by memory’s tack into amnesiac’s spine?
Was it a comment on your powers or your failures? Was it a wire
with another mesage attached, hung loose as laundry? Reeled up
to the invalid? Was it a window
glaring out from its frame to the exposed south?
Did you really intend to tell me or did it slip out, shocked
by its own clang? Was it a bell chime? Did it hiss? Was it the thick rattle of the marriage veil
as you kissed her cheek? Did it forewarn? Was it a wistful sight? Was it a start?
Did it ever clear its throat?
Was it a screech of horror? Was it heavy-volumed sorrow? Was its blackly heaving accordion
a celebration? Should I have screamed?
Should I have shot a stone in the spine of a runaway arrow?
Should I have bottled us both with a ship?
Should I have held my hand?
Should I have vaulted my own?

The mist rose with a little sound. Like a thud.
Which was the heart beating. And the sun rose, briefly diluted.
And after what seemed years, it sank again
and twilight washed over the shore and deepened there.
And from out of nowhere lovers came,
people who still had bodies and hearts. Who still had
arms, legs, mouths, although by day they might be
housewives and businessmen.
The same night also produced people like ourselves.
You are like me, whether or not you admit it.
Unsatisfied, meticulous. And your hunger is not for experience
but for understanding, as though it could be had in the abstract.
Then it’s daylight again and the world goes back to normal.
The lovers smooth their hair; the moon resumes its hollow existence.
And the beach belongs again to mysterious birds
soon to appear on postage stamps.
But what of our memories, the memories of those who depend on images?
Do they count for nothing?
The mist rose, taking back proof of love.
Without which we have only the mirror, you and I.

El Paso. Eleventh floor of the hotel in a dust storm with eight hundred miles of interstate ten vibrating behind my eyes. Two nights ago there were two of us. East of Redlands, I was away, and couldn’t remember or predict. There spun the windmill blades defiantly, making use.
I hear grains of grit tick against the glass and a howl that won’t let up. No time to inhale. On point, I might fall cynical, fall sentimental; they are the same. I want you to stand in front of me and be other. The walll of umber air thins for a span and the city sharpens. I figure as I watch the depot sign dim and clear without pattern the number of interruptions, the shortest distance.
 
*
The boy hand told a rhyme as he unfastened his pants. He was scolded, ended up in the cab of a big rig with this man he slightly knew, under a clear sky on the straight desert interstate.
To the driver the receiver acknowledged the quick shift, a cold front. Both were in shirt sleeves, laughing. Now the driver went back to the icy waiting room to fetch the boy. On the green vinyl chair he was propped, blood clotting at his mouth; he was shivering. The driver picked him up like an armful of tissue paper. Ifelt that. I felt his young feathery beath. “My poor boy,” I moaned. I was lifted. I was light as dried leaf, dried brittle star, headlights through falling snow. I was high above the road, traveling.
 
*
The last sure thing that night was my patent leather shoe. Darkness lifted me in his warm shirt and cold jacket. Old voices. Lighted wheel rolling on the lake. The pulse of my day lost its measure; I could feel endlessness and belong there. The lights fell and touched themselves and rose up—by motions repeated, taken and complete.

I woke up in a strange place,
in a dream, in a nest of fireflies.
When I opened my eyes I was
in a garden splintered by sunlight,
red roses seeped through the pale
leaves and the grass hummed.
The tepid air filled my lungs
like music, something French
and sentimental. I wanted
to sing, and why not?
I thought I was still dreaming.
I wanted a cigarette, a bath,
a glass of milk.
There was a small city behind my eyes
with roads and trees and newspapers.
I could feel it clanking to life,
its dogs and cars and crusty loaves
of bread, its bicycles and
postage stamps, its hundred
excuses for living, black coffee, rain.
It was a Monday or a Thursday,
I’m sure of it, and daylight
lay across my eyes like a net
of blunt knives. I wanted to wash
the bright taste of sunlight
from my tongue, I wanted to sleep,
i wanted an answer.
My life was a dull museum,
a magazine, an accident
of fasion, rakish and foolish
as a white silk scarf. I was in a garden,
I could hear bells tolling across
fields, across churchyards and
parking lots. I could hear couples
breathing in their cars, old men
in park benches, I could hear lilacs
blooming, radios, bees.
I wanted to bask in the harsh light
of possibility. I wanted to lie on a red velvet
couch under a skylight, to lose all sense
of proportion and live without pity or
blame, without a trace of irony.
I wanted wind and all its
consequences, leaves
in my hair, and honey, not sugar,
for my tea. I wanted absolution,
I wanted an aspirin.
I wanted to nail all the windows open,
to memorize each searing blade
of light, each speeding train
between the eyes, each brooding
way the body answers, the soft and
crooked places where the bones meet and sing.

No ideas. No thoughts, nor
philosophy. Hunger, thirst,
yes, flight and fear. And touch, sound,
and sight, and the tongue, which tastes.
Ten fingers, the heart’s in place.
Two arms, legs, esophagus.
Looking down: that’s the wide sky.
And touch. And the tongue, which tastes.

Although in the thick of a journey, the ship in the bottle isn’t going anyhwere. It has alrady reached its destination, while the bottle itself is long past being emptied of its contents and has become an absence, the very atmoshpere of the ship rushing nowhere with wind-filled sails. There is no end in sight; being is the paradox of stationary motion. And the wind that swells the sails, ruffles the whitecaps ona a blue plastic sea, is the wind of the ship’s creation, which blew in the workshop of its maker, whose restlessness was physical and existential, whose materials were chosen from the cast off and abandoned; and who, when he had completed his work, corked the bottle, walked out to the dirt street of his small fishing village to smoke a cigarette and gaze at the sea, which churns and plunges and goes no place,

 It is now time to turn off the devices in the wing
And listen to the rain. It is time, now, to sit still
        And run your finger along the suprasternum of
The truth as it arches above the viscera, and finally.
        It is a time when wires & catheters marked “single use”
Have most certainly been used before: cleansed
        And sterilized, but having spent time in someone
Else’s heart, they have been contaminant &
        Ruined. I was strong and could lift half
Of everything. I was powerful and could be alive
        And lithe as tiny scissors used
To cut out tissue in a human that had gone wrong.
        Hell is a world of its own, with its own
Towns and country-side. There I stayed beside your neatly
        Warm-blooded form like a brook mink in the clutch
Of a slightly larger animal & sat still, having
        Spent a moment in someone else’s marrow,
A diaphanoscope, catastrophic as the good love
        Of a tea-stained bride abroad the rain
Of saxifrage and clove, tomorrowing.

The Musical Heritage Society
invites you to accept
Beethoven's Complete Sympathies.
A full $80.00 value, yours for $49.95.
The brooding composer
of "Ode to Joy" now delighting
audiences in paradise nightly
knows your sorrows. Just look
at his furrowed brow, his thin
lipped grimace. Your sweaty
2 A.M. writhings have touched
his great Teutonic heart. Peering
invisibly over your shoulder
he reads those poems you scribble
on memo pads at the office,
containing lines like o lethal blossom,
I am your marionette forever,
and a compassionate smile trembles
at the corners of his formerly stern
mouth. (He'd be thrilled to set
your poems to music.) This immortal
master, gathered to the bosom of his ancestors over a century ago
has not forgotten those left behind
to endure gridlock and mind-ache, 
wearily crosshatching the earth's surface
with our miseries, or belching complaints
into grimy skies, further besmirching
the firmament. But just how relevant
is Beethoven these days, you may ask.
Wouldn't the symphonies of a modern 
composer provide a more up-to-date
form of solace? Well, process this info-byte,
21st century skeptic. A single lock
of Beethoven's hair fetched over $7,000
last week at auction. The hairs were then
divided into lots of two or three and resold 
at astronomical prices. That's how significant
he remains today. Beethoven the great-hearted,
who used to sign letters ever thine,
the unhappiest of men, want you
to know how deeply sorry he is
that you're having such a rough time.
Prone to illness, self-criticism
and squandered affections—
Ludwig (he'd like you to call him that,
if you'd do him the honor,)
son of a drunk and a depressive,
was beaten, cheated, and eventually
went stone deaf. He too had to content
himself with clutching his beloved's
toothmarked yellow pencils
(at the tortured scrawls in his notebooks
show) to sketch out symphonies, concerti,
chamber music, etcetera—works
that still brim, as does your disconsolate
soul, with unquenched fire and brilliance.
Give Beethoven a chance to show
how much he cares. East financing
available. And remember:
a century in heaven has not calmed
the maestro's celebrated temper, so act now.
For god's sake don't make him wait.

There are mysteries—why a duck's quack
doesn't echo anywhere
and: Does God exist?—which
will remain always as mysteries. So
the same with certain abstracts
aligned with sensory life: the tactile,
for example, of an iron bar
to the forehead. Murder
is abstract, an iron bar to the skull
is not. Oh lost
and from the wind not a signle peep of grief!
One day you're walking down the street
and a man with a machete-shaped shared
of glass (its hilt
wrapped in a bloody towel) walks towards you,
purposefully, on a mission.
Do you stop to discuss hermeneutics with him?
Do you engage him in a discussion about Derrida?
Do you worry that Derrida might be the cause of his rage?
Every day is like this,
is a metaphor or a simile: like opening a can
of alphabet soup
and seeing nothing but Xs, no, look
closer: little noodle 
swastikas.

Philippa woke one morning in early April to discover that her face had collapsed. Overnight! Her long-celebrated cameo face! Her classic cheekbones had disappeared beneath the sagging bruises of the bags beneath her eyes. What had been smooth taut skin was now "jowls" that were puffy and discolored, the hue of old piano keys. Her eyes were small and brightly anxious, threaded with fine filaments of blood, and her aquiline nose was now a pug nose in which broken capillaries glowed with a sullen heat. Philippa stared in disbelief. She shielded her eyes with her hands and backed out of the brightly lighted bathroom. My life is over, she thought.

It was so. She could not endure the humiliation. Only a few years ago she'd been mistaken frequently as the older sister of her eighteen-year-old daughter. This was true! Strange men followed her in the street, and anonymous valentines, love poems, and long-stemmed red roses in bouquets of a dozen found their way to her door. Philippa was only forty-nine, and had anticipated many years more of worldly conquest and triumph, giddy laughter, drama and melodrama with Philippa in the starring role.

She would reveal her ruined face to only a few individuals, whom she could hardly avoid—her husband, children, relatives, a small circle of supportive friends. Among themselves they would speak in bafflement of the change in Philippa: not in her face, which looked more or less the way it had looked for years, but in her new attitude which, they agreed, had become tragic.

I found myself in a story
without suspense, only
one deaf falcon circling deafly, and that
wild college girl next door
 
screaming at her mother on the phone.
 
My heart, a golden lobster, a star
in a grave, some
hot blood running underground...
 
and all my early daydreams loosed
like termites in the walls
of some deserted church.
 
Oh, I recognized my agony.
The howling dog of daylight life.
The years of lust had opened up
a permanent inn for phantoms
in my brain.
 
Then I turned forty.
 
Every morning, sweeping out the shadows
from the cobwebbed corners, raking
the leaves from the gutters,
the hair from the drains...
 
And sleep, the sweet
rolling water of its e's.
A stroll through the beautiful ruins
of my on dreams.
A hardware store
in a town without men. Whole
shelves dedicated to wrenches, gleaming.
 
And no reasons
to lock the door.
 
No door.

As in that grey exurban wasteland in Gatsby
When the white sky darkens over the city
Of ashes, far from the once happy valley,
This daze spreads across the blank faces
Of the inhabitants, suddenly deprived
Of the kingdom's original promised gift.
Did I say kingdom when I meant place
Of worship? Original when I meant
Damaged in handling? Promised when 
I meant stolen? Gift when I meant
Trick? Inhabitants when I meant slaves?
Slaves when I meant clowns
Who have wandered into test sits? Test
Sites when I meant contagious hospitals?
Contagious hospitals when I meant clouds
Of laughing gas? Laughing gas
When I meant tears? No, it's true,
No one should be writing poetry
In times like these, Dear Reader,
I don't have to tell you of all people why.
It's as apparent as an attempted
Punch in the eye that actually
Catches only empty air—which is
The inside of your head, where
The green ritual sanction
Of the poem has been cancelled. 

I don't know why I fell asleep
when I was eight at the top of the stairs
listening to my parents argue. Maybe I
thought they'd find me asleep and feel
so bad they'd learn how to get along.
 
I don't know why I put my fist
through the kitchen storm door glass
storming out of the house when I was ten,
but my mother had to wrap my hand
in a towel and call the doctor.
An accident, she said.
 
I don't know why I ran from the house
in my bare feet in February,
my father swearing, me in tears
and no clear thought but getting so far
away as a thirteen-year-old could get,
which wasn't far in a small town
where your dad's a minister, everyone
thinks he's a saint, and you're a disgrace
to be acting up the way you always do.
 
I don't remember a time when the house
I grew up in wasn't crackling with rage.
I don't know why. I think my father
was really a mess, but he didn't
discuss that with me, and my mother
just put up with him year after year.
You get so wired, you learn to think
that's the way life's supposed to be.
 
And you learn to be angry all the time.
You run away to California.
You join the Marines at seventeen.
You quit every job you don't get fired from.
After a while you don't get hired,
and people avoid you; they think you're
out of control, and you probably are,
but it takes most of a lifetime just
to begin to make the connections.
 
By then you've got a child of your own
who's angry all the time. I'd like to say
I don't know why, but I do. 
I'd like to explain that it's not her fault,
but what's she supposed to do with that?
I'd like to undo the damage I've done,
but I don't know how. 

When first they told me the serpent beguiled her
I pictured her eyes knocked loose and rattling round
like the gizmo you'd take with you into the closet
and pump with your thumb to make the red and blue sparks.
You needed the darkness. You needed the quiet
You needed the whisper of sleeves on your cheeks.
Most you needed the shelf where your father's brown hats
squatted like toads, forget about sparks—
the mouth, not the eye, is the holy portal.
Hats with cool satin bellies and stained satin bands
that I put to my tongue when alone in their dark,
compelled by the mystery of his old sweat.
And this much I knew: such an outlaw rite
commanded adult fury in the open. You could not
speak of sucking the hats' bowls to your face,
or of licking the grosgrain of their sweat-darkened ribbons:
there was no way to explain why you even wanted this.
 
Let them think I was in there fooling with my Black Cat sparker
and not tasting for wax that came out of his ears,
not hungry for everything about him that was forbidden.
God cursed the snake: Thou shall eat nothing but dust—
but wasn't Snake a scapegoat for the wrong
that God himself had done? To name
out of all paradise the one thing denied her,
so Eve would spend those first days walking round
with apple apple filling hours in her head?
Sour, sweet—how it tasted went unsaid. Either way,
I doubt the fruit lived up to what she would expect.

This one was presented to me
while I was falling asleep:—veil of paraphrase
from the words you sent, from the perishing stanzas in the bed
to assume this air-appearance, bruised shadow
on the new white paper maché, simple sum
of both our verbal traits.
 
I was speaking from the mask
with the tongue of pearls:
    my breath softened this compromise
and the edges of the mask.
I wore all the extravagance of lost syllables: androgynous lethologica.
 
I was sleeping on paper.
I was speaking from the tapestried books of Eros, speaking
to your wrists. It was the pulse
of dying bees, pale in a bowl
carried across a dry field.
 
The sky was a blank page of the mask.
Bees: this terrifying
devotion to language.

My brother turns his life insideout,
from a jail in Leesville,
from a half-way house in Lake Charles,
from a slave-quarter in DeRidder.
He is prisoner of his own rage,
trapped behind the swollen bars
of some lingering chains
and some sudden cage.
 
I speak to him from miles away,
from the cell next door and
lightyears away,
from motherlands and the fertile earth
our Mississippi father plowed:
 
I am trying to be the lawyer he needs,
the father who died fighting for his son,
the big brother with muscles in his miles,
the preacher with his pitiful prayers,
 
I am trying to give him 
the key to the cage, the hammer
to break the chains, the plot
the escape, the magic, the ju-ju
the tunnel under the demon walls,
the North Star to follow,
 
I climb inside all his sins,
find them in the flesh of this poem,
do bloody battle with them,
rip them apart like a white man's curse,
become their bitter judge,
their merciful jury,
their solemn executioner,
 
I leave them on the open floor
of his cell, spread out like the pages
of a testament, shadowboxing him
like a mirror,
 
I can forgive them 
those far-away long-ago sins,
but I can't erase them,
for they have their own afterlife,
their own ghost pulsating
on the hot breath where
my brother's frustrated bloodline boils...
 
yet no loving offering 
from my elderly black hand
can reverse his youthful middle passage
as he sits
on the frontporch of his betrayed generation,
sent to his silent room
like a spoiled boychild,
where he conjures secret maps
for whatever freedoms
he chose to rock his dusty soul with.

seventy destitutes and a shirt that ripped itself up
in the null, by some caprice I lay back in the 
null and all was laurel and beneficence, benefacted
the king of the poor, camel that would crawl. A rain
hard, thin, penetrated, in need of assistance
I penetrated rooms furnished to a real life
that with capital letters drew itself away from mine, courteously
obliging were the condemned to death. Invitations
crept along the rainy cornerstones of a city
permeable: not one hidden beast dusted
the goats that marched ecstatic upon the mounts of the 
Trinity: a camel, two Indians and the people master
of all the arts, music and mathematics, the fury
of realizable dreams. Lost in the basin of shadows,
the white spiderwebs and the dust on the lashes—
specks and small pearls beneath a rain most wretched
settled for the best a life closed.
 
_
 
 
Two monkeys ploughed the soul of invisible traces,
the heart suffered it, old guard whiskered, corrupt,
drunk, tenacious, without hope and yet expecting the entire
curved sky in hand. The heart has a hand? you ask and
irony too with its hand (riddled with cookies)
draws or scratched an arabesque tremulous on the opaque hills
of the mind: irony is a needle, the tempests bathe with
opaque sorrows the lascivious blood, of how the breath rushes
 
to lop off the guards! (here folly you managed a 
sort of feast, released me).

Without a knife he opened himself up. 
 
Without a knife. 
 
Chinese letters marched around him in formation, 
         a military equestrian parade – 
 
He was an adept, in my book on the golden flower.
 
On a bed of peacock tails.
 
And he was opening his abdomen with both his hands,
    parting it like curtains.
 
And I thought if I looked at him long enough, I might go through there.
 
Through the flame-shaped opening.
 
Where there sat another lotus-sitting figure.
 
And the caption said, Origin of a new being in the place of power.
 
And I thought, Was that the flower.
 
_
 
What was the body but a scalpel and a light what was it—
 
Rubbing an oil into scars like a river for the first time I touched them—
 
I was an adept in the book of vivid pain, I used my finger like a knife—
 
Not
    to hurt myself, but to somehow get back in—
 
like the little man opening his belly right up,
    and the little man resting inside there.
 
But how could I. When I would not enter the flower-shaped opening.
 
When I hovered
                        above.
 
But never leaving it, always nearing it, a fly on the verge of something
    sweet—
 
Was that what the body was, a sweetness?
 
Hive ringed by fire.
 
_
 
And the adept says, That's you on the bed: Empty Chamber.
 
And your stomach
                            is open like a coat—
 
It's black in there, deep.
It's red in there, thick
                               with the human loam—
 
And all along your ghost head and your shoulders 
         you can feel the wet
as you slide back in,
         your tissues cupping you like hands.
 
The body: worm round an ember of light.
 
You're in it now.
 
Flower.

Before, you curled inward
around hurts and scars;
braille of battles
seldom won; fissures
and wristroads
a razor made.
 
                         Stutter
from tongue-stump
unable to utter
its woe.
 
                          Still,
from tongue-stump
unable to utter
its woe.
 
                           Still,
your body was mostly
intact, and you
told yourself:
I'm a lucky husk.
 
And now, you're shattered,
hurtled outward:
shrapnel of stars
and a weird music:
bone in the wind's throat.

winter devours us
a gold dust cigarette
a mona lisa hi
saying hi to everyone
 
the weariness of animals rings
on the sale sacks and the butterflies of air and sadness
but the carnivorous light
and the mona lisa hi
keep saying hi to everyone
 
we're swaying eyes opened balanced
on the rope
the open eyes dance on tiptoes
it's cold inside the bottle of the shut voice
it's cold heavy on the road
and the wind moves the light along the road
there's that mona lisa hi hissing all along it
like the other cars cycles planes bikes on the road
 
winter devours us
we the golden tips of gold dust cigarettes 

Uncanny to realize one was here, so much
came before the awareness of being here.
 
Then to suspect your place here was yours only
because no one else wanted or would have it.
 
A site, a setting, and you the matter to fill it,
though you guessed it could never be filled.
 
Therefore, as much as a presence, you were a problem,
a task; insoluable, so optional, so illicit.
 
Then the first understanding: that you
yourself were the difficult thing to be done. 
 
Outsets
 
Even then, though surely I was a "child,"
which meant sense and intent but no power,
 
I wasn't what I'd learned a child should be:
I was never naive, never without guile.
 
Hardly begun, I was no longer new,
already beset with quandries and cries.
 
Was I a molten to harden and anneal, the core
of what I was destined to become, or was I
 
what I seemed, inconsequential, but free?
But if free, why quandries, why cries?

Distance is money just out of reach,
a kindness like rain-laden clouds
that never drops its coins. Epochs
of fossilized trees crawl rustling hillside
strata: they smell like somewhere else
I've never been, an Anatolia
just outside the mind. Geometries
of travel and desire (from here to want
and back again), the myths of pleasure
reinvent another ancient world: oiled boys
racing naked around the circular walls
of Troy to find out who will wear
the plaited wreath, parade painted circuits
of unburnt parapets waving
to the crowds. See, even night
adores him, dresses him in its moon
and apparition. The sheen of intention
is on him, translates his motions
into marble, alabaster. (Cassandra
wakes and says There isn't going to be
a Trojan war. Centuries of fossil speech
fill up the space that comes after
currently, years spent talking
to paper.) Man and moment
become one, his reliquary skin 
makes white occur (by now
the sweat has faded from his garish
details). The things his hands become
act out interruption, history
is his story, held at bay. He wears time
on his body (wears it out), chases gods
from mountaintops until the myth-smoke
clears. His old world's blurred
and hard to read, misunderstanding 
becomes a place: galley
run aground on shallow skin
the color of no event.

And we, too, have the right to love the last days of authumn and ask the grove:
Is there room now for a new autumn so we may lie down like coals?
Like gold, autumn brings its leaves to half-staff.
If only we never said goodbye to the fundamentals
and questioned our fathers when they fled at knife-point.
May poetry and God’s name have mercy on us!
We have the right to warm the nights of beautiful women, and talk about
what might shorted the night of two strangers waiting for North on the compass.
It’s autumn. We have the right to smell autumn’s fragrances
and ask the night for a dream.
Does the dream, like the dreamers themselves, sicken? Autumn. Autumn.
Can a people be born on a guillotine?
We have the right to die any way we wish.
May the earth hide itself away in a blade of wheat!

While he told me, I looked from small thing
to small thing in our room, the face
of the bedside clock, the sepia postcard
of a woman bending down to a lily.
Later, when we took off our clothes, I saw
his deep navel, and the cindery lichen 
silk, between the male breasts, and from
outside the shower curtain’s terrible membrane
I called out something like flirting to him
and he smiled. Before I turned out the light
he touched my face, then turned away,
then the dark. Then every scene I thought of
I visited accompanied by a death-spirit,
everything was chilled with it,
each time I woke I lay in dreading
bliss to feel and hear him sigh and
snore. Near sunrise, behind overcast, he got
up to go in and read on the couch,
as he often did,
and in a while I followed him,
as I often had,
and snoozed on him, while he read, and he laid
an arm across my back. When I opened
my eyes I saw two tulips stretched
away form each other extreme in the old
vase with the grotto carved out of a hill
and a person kneeling in it, praying. Around
the neck of the vase, its narrow sky,
were petioles, leaf-scars, pollen ashes,
pollen dust, as if I saw where he had been
living, my imagined shepherd in impermanent paradise.

It’s Sunday.
I’m afraid of the crowd that looks like me with its stone faces.
From my glass tower crowded with migraines and impatient Ancestors
I muse over the rooftops and hills in the mist
In the calm—the chimneys are serious and naked.
At their feet my dead are sleeping; all my dreams deeds—dust
All my dreams, needless blood spilled down the streets, mixing with the blood of butcher shops.
And now, from this observation post, as if from the outskirts of the city
I muse over my dreams walking distractedly down the streets, sleeping at the foot of the hills,
Like the drovers of my race on the banks of the Gambia and the Saloum
And now the Seine, at the foot of the hills.
Let me think about my dead!
Yesterday was All Saints, the Sun’s solemn birthday
And all the cemeteries were empty of memories.
Oh my Dead, who always refused to die, who were able to keep Death at bay
Away from the Sine, away from the Seine, and in my fragile veins, my indomitable blood
Protect my dreams as you protected your migratory sons with their skinny legs.
Oh my dead! defend the Paris rooftops in the Sunday fog
The rooftops that protect my dead.
Let me leave my dangerously safe tower and walk down to the street
With my brothers who have blue eyes
And rough hands.

Aphrodite of smooth long skin
      And tenderness,
She stepped from stone as from a dress
And stately as a mannequin.
 
They slept curling their bodies tight,
      One long caress
Of limbs turning in to press
Skin onto skin through the short night.
 
For months of sun and stoniness,
      Her modeled shape
Walked as a goddess in our landscape
That vanished of its own excess.

Loving you is like eating bread dipped in salt,
like waking feverish at night
      and putting my mouth to the water faucet,
like opening a heavy unlabeled parcel
      eagerly, happily, cautiously.
Loving you is like flying over the sea
for the first time, like feeling dusk settle
      softly over Istanbul.
Loving you is like saying “I’m alive.”

There was breathing but there were no bodies
Anywhere to be found & so we switched ourselves
Down a couple of notches and we barely moved
And we really listened and this time we really
Listened in case we could catch a glimpse or
Get an inkling or see something around the edges
Of everything available & then some, so we
Stayed tamped and dampened and tuned which was
Fine which was what was needed to remind us
How silent a submarine can be & how slowly one
One can remove a glove if one wants to remove a glove
Very slowly one finger at a time almost reluc-
Tantly if at all, so we waited better than we’d
Ever waited before or since & then some meteors
Started streaking into earth’s atmosphere leaving
Long broad gauze trails in their wakes in every
Direction we turned to look much of the breathing
We’d half-dreaded had materialized, gasps, audible
Awes, little sighs, pink squeals, now and then
Chrashingly thunderous rounds of applause almost,
Shocking, and it was.

Only an All-Powerful Name
invoked again and again
gives me victory
over middle age, a chronic virus,
the disinclination to lift these weights,
and the crevice between my eyes
reflected to me from mirrors that are everywhere
mocking the idea that my body can be beautiful in this life.
 
But I’m shocked to discover,
looking up from my hundredth whispered Bismillah,
I’m not the only one praying here:
the brute on the fly machine
with the black bandanna over his shaved skull—
R.I.P. WOLFMAN SHORTY inked by hand
on his right biceps, Twin Towers on the left,
his sexy little belly, if I read right, that says
he’s caught the kitty too (from shooting up,
my guess, and not like me, from men)—
as he inserts the weight pin at 150
murmurs “Just one more,”
crosses himself, kisses
something he holds in his right hand,
then touches the weights in front of his heart
with a tremendous spasm of will—
 
Oh God
help us to lift it
and go on lifting it,
the heavy burden of Your light.

For reasons unclear,
and in circumstances unknown,
the Ideal ceased to be content with itself.
 
It could have gone on and on with no end,
carved away from darkness, chiseled out of light,
in its dreamy gardens above.
 
So why on Earth did it seek excitement
in the bad company of matter?
 
Why did it need enthusiasts
among the non-starters, born losers,
with no prospects for eternity?
 
Wisdom on crutches
with a thorn deep in its heel?
Harmony torn apart
by stormy waters?
Beauty
with aesthetically displeasing intestines
and Good
—why with a shadow
if it used to be without?
 
There had to be a reason,
inconsequential as it seemed,
but it won’t be betrayed even by the Naked Truth,
busily sifting through
its earhtly attire.
 
And to top it all off, Plato, those intolerable poets,
the gust-borne shavings off the monuments,
scraps of the grand highland Silence…

An unmarriage is not a sweater half
unraveled or sheared in two not half
of anything not a husk or shed thing
or artifact behind glass or in the rubbish
not at the bottom of the sea calling out
nor tied to a chair with duct tape sealing
its mouth an unmarriage is not what one
or the other or anyone thinks not storm cloud
or tremor or even the sky finally in placid
agreement with the earth though like weather
it is not the air we breathe nor the mechanism 
of breathing but irrefutably present in the gray
pink yellow bubblewrap of lung tissue in
perpetuity in the air pocketed down deep
not sustaining not part of the fabric
not dead.

“Conditions continually change. What is good
enough today may become obsolete tomorrow. One
of the attributes of the progressive educator is
a willingness to investigate.”
 
Without intending to be rude,
You smother him with platitude;
Curb your insistence—
 
When astigmatic Ichabod,
Attached to his outmoded rod,
Resists resistance.

You are like me, you will die too, but not today:
you, incommensurate, therefore the hours shine:
if I say to you “To you I say,” you have not been
set to music, or broadcast live on the ghost
radio, may never be an oil painting or
Old Master’s charcoal sketch: you are 
a concordance of person, number, voice,
and place, strawberries spread through your name
as if it were budding shrubs, how you remind me
of some spring, the waters as cool and clear
(late rain clings to your leaves, shaken by light wind),
which is where you occur in grassy moonlight:
and you are a lily, and aster, white trillium
or viburnum, by all rights mine, white star
in the meadow sky, the snow still arriving
from its earthwards journeys, here where there is
no snow (I dreamed the snow was you,
where there was snow), you are my right,
have come to be my night (your body takes on
the dimensions of sleep, the shape of sleep
becomes you): and you fall from the sky
with several flowers, words spill from your mouth
in waves, your lips taste like the sea, salt-sweet (trees
and seas have flown away, I call it
loving you): home is nowhere, therefore you,
a kind of dwell and welcome, song after all,
and free of any eden we can name

Fruit of the passion flower in a secret room.
It has been a long time since a theory of illusion
was accepted by blue herons flying over the city.
 
Fruit of the exchange sliced into pieces geometrically
entering the body, nourishing the migration of butterflies
to be studied, but not tracked down in time.
 
Fruit of the flower mistaken for angels
and troubled monks who lick their fingers
of the sticky substance, go on with their task
 
of converting magic into dogma, the juice
of the fruit gathering in clay jars to become
the ballad of the body they were warned about.
 
Fruit of the harvest given its seed, its ecstasy promising
nothing to those desiring more than the pickings from
a trembling branch with its holy hair of the invisible.
 
Fruit in lavender glass bowls armed with moisture
from the laps of windows, mistaken for the divinity
of prophetic apples, bitten into by ripe ghosts full
 
of oranges, lemons, and darkening bananas—
yearning passed beyond the evil waters found
in the crushed fruit, the disappointment of finding
 
the pulp is dangerous overcome by emptying it
into the open mouth, this communion
between the hummingbird and its one prayer.

She smirks, sets herself up
on a cinder cone—How does
it feel, she asks the old mountain,
to have no choice but to feel?
Succuss of Anoton’s glottis.
Rumbles, plutonic debris.
Feel this, she hisses into his
sphincter, then does something
evil with fruit—oh, the power
to cry! Oh, to be able to cry!
His mouth is under the sea now.
The past is a quasi-fetish.
I was only a child, but my
obsession with you was divine.

The great urinator was yellow
and the stream that came down
was bronze-colored rain
on the domes of churches,
on the roofs of cars,
factories and cemetaries,
the populace and their gardens.
 
Who was it, where was it?
 
It was a density, think liquid
falling as from
a horse,
and frightened passersby
with no umbrellas
gazed up skyward,
meanwhile avenues were flooding
and urine inexhaustible flowing
underneath doors,
backing up drains, disintegrating
marble floors, carpets,
balustrades.
 
Nothing could be detected.  Where
was this peril from?
What was going to happen to the world?
 
From on high the great urinator
was silent and urinated.
 
I am a pale and artless poet
not here to work out riddles
or recommend special umbrellas.
Hasta la vista! I greet you and go off
to a country where they won’t ask me questions.

The day makes its final appearance,
the sky rubbed out in places
with a blue so understated it’s nearly
a memory of blue. Forget the vase
arranged on the table, the tulips
are too vague. Even the white
tablecloth is an erasure.
Imagine the pale drone
of dinner conversation,
the politics of brie, cold soup.
The good china infects everything.
Even now the knive falters,
the wine glass can’t be saved.
Think of the blank mirrors
of spoons, the fish
whose whiteness is a given.
Consider the ravenous napkin.

Lucinda said she was going to take a shower.
I said, “Do you mind if I watch?” She looked at me
as if i were crazy, or some kind of pervert. “We’ve
lived together for ten years and I’ve never seen you
take a shower,” I added. She scratched her head and
looked at her feet. “A shower is kind of a private
thing, don’t you think?” she said. “So is making love,
but we do it,” I said. She thought that over for a
minute. “Well, you’ll be disappointed, a shower is
just a shower,” she said. She made me wait outside
while she undressed. After the curtain was pulled
and the water was running, I was permitted to enter.
There were hundreds of native boys chanting in a
tongue I couldn’t comprehend, dancing in a circle 
around her. She soaped her breasts and ignored them.
They worshipped her. She continued soaping her breasts.
They whooped and cried for joy. More soap for the
breasts. I was afraid for my life. Then the soap
travelled south.

I said I don’t want to be older, but it’s be older
and older or nothing, right: and day by day
 
it’s been older every day since the beginning:
still, there was a bracket of young years
 
within which one could say, these are not the
older years or the baby years: there are, as
 
Shakespeare said, groups of time, the
transitions from one group to another usually
 
unalarming: people who have nothing to say
should say nothing: they should drum syllables
 
or squeeze verbs (or nouns) or cast them like
die, craps, creeps: for example, I don’t
 
feel at home in this universe and it may be
the only one: that is so pathetic: I think
 
that is so heartrending with content:
how can the place you come from not be your
 
home: is the only way to make a phrase
interesting to make it sound like it’s not a
 
phrase: or it could be two phrases or go two
different ways when you are really going nowhere
 
well, the human race needs a better track,
the track itself worn or grown over.

The origin
of what happened is not in language—
of this much I am certain.
Six degrees south.  Six east—
 
and you have it: the bird
with the blue feathers, the brown bird—
same white breasts, same scaly
 
ankles. The waves between us—
house light and transform motion
into the harboring of sounds in language—
 
Where there is newsprint
the fact of desire is turned from again—
and again.  Just the sense
 
that what remains might well be held up—
later, as an ending.
Twice I have walked through this life—
 
once for nothing, once
for facts: fairy-shrimp in the vernal pool—
glassy-winged sharp-shooter
 
on the failing vines.  Count me—
among the animals, their small
committed calls.  Count me among—
 
the living. My greatest desire.
To exist in a physical world.

I built a ladder
in the sky
out of my life.
 
But there was nowhere to step off.
 
Who’s ever think I’d end up being what I built?
 
I thought I’d leave the ladder behind
like footprints that suddenly stop.
 
The idea being, when I was done,
others could use what I built.
 
I was about to shut down
“It’s no use!”
 
when whatever happened next—
the pride I felt in being lost again,
the thought of you,
or the feathery night moth
who, landing in the garage door’s electric eye
miraculously held it up; it was a rung, a life.

The sorrow of a horse standing in a stable goes on
Night and day. The plane that crashes in the desert
Holds shadows under its wings for thirty years.
 
Each time Rembrandt touches his pen to the page,
So many Dutch barns fly up. It’s hard to know why.
We do know earth has pulled so many nights down.
 
Each time a hog, caught by one leg, hangs
Upside down, he looks at the ground from above.
Our elevation suggests that the knife is approaching.
 
Things go on. The weight of history begins
To bend us over once more. It won’t be long before
We put our heads down on the chopping block again.
 
When we hear a Drupad singer with his low
Voice patiently waiting for the next breath,
We know the universe can get along without us.
 
The writer of this poem is forgetful like you.
For him, a century of forgetfulness can
Go by in the space of a single heartbeat.

There was breathing but there were no bodies
Anywhere to be found & so we switched ourselves
Down a couple of notches and we barely moved
And we really listened and this time we really
Listened in case we could catch a glimpse or
Get an inkling or see something around the edges
Of everything available & then some, so we
Stayed tamped and dampened and tuned which was
Fine which was what was needed to remind us
How silent a submarine can be & how slowly one
One can remove a glove if one wants to remove a glove
Very slowly one finger at a time almost reluc-
Tantly if at all, so we waited better than we’d
Ever waited before or since & then some meteors
Started streaking into earth’s atmosphere leaving
Long broad gauze trails in their wakes in every
Direction we turned to look much of the breathing
We’d half-dreaded had materialized, gasps, audible
Awes, little sighs, pink squeals, now and then
Chrashingly thunderous rounds of applause almost,
Shocking, and it was.

We needed water & frozen water
for the party. I chose you to two-step
 
with but the downstairs chandelier
stayed still, its prisms prim.
 
Consider this: if sunfish
& ducks compete for the same bit
 
of bread, at any moment their mouths
might meet. That’s how my mother
 
explained the Other, told me to hedge
my bets, furl wish-scrolls into
 
the topiary.  Still I had questions
about Life & the Afterlife. You
 
looked in through the screendoor.
I sat next to my ex.

A weed     green
with a black shadow village under it
and then browngray dirt     then a browngray stick
stuck on a stone
which has its own black shoah moat to the north
how hungrily life    like an o
goes after life

How can you stand it—looking at things?
      For example, the geranium
 
out on the patio, the single pink
blossom in the sun? Or stand the sunlight
moving through it,
 
illuminating, holding the flower open like a high
clear note, an ecstatic
widening
 
which arrives, arrives. What
do you do with it? While the shrubs and the lowest
overhanging leaves
 
lift slightly in the wind, and the blossom
 
doesn’t move.  It’s the object
of affection, and this is how
it hurts you:
 
by holding the note open—
 
Past the front of the apartment, traffic goes by:
one truck, then another
 
comes on, disappears.  And I have
 
the blossom in my vision—
       sunlight, like vision,
making clear the tiniest
 
hidden veins.  I don’t know why
I should be here, alive
 
and having to see this, this bright thing
living in time
 
or have to see it later, at the end
of the afternoon, when the sun’s
 
lower, its light diagonal across the pot,
      the light then pulling away
across the mossed brick
 
like a wave, only slower,
slower.  The blossom is still pink,
but no longer
 
brilliant. I’ll go back
into the kitchen.  But you, are you stronger than I? Can you
      stay in love with it? Make promises,
 
marry it?  Are you so sure
of your position in the world?

I was not, in the beginning of time, a head on a plate.
I was a foot that wriggle and writhed to escape.
I curled my toes to kick the wall, and I carried the bruise.
I used my instep like the back of my hand.
That was then, in a protected shadow, which remains as it was.
 
The hand was the hand and the foot was the foot.
Elsewhere, the head and groin were interchangeable.
Tonight, I hold my life in my hands, and my hands are small.
What if I am asked to hand over my life in a week?
Tonight, in a week, a year, an hour—all the same afterward.
 
My head on a plate, and what will it bring at auction?
Salome like it when I did what she said to.
Otherwise, we had what might be considered a falling out.
The guilt was not helpful and the condition inoperable.
I am tonight a pilgrim in a corridor of moonlight.
 
I, whose lot is the most one should ask, have learned a lesson.
I think of things formerly too terrible to contemplate.
And tell my friends, the fly and the spider.
The soup tastes like sacrifice.
I have taken in my belt.
 
I weary of carrying my head in on a plate.
If I were allowed to drink and laugh on the job.
But I have to carry my head in as if it were a set of jewels.
Eyes, of course, teeth, the cheekbones of appearance, the jawbone of discussion.
Others judge me by the resolve with which I continue to speak.

I asked what can you do    while you’re alive
a donkey doesn’t have ears    doesn’t have a mouth
eyes with long lashes over them like umbrellas
holding up philosophy      philosophy doesn’t take any responsibility
for debt or unhappiness
 
people despair get depressed      but
what can they see      when they so indolently desperately head toward a hole and
darkness
look at the braying donkey    a donkey doesn’t
fall or anything    get blindfolded all the time
she can see quite well in the dark       can hear well
with no disability    twirls round and round
like a merry-go-round
I wonder if suffering    looks like the slobber of joy sometimes      around that time
people get fed up with despair    in despair
go to the other side      other side      there
 
people who come to pray    in front of a guardian god and receive
the precious tears of the donkey      never stop coming
Minoru Yoshioka       appeared       from time to time
to eat a bowl of shaved ice with sweet beans
even a phantom gets thirsty
 
phantoms    appear all over the place
the peak of Mt. Yamamotoyama in Ojiya in deep fog
is no different from the London suburbs
he chanted     like a spell    the same English as at the time
he walked through the Kew Gardens
when the pronunciation stopped short    the fog cleared up
 
while eating a bowl of soba noodles      the donkey     kept a journal this far
we don’t know what will become of    tomorrow
nevertheless    there is also something I have understood
even a phantom gets thirsty.

The horse-chestnut tree shelters the house of princes.
The laurel nudges the catalpa.
Mussolini offers a diamond to Corot.
The proud, the famous, the magnificent
exude gentleness and megalomania.
Embassies are loud with the sound of cymbals and organ.
The taste of insolence is sharp, with an agreeable mingled sweetness.
 
A man declaiming in front of a coat of arms
is possessed of great pride and believes no man equal to himself in valor, dignity or competence.
He will have two wives who will love him dearly and whom he won’t love at all.
He will be irascible and lustful.
He will endure many reverses because of his sudden wrath and his great courage.
 
The girl will have a large and wide bosom.
She will experience disappointment at the age of twelve through an act of oppression or virginal corruption.
She will conquer in all things, with God’s help and that of the fuchsia , the orange, and the dahlia.

I was making a roast.
The smell wafted from the kitchen into the living room,
through the yellow curtains and into the sunlight.
Bread warmed in the oven,
and in my oven mitt, I managed to forget
that I’d ever punched someone in the face.
It seemed so long ago, I might not even have done it.
I went out into the yard before dark
and saw last year’s rake on the lawn.
It was a cheap metal one
that tore up the old grass.
I did that for a while.
When I went back in the house,
the roast was burned black
and the bread was hard.
I sat on the couch and watched it get dark.
I was getting hungry, but I felt afraid
of seeing the refrigerator light go on.
Then I would have to turn on other lights,
and then what would I do?
I heard a car pass once in a while.
I thought about a time on vacation
when I bought a newspaper and tomatoes
from a supermarket I’d never heard of.
I remembered an old bathing suit I had,
but I couldn’t think of what happened to it.
I could move away.
I could get in the car right now
and drive all night,
as soon as I had a sandwich.
Turkey, tomato, mayo,
Swiss, lettuce.  It was exciting.
I still had my shoes on.  I drove to a truck stop.
It was bright inside and I loved the world.
I bought a sandwich and ate it from my lap while I drove.
When I pulled up to my house it was quiet.

It’s a tempting thought—
and quick to practice.
 
It was always that thought
I went back to
in my weakness,
so that I came
no longer to believe it.
 
Weren’t there other postulates
that wanted to appear?
 
I started that day
with the sketch of angels
on my wall—
Raphael’s
chalcographie.
 
Cooking in the kitchen,
I looked out the window
and the four trees rose up
green and circular,
the leaves
balanced on the thin
shoot of
pale bark.
Behind them, more trees.
 
My exile saved me.
I learned to speak myself
out of what was denied me.
 
I went to bed last night thinking
Maybe this was right…
 
The night sky was pink.
1 A.M. and Leonid
passing though its thirty-six years
in meteoric flight…
 
so I went to sleep
and thought of it all
 
above, going on—
I was walking into the future.
 
I remember my mother painting the landscape,
cutting the flowers, in relief, with her
palette knife.
 
I will not be afraid of it.
I will not hate it.
 
If the stars
are to be ignored
why such (power and) light—
 
purely in the world?

The screen is full of voices, all of them holding their tongues.
Certain things have to be “undergone,” yes.
To come to a greater state of consciousness, yes.
 
Let the face show itself through the screen.
Let the organizing eyes show themselves.
Let them float to the surface of this shine and glow there.
 
The world now being killed by its children.  Also its guests.
 
An oracle?—a sniper, a child beater, a dying parent in the house,
a soil so overfed, it cannot hold a root system in place?
Look—the slightest wind undoes the young crop.
 
Are we “beyond salvation”? Will you not speak?
Such a large absence—shall it not compel the largest presence?
Can we not break the wall?
And can it please not be a mirror lord?
 
Pressure of what you’d hear
if you really heard
the findable pressures
of finite things—
 
you’d be concussed, actually,
by the carpenter
a Catalan or South Miami Cubano
60-something years old
 
and carrying a ladder
with inordinate care while complaining
in curses yelped
Spanish-style about the
 
hardening of his arteries,
his legs ready for the go-round
still, being on the make—
only, in this country
 
it’s your money or your life,
and we don’t want any
of those who slide into the pew these
Sunday summer mornings
 
to think the bedmaker
we call Jesus
has really died—after all, the sheets
so neatly & finally tucked-in
 
on all our beds
are clean, are they not?—so speak
American, says the crew boss,
speak American, OK?
 
and then shut the hell up.

Your hooves drawn together underbelly
shoulders in mud    your mane
of wist and soil deporting all the horse of you
 
your longhaired neck
eyes   jaw yes   and ears
unforgiveably human on such a creature
unforgiveably what you are
deposited in the grit-kicked field of a champion
 
tender neck and nostrils   teacher   water-lily suction-spot
what you were   marvelous   we could not stand
 
Night drops   an awaited storm
driving in to wreck your path
Foam on your hide like flowers
where you fell   or fall   desire

Let’s praise loss, its particular weights, its music.
 
Sometimes the broom is brittle; sometimes damp,
useless.
 
Evening: splinters of fret strike the pavement wet.
 
Let’s praise those who resist
the parts of love that bring
only peace.
 
Sometimes the broom is brittle and can’t bend; a fear
of breaking, a stiffness.
 
In this rough country, in the rough
morning light
night fills the broom.

That’s what the lady said. Said it right
Out, loud and clear. Said, “You’ve been mar-
Ginalized.” Well, thanks. “It’s too bad,”
She said. Oh, you bet your freakin’ elbow
It’s too bad. And what’s that I hear behind
My head? Palm fronds creaking? Is this
Friday’s footprint? A sad castaway is what
I am, looking everywhere for a bottle, not
The one with a message, but the one with a
Nice drink of cyanide. Here’s to you, lady.
So long. May you choke on that martini.

Please listen, there’s a thing back there I killed
that’s spiritual and has two wings like anything
we love forever—take the pigeon, take the
bluebird—I would rather walk with a can
than hurt a bluebird; I would kill anyone who stuffed
a full-grown frog into a mason jar
and threw him from a third floor window, the glass
cutting his body, penetrating his mouth
and eyes.  You have to get down there and kill
the frog yourself before you run up the stairs
and beat him, holding him half out the window, let his
name be erased for the thing back there.

There are soldiers in mother’s hair
and soldiers coming in the window.
Distracted? I am driven.
I can’t stop chattering
with history hissing its heat.
 
Grave raincoat-shouldered people
with their own histories, bad
histories, drink to their bitterness
and chide us for our efforts.
What is there other than I forget?
 
I can’t read the papers or your face
on the phone. Give it up is the answer, is
is the answer, aghast as a verb.
The rain’s washed most of our skin off.
How does it feel during a war?
 
A silence stirs.

So then he wandered out into the street and began to testify
Something about life being a long journey of the soul
An endless voyaging turning into a voyaging with an end
One knows how but one does not know when
No one yet knows when as the traffic bore down on him
 
As the traffic bore down on him my mind drifted in the wilderness
Or was it that my mind having been adrift all along
I’ve just grown to regard the wilderness as my resting or laughing place
He cried but those were not yet his last words
As the traffic parted around him as around one charmed

I slum among crumbs, a spotted shadow
before I become a surrogate republic
for you: O decorated cyborg
O Comrade Snowflake in a lonely pool
 
Before I become a surrogate republic
I blushed fossils with phosphorous
O Comrade Snowflake in a lonely pool
I still sing faithfully to each and every vertebrae
 
I blushed fossils with phosphorous
Is this really your final answer
I still sing faithfully to each and every vertebrae
I kiss each mouth you give me
 
Is this really your final answer
For you: O decorated cyborg
I kiss each mouth you give me
I slum among crumbs, a spotted shadow

Because there’s a word, there’s a way to wonder
if any of our group shagging baseballs
all spring might not have been a girl at all
but a hybrid cultivar.  Micki and Jackie
resembled twin ponies, palomino
manes like vanilla frosting.  Ruddy Turnstones,
Sal and Les tumbled through the neighborhood,
grandstanding for screams.  We all wanted to be
boys then, to serve the Power whom we knew
found delight in our swinging from trees.
We wanted to serve the one god of joy
in the body and wreck ourselves at the altar
of summer nights on the city stoop, our shaped parts
sprouting overnight as we slept, changelings.
Sometimes I chose the hard singularity
of the young liege, honor-bound even in defeat.
To the armor and scabbard I cleaved,
make-believe punishments a drubbing I took
to prove my manliness, my worthiness.
Sometimes I starred in my own
Midsummer Count and reamed myself
a handsome specimen in bright plumage,
recognizable on the wing, most numerous
in early June when my kind crossed natural barriers.

This wasn’t what you had in mind
when you said, A house by the sea—
this flat Japanese plan; this expanse
that stubs on a bunker of grass;
these swans hissing humans off the nest;
and vitex, the abortion tree, scratching at the window screen.
 
I don’t think my mother was part of your ideal.
Or this dinner of wet chicken lobster and gin.
You meant Sweden, a kind of sober heaven
where you wouldn’t have to think about God.
Stay, stunt love, if you can stand it here.
Soon your double body will be nobody, no more.

Respondez! Respondez!
(The war is completed—the price is paid—the title is settled beyond recall;)
Let every one answer! let those who sleep be waked! let none evade!
Must we still go on with our affectations and sneaking?
Let me bring this to a close—I pronounce openly for a new distribution of roles;
Let that which stood in front go behind! and let that which was behind advance to the 
front and speak;
Let murderers, bigots, fools, unclean persons, offer new propositions!
Let the old propositions be postponed!
Let faces and theories be turn’d inside out! let meanings be freely criminal, as well as 
results!
Let there be no suggestion above the suggestion of drudgery!
Let none be pointed toward his destination! (Say! do you know your destination?)
Let men and women be mock’d with bodies and mock’d with Souls!
Let the love that waits in them, wait! let it die, or pass stillborn to other spheres!
Let the sympathy that waits in every man, wait! or let it also pass, a dwarf, to other 
spheres!
Let contradictions prevail! let one thing contradict another! and let one line of my poems 
contradict another!
Let the people sprawl with yearning, aimless hands! let their tongues be broken! let their 
eyes be discouraged! let none descend into their hearts with the fresh lusciousness 
of love!
(Stifled, O days! O lands! in every public and private corruption!
Smother’d in thievery, impotence, shamelessness, mountain-high;
Brazen effrontery, scheming, rolling like ocean’s waves around and upon you, O my 
days! my lands!
For not even those thunderstorms, nor fiercest lightnings of the war, have purified the 
atmosphere;)
—Let the theory of America still be management, caste, comparison! (Say! what other 
theory would you?)
Let them that distrust birth and death still lead the rest! (Say! why shall they not lead 
you?)
Let the crust of hell be neared and trod on! let the days be darker than the nights! let 
slumber bring less slumber than waking time brings!
Let the world never appear to him or her for whom it was all made!
Let the heart of the young man still exile itself from the heart of the old man! and let the 
heart of the old man be exiled from that of the young man!
Let the sun and moon go! let scenery take the applause of the audience! let there be 
apathy under the stars!
Let freedom prove no man’s inalienable right! every one who can tyrannize, let him 
tyrannize to his satisfaction!
Let none but infidels be countenanced!
Let the eminence of meanness, treachery, sarcasm, hate, greed, indecency, impotence, 
lust, be taken for granted above all! let writers, judges, governments, households, 
religions, philosophies, take such for granted above all!
Let the worst men beget children out of the worst women!
Let the priest still play at immortality!
Let death be inaugurated!
Let nothing remain but the ashes of teachers, artists, moralists, lawyers, and learn’d and 
polite persons!
Let him who is without my poems be assassinated!
Let the cow, the horse, the camel, the garden-bee—let the mud-fish, the lobster, the 
mussel, eel, the sting-ray, and the grunting pig-fish—let these, and the like of 
these, be put on a perfect equality with man and woman!
Let churches accommodate serpents, vermin, and the corpses of those who have died of 
the most filthy of diseases!
Let marriage slip down among fools, and be for none but fools!
Let men among themselves talk and think forever obscenely of women! and let women 
among themselves talk and think obscenely of men!
Let us all, without missing one, be exposed in public, naked, monthly, at the peril of our 
lives! let our bodies be freely handled and examined by whoever chooses!
Let nothing but copies at second hand be permitted to exist upon the earth!
Let the earth desert God, nor let there ever henceforth be mention’d the name of God!
Let there be no God!
Let there be money, business, imports, exports, custom, authority, precedents, pallor, 
dyspepsia, smut, ignorance, unbelief!
Let judges and criminals be transposed! let the prison-keepers be put in prison! let those 
that were prisoners take the keys! Say! why might they not just as well be 
transposed?)
Let the slaves be masters! let the masters become slaves!
Let the reformers descend from the stands where they are forever bawling! let an idiot or 
insane person appear on each of the stands!
Let the Asiatic, the African, the European, the American, and the Australian, go armed 
against the murderous stealthiness of each other! let them sleep armed! let none 
believe in good will!
Let there be no unfashionable wisdom! let such be scorn’d and derided off from the earth!
Let a floating cloud in the sky—let a wave of the sea—let growing mint, spinach, onions, 
tomatoes—let these be exhibited as shows, at a great price for admission!
Let all the men of These States stand aside for a few smouchers! let the few seize on what 
they choose! let the rest gawk, giggle, starve, obey!
Let shadows be furnish’d with genitals! let substances be deprived of their genitals!
Let there be wealthy and immense cities—but still through any of them, not a single poet, 
savior, knower, lover!
Let the infidels of These States laugh all faith away!
If one man be found who has faith, let the rest set upon him!
Let them affright faith! let them destroy the power of breeding faith!
Let the she-harlots and the he-harlots be prudent! let them dance on, while seeming lasts! 
(O seeming! seeming! seeming!)
Let the preachers recite creeds! let them still teach only what they have been taught!
Let insanity still have charge of sanity!
Let books take the place of trees, animals, rivers, clouds!
Let the daub’d portraits of heroes supersede heroes!
Let the manhood of man never take steps after itself!
Let it take steps after eunuchs, and after consumptive and genteel persons!
Let the white person again tread the black person under his heel! (Say! which is trodden 
under heel, after all?)
Let the reflections of the things of the world be studied in mirrors! let the things 
themselves still continue unstudied!
Let a man seek pleasure everywhere except in himself!
Let a woman seek happiness everywhere except in herself!
(What real happiness have you had one single hour through your whole life?)
Let the limited years of life do nothing for the limitless years of death! (What do you 
suppose death will do, then?)

Just as I decide
There’s nothing true
About me (can’t tell
 
if I’m more despised
or ignored, my mind’s
warding off or reeling in
 
someone who could scald me
with a spoon of chatter),
just then I decide
 
in my seclusion, there’s a cabin
by the stream and the jangled speech
of a person is hushed enough
 
so I say Hello No One,
 
can you hear me?
In the rushes I spook
 
a few geese into flight.

What looked like a statue held a shove.
Even so, it was hard not to want
to run full throttle straight
into the arms, the very harm
of it. Some thought the figure at the top
was of another kin or kind, that only blind
force would send him over. Others swore
he would give or bend, that something like love
was standing there and could be swayed to reason
or sweetness—a considered push
might do him in. The view from below
was blocked by distance, and the relentless glare of the sun.

So human to feel the dominion of the sun
as a yoke, to learn that radiance will shove
a gaze back to the ground. The reason
for submission disappears: it’s just a fact of the here below—
like thinking there’s a harmless form of harm.
Time and again, the figure on the hill swore
he would never relent, that it was his want
or whim to stay there, impervious to love
and hate. Our path was made straight
by that stubbornness—just a final push
we thought. But we were blind
to the possibilities, and to what was waiting at the top.

Once we began the game, it seemed impossible to stop
caring and turn to something else. The sun
was so hot, the voices drew us on, the blind
will of a crowd bore down. Our mothers saw the harm
in it and called us back; our fathers swore
we couldn’t go. The old ones had felt the shove
and pull of it themselves, but forgot the way a want
grows to desire. The path was straight,
as clear as day—with a push
they tried to lead us on to reason.
But we were caught in a world far below
that place where thought grows light as light and love.

There were flowers in the meadow: buttercups and love-
lies bleeding; milkweed pods with down bursting from their tops;
daisies by whose petals lovers swore
to love forever; and thorns left beneath the leafy blind
of the thistles. Beauty was a mask for harm
and everything under the sun
had the power to draw us, or just the same, push
us away. Does the weed, too, feel the deep want
of replacement, the need to go straight
for the root, then draw it out from below
there in the dark earth’s hush—over
and over? Why look for a human reason

When nature has a reason
of its own? The saint said the love of a neighbor is really love
for love itself, the soul reaches out to the good; in the blind
acceptance of those about her, she makes a final push
toward the divine. Souls hover
about and above one another, in the want
of connection, a promise foresworn,
and, for a time, they set all forms of harm
aside. It’s vital, this straight-
forward link between them, as necessary as sun-
light or water. In such a world, the top
has no added value; the place to be is here below.

The thinker, too, looked below
the surface—to the master’s power and the servant’s reason.
It was the master who was blind
to history. Once he resisted the push
toward death, nothing else could harm
him; by then no more want
could arise. The servant swore
he couldn’t care less, giving reality a shove.
But the truth of his work stood there in the sun-
light, steady as need and the love
of craft. The master won, though it turned out the top
was a dead end, leading straight

To oblivion. No one can escape the straight-
forward claims of the makers, the rule of the here below;
the king stands at the pleasure of those who swore
to go on and on with the game. He tells himself it’s love
that keeps them swarming, there in the sun
and rain, elbowing and shoving
for a closer look. But he knows that what they want
is the tooth and nail of him, that the push
and prop of his image can occupy the top
for just a while. There behind the blind,
waiting, the assassin has his reason—
though it’s never just his own. And the worst harm

Comes from the innocents who never see the harm
at all. The crooked made straight,
the mad the font of reason,
the prophets at last gone blind.
The bloated carp rose to the top
of the stream and the rowers pushed
them down again with a shove;
the fishermen swore
with the sun
in their eyes that, below
the dam, the wheel of
the mill still turned: what you want

Is what you get, they said. And what we wanted
was to find the meadow—and everyone unharmed.
The farmers came running for the top,
frantic and clanging with shovel
and ax, cockamamie, heedless, straight
through the gardens, scattering the love-
nests of the larks and plovers. They swore
they would push
away the past. Their reason
was impatience swirling there below
their intention. Father or son,
son and father; either way, they were blind

To the particulars and all in all blind
to consequence. To stop too soon is to want
to stop wanting. The hunters have their cunning reason
and go about their work by stealth. Straight
as their arrows, they aim for death, though love
is what closes the distance. Show
the trophy high on the wall, swear
to the courage of the soldiers and sailors—the top
of the mast, pushed
deep in the dirt, flies a flag that declares the end of harm.
But the orphans lie sleeping in the meadow below
and will rise up in fury with the sun.

In the end, love, it’s only one or two standing there beneath the sun
surrounded by silence. The blind
light blanketing the hill retreats and returns, oblivious. Love
turns the world and brings it ill or harm.
We guessed there’d be plenty and then empty straits
and both would set the whirligigging top
a-spin. We didn’t need a better reason
than that to join the push
of generations. The aching want
for the future drove us on, then shoved
us back to the past. All the while, the meadow waited below.
Within the locket, it’s the image our hearts wore.

We had promised, we swore
and crossed our hearts. In that sun-
dappled wood, all faith was blind.
The little boat rolled through the straits
and inlets, intent, unswerving, toward home. No other reason
was necessary. Now here below
in the something ever-after, I’ve had at the top
of my thoughts a thought of love,
the shape it had before it turned to harm.
And what I’ve wanted
to do is return to the source, the first push
before the fulcrum’s shove.

The trail to the top
of the hill meandered. A lark hovered, shadowing the clover below,
and the hunter’s blind was in the end abandoned. Everything that seemed worth wanting
could slowly flower, like a weed, into harm. Still, the mind can straighten
its own path; the reason has a nature sworn
to truth. A final push is waiting; its patience is a synonym for love.
The king was an idol. There’s only the daylight glinting there beneath the sun.

They’re in the boat and the boat
is sinking. Because of discipline nothing
is possible but the voice of the captain, who
is otherwise missing and flushed of meaning.
They take events the way they are
in their own hands and drop the oars,
look for planks of wood, friendly fish,
the horns of otherworldly creatures
to grab onto. An empty keg has meaning here,
and two soldiers decide that this
is as good as anything for miles.
Another has a belt and he’s lashed it
with his arm around a piece of plastic,
some cloth attached and billowing
above it, and now the wind drags him
slowly away. The way a letter you always
wanted to write and did goes off unhurriedly
and naked into the sunset or raindrop
or whatever happens to be happening
on that particular day. Like someone waiting
for a rescue plane and so amazed when it comes by
that he skips a beat and just watches
it glide past. The calm birds overhead
give life an oblivious, un-glittery and painful quality
that can be usual for birds when one
really ponders them this far out.
Once I was collecting all the cans a fortress
had thrown out, quite a lot of cans, and they
bulged in my cargo hold like the belongings
of men who have seen something of the world
and decided to bring with them a bit too much.
Maybe it’s better to leave everything behind,
better wait for a miracle rather than go onward,
lips curled in a persistent snarl,
pen and paper so ink-spattered and mad
there’s really no order in the end
to the way the ink is falling over each
tiny shrapnel of itself. Like a vine
that has grown so tangled and over-wrought
there’s no gravity left to hold it stable,
no firm soil either, no bird swirling above the wreck,
hoping at least for a bit of fish
to suddenly rise; a bit of resurrected life
which would float, and drag the past
back towards the beginning.

When the bones of my arm were emptied I began
to hover, a man becoming his own kite.
Along the street I flew my arm above myself,
reached toward stars if night and stars
if day. I can imagine it appeared
 
that my arm was trying to pull me
free of something, something like drowning
but there was no water. I was trying
to say there are no secrets left.
I could have said, there are no secrets left,
 
but the idea of removing one bone at a time
and emptying it and putting it back
felt like a crime, a kind of burglary,
and breaking and entering would make
the point that we have no privacy
 
better than saying we have no privacy.
Every night a new bone and every night
I kissed the things I removed, an estuary
from my hips, violin from my clavicle,
all of which I hammered and bulldozed
until it fit under my tongue
 
so cameras couldn’t point the guns
of their eyes and computers couldn’t listen
to the words of my fingers and if secrets
can’t be secretly shared, flesh
is prison. Slowly I floated more,
floated better in that region
between ground and ghosts. I could see
 
the feet of the dead above me,
the commencement of night below.
The trick was to know when to stop, which
part of me I had to keep to keep
from disappearing, what the difference was
 
between refusal and suicide, between yes
and no. I’d like to believe there’s something
we have for each other that has nothing
to do with what we can give, the small
and rare gravity that surrounds each head,
the first muscle we choose to touch
 
when rubbing a back. Who invented
that, how you are unlike me? I don’t need
all the details of your crotch
to feel safe. But I must remain here
to live, and if whispering is required
 
it is better to shout. I settled
for one inch above the pavement, for the chance
to think of myself as a small balloon
in a small parade. The way it’s going,
the only way to live on this planet
 
will be to leave it. How silly.
Let them take all the notes they want.
I’m here to correct the mistakes in the file
I’ll never be shown. For instance,
these are not subversive thoughts
 
but the taste of my marrow and the most
dangerous words are the ones we never hear.

By the turn of the century
Talking about the money
Replaced talking about the sex,
 
Talking about one’s so-called
Religious life, and all that
Earlier yak about the psyche.
 
Talking about the money
Got down to it and captured
The hunger, the hope,
 
The love and the fear:
Let me hear your money talk,
Many sang.
 
Money was a good time
(What people want most is
Good times and insurance?)
 
And money picked up
The garbage the following
morning. (Someone’s
 
Got to do it and someone gets
Money to do it.) There was
Really nothing like talking
 
About the money if you wanted
To really get to know someone,
To get to know what animated,
 
What moved the American.
Do me. Do it to me, honey.
Do my money. Let’s get cynical:
 
Let me hear your money talk.

My father first threw me across water,
an infant, pinned to a javelin.  In the warrior
dream of the risen body, heaven is a precinct
  
of sweetmeats and dancing girls.  My heaven
was constant flight.  He threw me skyward,
so that I would never doubt the will’s fierce transit.
  
Fate was another kind of fate.  What I took to be
divine momentum—flung from his hand and sped
onward with the hawk’s guidance, turns out to be
  
merely a weapon’s trajectory.  Pity the weapon,
the missle locked unconsciously on doom—
launched and accelerating to its own destruction
  
in the name of the cruel illusions:
perfect human aim, god-given prophecy.


The sisters are wailing, quite beside themselves with something new.
The pale Christ, lanky as a long distance runner, seems half-amazed
at what he has done.  Sitting up, the awakened one sees the immobile
  
face of the woman he mounted like a maniac, his body erupting in fever,
in abcess, for want of her, and is indifferent.  He can hear murmurs,
jeers and coarse laughter on the roads and in the homes, the crush
  
of a slapped face, the unhinged bells, the dangerous, sullen gaps.
Suddenly visible are the closed faces of the doomers and the open faces
of the doomed, although he is in a dark room, his tongue black and stiff.
  
Fanatics who worship the sun sever their arms as offerings 
to help it rise; it rises, and the disinterred one, for a time, continues,
dancing by himself like a horse with its screaming, high-tossing head. 

That man in the field staring at the sky
without the excuse of a dog
or a rifle—there must be a reason
why I’ve put him there.
Only moments ago, he didn’t exist.
He might be claiming this field
as his own, centering himself in it
until confident he belongs.  Or
he could be dangerous, one of those
men who doesn’t know
why he talks to God.
I thought of making him a flamingo
standing alone on one pink leg,
a symbol of discordancy
between object and environment.
But I’ve grown so weary of inventions
that startle but don’t satisfy.
I think he must have come to grieve
a good friend’s death, and just wants
to stand there, numbly, quite sure
the sky he’s looking at is vacant.
But I see that he may be smiling—
his friend’s death was years ago—
and he might be out there to savor
the solitary elation of having discovered
what had eluded him until now.

A scent rather quietly loves 
the library Readers look up: a
life of paper inside the great
Life: scent of greenly ravished civilization -
dream of inspiration freed. When a 
book is lifted from horizon's steel
that mystery object spreads an oddness
each call number a timeling of
yellow math, its curve leftover from
epic. The mind has no periphery 
for meaning, the several phoenician, sailing
sideways through vowels of the dead.

My soul is a mind and a meander, a Mrs. Luxe.
Little Spartan boy, release the animal in your shirt!
It isn’t a wolf cub, it’s a puppy, soon
To be Lassie, and she’s needed
For the invasion of Norway, that disastrous offensive.
  
Her parachute opens.
A minute or so later,
Her paws touch delicately down
Onto the glacier, and instantly
The ice turns a radiant deep sky blue
Wherever she goes.Â  Peter Lawford
Is rescued and returns to England.
Lassie remains behind,
Changing every inch of the arctic earth into blue sky
Which is becoming my mind.
  
My soul has turned from now to then.
It’s all a luxury, this being alive.
Read me that woman’s poetry, I’m watching King Kong.
There’s an animal up my sleeve, and it’s killing me.

In the alleys below her heart,
a drain, as if inside there’s
a city, blood gathering
in a pool, a cistern.
  
When it overflows, first just
a drip, then a stream
hidden, the way spirits
hide inside trees and rocks,
  
there in that well, teacup
inside flesh, is a crouching thing,
how it claws when it’s flushed
from her, how each time
  
there’s a tug so strong, aching
sacrum and arch drawing
toward her thighs.
  
Then she’s a long root
of blood opening from below
as if the body, as if
the body, as if—no,
of course not—something tips
over inside her.

Those were
the two
 deepest
 byes
I ever
 heard
we practically
 barked.
Thanks for
the photograph
you sent,
one on
the phone.
I will
only say
mist for
 sweat
trees for
the limbs,
leaning at
a rest stop,
 wanting
to hold
 you
 from
here.  The
 magnificent
waste of
us: hot
 little
ship, plunging
to the
 bottom
of the
 sea. 

The candles are forgetting how
to light the holes in our bodies.
Still, they dine on thunder and hearts,
for soon they will do a quiet crime.
  
To light the holes in our bodies
satellites steal the script and burn it,
for soon they will do a quiet crime
and save that talk for morning’s first blush.
  
Satellites steal the script and burn it,
the way my clematis has to strangle something
and save that talk for morning’s first blush
to pay so much purple interest to the sky.
  
The way my clematis has to strangle something
when the house is happily numb, hoping not
to pay so much purple to the sky.
Only the evidence points to your innocence
  
when the house is happily numb, hoping not
all your alibis will feel like paper cuts.
Only the evidence points to your innocence,
and in the spirit of full disclosure, I must tell you
  
all your alibis will feel like paper cuts.
Half the fun is not knowing where that ocean came from,
and in the spirit of full disclosure, I must tell you
if you take the beach away, my ribs will follow.
  
Half the fun is not knowing where that ocean came from,
like the apostle who came in the rain,
if you take the beach away, my ribs will follow.
To be in love with my golden mouth,
  
like the apostle who came in the rain,
the candles are forgetting how
to be in love with my golden mouth.
Still they dine on thunder and hearts.

Peace comes after the war.
Not before—we didn’t know there was peace.
We weren’t sure war was coming, but it felt funny.
There was an urgency to have the good time had by all.
Peace.  The wreckage.  The new house from the broken beams.
The work.
 
It’s never forgotten, as the hammers go on from 7 to 7
An the burned toys picked out from the ashes.
The rest of the mess taken to the trash with gloves on.
And the good time had by all—
There in the mess—
Peace is not a time of rest, no.
I leave you peace, my peace I give you,
The say each week
When I go to meditate on the war, the waste, the thing.
And we are told to take the peace out into the world with us.
The mess I cleaned up, the hammers from 7 to 7, but it’s over.
Go on.
  
The hard times are over: let the bon temps roulez.
I wish it could be that way.
But no matter: Mardi Gras came and went and now it is Lent.
I went and buried the dead.
I ministered to the sick: he lay detoxing each afternoon till six.
I had lived on Easy Street, honey, don’t forget it.
It will never be the same for me again, don’t doubt it.
  
Now it is time to pull down the shades and work deep into the night.
Go on.
Peace be with you.  Don’t fight

My mind is not quiet.
I do not think of you dead.
Many who read
this do not know 
you. They know
someone else,
don’t want either
to think of someoneÂ 
else dead.
Of all the rain storms,
we are alive for this one.
As if you are a paint truck
spilled in summer.
Or a painting
where once there was
a window.

I rub my walls down.  You rub your walls down.
The old stains come clean.
You’re sore, I know.
If it burns, like a throat cooked by hot wind,
drink your water.
Rub the stain, rub the stain. 
Are you tired of this mess, your mess?
I am.  Here, sit down, look
out this window: the fern-green grass
cool as pillows.
The outside sky is blue as paint, blue oil.
The oak tree is brown construction paper.
But look, now there’s tar in the grass.
Go a little closer and my sky
just licked your cheek.  
I’m sorry, but you’ll have to clean that
up too.  Now my stain is your stain.
You clean for me.

We meet in this country.  Beneath the damp light
at the world-famous fair, where life is meaningful
  
and dreadful.  The conglomerates show off their
wares, which will help us when we’re sick of work
  
and heading for the train.  I hate to be alone.
The solitude of Brooklyn.  But outside, now framed
  
by the window, a couple.  They stare at one another
over pork chops and beer.  I call you on the telephone.
  
I call to hear your muffled voice.  "People aren’t
the be-all and end-all of one another’s lives," you say.
  
Between these tender hemispheres, in the space
of our gender, the divine reaches down like a hook.
  
Must it be such a hardship, then, to hoist ourselves
up to the conscious interior?  Are we so cleanly spoken,
  
here, that all has been said by two bodies, alone
in the dark, their brains electrified? Their tongues
  
 in one another’s mouths?


The father was a carrier
He had five buckets
How did he carry it all in those five buckets?
And the men on the ship.  They were all carriers,
heads & backs & shoulders—Lonely, father,
little brothers, I miss you.  So.  Heavy-laden. 

The hedge must have seemed as ever,
seeds and yew berries secreted beneath,
small edible matter only a bird’s eye could see,
  
mixed with the brown of shed needles and earth—
a safe quiet cave such as nature affords the meek,
entered low, on foot, the feathered head
alert to what it sought, bright eyes darting
everywhere but above, where net had been laid.
  
Then, at some moment mercifully unwitnessed,
an attempt to rise higher, to fly,
met by an all but invisible limit, beating wings
pinioned, deep instinct denied.  O panicky
thrashing and flutter, in daylight and air,
their freedom impossibly close, all about!
  
How many starved hours of struggle resumed
in fits of life’s irritation did it take
to seal and sew shut the berry-bright eyes
and untie the tiny wild knot of a heart?
I cannot know, discovering this wad
of junco-fluff, weightless and wordless
in its corner of netting deer cannot chew through
nor gravity-defying bird bones break.

The skull, when it’s not whistling
like a kettle, is stocking up
on unshelved tremors: we can only unfold
the map and search out A Storm
  
Is Coming.  Before that there’s shouting
OhLaLa in the convertible, scratchy music.
I too liked the volume turned up.
Her eyes closed, taking in
  
being taken care of:
a flash bulb went off inside her.
The light sizzled then went out.
Not only the detached private parts,
  
but word choices.  They were shot glasses
on escalators.  The mind is a fracas
with bristles: the tongue a series of pauses.
In reality, if you can imagine in reality,
  
we short out every couple of minutes.
I’m lost, are you?  I think of the sky as property.
And what I like about the primitive, exotic,
under-the-dress part, is just a sentence or two:
  
we had Milton in Sunday School: no need for Dante.

You write things down in your sleep
you can’t remember when you wake up,
casting off doubts like rowboats into low surf
receding toward another saltwater nowhere
on the way to leaving the poem behind.
You wonder if form could be contagious,
shaping the visible to the horizon
where the sky drowns in your blues,
your green unsettled waves scribble their signatures
on white sand comprising millions of crushed quartz
particles. Willets and black-headed laughing gulls
skim the white and wrinkled pages
for what waves left behind, the drowned out
names: polychaete worms, small clams, and snails.
  
If we were standing on the beach
to watch the Gulf roll out its jade
and turquiose distance, I’d put a flag there
for you: sea turtle, nurse shark fin, floating
log of drifwood bobbing, something
to break up the horizontal, break into
song that interrupts the rush and hiss of tides
on sand, water’s willingness to wander,
to return. Several schools of rays
fly underwater just off-shore,
mantas, perhaps, but much too small,
what are they teaching today? The wind
is a secret that tells itself, its heavy
vowel clusters mumbling afternoon.
  
We have come to the end of the body
and the body doesn’t end, terns and
brown pelicans break the surface concentration
to dive for small fish. Local bays and bayous
are almost swallowed up
in dioxin, sewage, run-off from the paper
factory and toxic seepage from assorted
Superfund sites. Perdido, Blackwater,
Texar and Grande still glister, what with the light
locked in its present tense (today casts off its doubts
like sand poured from white sneakers).
Gulls salvage whatever they can
find, pick at the remains of pronoun
and place, never look light in the eye.
  
We cannot get simpler colors (your eyes are blue
with flecks of green, or gray mingled with
blue), wouldn’t want that anyway.

Horse, master, boy—
How did God get
Back into you?
  
Bad dream, you
Collapse into me. Germ
Warfare flashback. Eel black
  
The eyes: an asylum window. Glass
And liquid as child’s final
Fever. And the city will burn.
  
Bad blood, come to me.
Sirens at dawn,
A metal wing burns in the desert.
  
Train ride at midnight, let us
Live there. Red empire
Of your talismanic mind,
  
Acropolis of underwater plants,
Ermine and honeyed lace.
Brave saint of nosebleeds,
  
Little brother, take me.
The world will surge,
And the moon
  
Pull its yellow ocean back.
Machine-gun sonata, we never
Signed up for this.
  
Stroke the bright piston
Of the machinery, fold your secret
Into me.
  
Each frame kills the one
Before it. Since
When did death
  
Arrive in a child’s
Horse-drawn carriage,
It’s eye a blink in the center of this?
  
My life was not
Wasted: you waited
For me.

The green brocade, the layers, like a wall of spring—Ophelia, leonine in
tub—Bizet a drape of echo on the tile—masculine, the roar, perhaps while
shaving, head thrown back—Kurt, Michael, Reed—closer, red, the gold, our
clothed bodies, cushions of support—Sebastian, Cleopatra, Howard, Tom—
a spell of foliage below, huge, engorged, enveloping, no summer—the tux,
the tie, the white shirt on the hanger—Richard—hunger for the shot glass,
for the blue pinot—the time this designates, its pages—grigio, bells, white
smoke, the crowd now visible if thin—the ever absent diminution of the
distances—the wall, the chairs, the carpeting—the visible, the newly
nameable—in our midst, in our mist—the teal, the burgundy, the bronze,
the fade to ochre, umber, flattening of foreground/background/memory
imagination—Bill, the unknown center of the room—echo chamber of the
shell, the hollow ‘round which hardness curves—not gone alone—the gone
concurrent blond events, the time of velvet hand to glove—as if an opera—
as if a song—the tuneless mirror, spill of paper, crushed and wretched stems,
the dust—winter a fact, as usual, behind the fall—and what comes after
night that is not morning.

I found out they’d been grinding chickens up behind my house.
  
Spent egg hens,
throwing them into the woodchipper live by the thousands
cheaper than the slaughterhouse.
  
What do you think I did when I found that out.
  
You may touch me now, I am tame.
  
The roses had
seemed to me like torches,
till the wind came and blew them away.
  
There’s no middle ground,
only things and the soul
  
at a vast unbridgeable distance from them,
which my friend JB once noted
before jumping—
  
 Stiffneck,
this is it, that lilac
floating along the black water—
  
The clouds were not lit, on either side.
I probably want what Moses wanted.

The moon stirred volume of ocean sighed
Coconut tanning-oil and frozen custard.

Birch lions and dragons rode the merry-go-round.

A splinter of the herringbone cedar boardwalk
Might be teased from your finger with a steel
Needle purged of germs by a match?s flame.

When the sliver was out they held it
Up to your eyes, with bits of your flesh or blood
Stuck to it.  Some doctors believe it helps
To see your tumor or gallbladder floating in a jar.

If Nana sewed a button on my shirt while I
Was wearing it, she made me chew a bit
Of the same cotton thread to keep the stitches
From piercing the precious tissues of my heart.

On the day of atonement she sat upstairs.

The shul was within the sound of the Atlantic.

Across the street, Our Lady Star of the Sea
With the rumored mutable crackers and wine
Swathed in its shadows.  Froth of Communion dresses.

Three round medallions filled the rainbow arc
Of our shul?s jewel-colored Palladian
Window three stories tall, with three images:

The eight-branched lamp; the double tablets of law;
The Star of David:—Study, Obedience and Pride?
Or Blessedness at Home, in Heaven and the World?

Eight and Two and Six inscrutable 
As the narcotic English translation my eye
Might swim to from the phonetic surf of Hebrew.

Meaning secreted itself in the urgent uncomprehended
Syllables the cantor sobbed,
In the eight miniature gilded minarets,
Terra cotta pilasters and three high double doors—

In the velvet and silver fittings
Of the Torah you kissed only be kissing the fringe
Of your tallis, then reaching to press
That fringe to the cloaked scroll.

It flirted and hid itself in names, Sol Tepper,
Manny Horn, Isador Moss.  Iossel, the ever-smiling ?simple?
Concentration-camp survivor  they treated like a child—
Grinning, but his dark round eyes like pictures
Of the starved, the mutilated, orphans deprived of touch.

The same men called to the bima to pray by secret
Desert-names: Reuven ben Nachman, Moshe ben Yakov,
Yisrael ben Avraham, in wingtip shoes and neckties.

And with Nana upstairs Sophie Gorcey, Molly Joffe,
Suzy Diamond looking down from the balcony.

Nylons, hat feathers, double breasted suits.
Prescribed times to rise or sit or when those recently
Bereaved were supposed to leave the building
Or remain, or enter again through the three doors
Framed by four iconic columns.

The church the synagogue the boardwalk all razed now,
Merry-go-round carted off: temporary as gestures,
Icons expendable, less enduring than names.

Made things like garments.  Means.  Conduits,
Like the dark vaulted cylindrical tunnel that led under
Ocean Avenue between the pool at Chelsea Baths
And the beach, where people descended from the bright
Stucco pavilions into the dark round mouth,
Then padded out onto the beach broiling in the sun:

Passageway of shadow from one blinding glare
Into a greater one, walkway invisible under the traffic,
Black damp burrow of the real, leading
From incomprehensible brightness to brightness.

Maybe, since you’re something like me,
you, too, would’ve nearly driven into oncoming traffic
for gawking at the clutch between the two men
on Broad Street, in front of the hospital,
which would not stop, each man’s face
so deeply buried in the other’s neck—these men
not, my guess, to be fucked with—squeezing through
that first, porous layer of the body into the heat beneath;
maybe you, too, would’ve nearly driven over three pedestrians as your head
swiveled to lock on their lock,
their burly fingers squeezing the air from the angels
on the backs of their denim jackets
which reminds you the million and one secrets exchanged
in nearly the last clasp between your father
and his brother, during which the hospital’s chatter and rattle
somehow fell silent in deference to the untranslatable
song between them, and just as that clasp endured through
what felt like the gradual lengthening of shadows and the emergence
of once cocooned things, and continues to this day, so, too,
did I float unaware of the 3000 lb machine
in my hands drifting through a stop light while I gawked
at their ceaseless cleave going deeper,
and deeper still, so that Broad Street from Fairmount
to the Parkway reeked of the honey-scented wind
pushed from the hummingbirds now hovering above these two men,
sweetening, somehow, the air until nectar,
yes, nectar gathered at the corners of my mouth like sun-colored spittle,
the steel vehicle now a lost memory
as I joined the fire-breasted birds in listening
to air exchanged between these two men, who are, themselves,
listening, forever, to the muscled contours of the other’s neck, all of us
still, and listening, as if we had nothing
to blow up, as if we had nothing to kill.

On the pot-holed road from the Port
Authority Terminal the Newark Airport bus
sighs up and down as if moguling.
In my experience, motion of this kind
while sitting in a bus oftern increases
the size of the penis.  It does now.
A mixed sign.  In certain operas
the desire for sex and the allure of death
seem to be present just before or just after
each other but occasionally simultaneously.
  
Consider the love life of the prostate.
During love-making this gland, which is,
as doctors like to say, the size of a walnut,
and has very few pleasure fibers in it
but a great many for pain, tranmits
the sensation of pain with growing intensity,
until at last, when our walnut can no longer bear it,
the duct opens and semen burts out and gives
shuddering relief or ecstatic joy, as you like.
  
Climbing the Pulaski Skyway on a faulty
pneumatic suspension, the bus gasps
and blows and develops a bucking rhythm
the lets me imagine what the fuck-
ing of buses could be like.  Minutes later
I find myself thinking the bus moves
like an antediluvian mammal
being shoved to its grave without first
having been fully persuaded its time is up.
Though not kept informed explicitly, the penis
instinctively senses this turn of thought, and shrinks. 

They were a hard and practical people,
and when they said
they were willing to serve me,
I took what they had to give:
bowls of rain,
prayer-husks filled with meat.

(Their firstborn, I.)

They cut my foreskin
when heat was a prisoner in the ground.
The trees stood naked
though the sun in Taurus rose.

When I chewed twigs for a change
of texture,
they said the scars
on the trees were fire-marks,
that buds were sorry
from smoke
and the far blood’s branching.

I listened to them
and grew: my hide, my legs,
the rhythm-and-rhythm
of an animal glimpsed at dusk.

(I was silent but not still.)

Wearing a wreath
of crocuses,
I walked the perimeter
because I liked
how the ground felt
under the soft pads of my feet.
Wet with the night’s rain,
it reminded me of my gift:
a silence that was ingrown,
particular.

Because they could do nothing
about the feeder flies,
the nettles that bit my side,
they did not like it
when I moved,

they who planted the seedlings,
the small hooded flowers
where I tried to sleep.

I received their permission
and their lies,
 and by guarding them,
by eating their brown bread,
I thought I would move beyond
the fact of flesh.

(Strength in my muscles, my legs.
The sting in my side
when I paced near the prickered fence.)

I kept my posture straight.
My mouth was wide and waiting.

Do you see?
I too had desire,
but as befits a fallen world
I could not survive
unless I calmed them
with my silence.

And so a childhood ended
and was buried:
quiet lion, latent lute,
their hands reaching to touch me.

The professor stabbed his chest with his hands curled like forks
before coughing up the question
that had dogged him since he first read Emerson:
Why am I "I"? We hunkered like musk ox
while his lecture drifted against us like snow.
If we could, we would have turned our backs into the wind.
  
I felt bad about his class’s being such a snoozefest, though peaceful too,
a quiet little interlude from everyone outside
rooting up the corpse of literature
for being too Caucasian. There was a simple answer
to my own question (how come no one loved me,
stomping on the pedals of my little bicycle):
  
I was insufferable. So too was Emerson I bet,
though I liked If the red slayer think he slays—
the professor drew a giant eyeball to depict the Oversoul.
Then he read a chapter from his own book:
 Naptime.
He didn’t care if our heads tipped forward on their stalks.
  
When spring came, he even threw us a picnic in his yard
where dogwood bloomed depsite a few last
dirty bergs of snow. He was a wounded animal
chased across the tundra by those wolves,
the post-modernists. At any moment
you expected to see blood come dripping through his clothes.
  
And I am I who never understood his question,
though he let me cllimb to take a seat
aboard the wooden scow he’d been building in the shade
of thirty-odd years. Somehow I rowed it
out of his yard, into my life—it’s all a mystery.
The work is hard because the eyeball’s heavy, riding in the bow.

Dry land,
quiet land
of night’s
 immensity.
  
(Wind in the olive groves.
wind in the Sierra.)
  
 Ancient
 land
of oil lamps
and grief.
 Land
of deep cisterns.
Land of death without eyes
and arrows.
  
(Wind on the roads.
Breeze in the poplar groves.)
  
Village
Upon a barren hill,
a Calvary.
Clear water
and century-old olive trees.
In the narrow streets,
men hidden under cloaks,
and on the towers
the spinning vanes.
 Forever
 spinning.
Oh, village lost
in the Andalucia of tears!
  
Dagger
The dagger
enters the heart
the way plowshares turn over
the wasteland.
  
 No.
Do not cut into me.
 No.
  
Like a ray of sun,
the dagger
ignites terrible
 hollows.
  
 No.
Do not cut into me.
 No.
  
Crossroads
East wind,
a street lamp
and a dagger
in the heart.
The street
quivers like
tightly pulled
 string,
like a huge, buzzing
 horsefly.
 Everywhere,
I see a dagger
in the heart.
  
Ay!
The cry leaves shadows of cypress
upon the wind.
  
(Leave me here, in this field,
 weeping.)
  
The whole world’s broken.
Only silence remains.
  
(Leave me here, in this field,
 weeping.)
  
The darkened horizon’s
bitten by bonfires.
  
(I’ve told you already to leave me
here, in this field,
 weeping.)
  
Surprise
He lay dead in the street
with a dagger in his chest.
Nobody knew who he was.
How the streep lamp flickered!
Mother of god,
how the street lamp
faintly flickered!
It was dawn. Nobody
could look up, wide-eyed,
into the glare.
And he lay dead in the street
with a dagger in his chest,
and nobody knew who he was.
  
Solea
Wearing black mantillas,
she thinks the world is tiny
and the heart immense.
  
Wearing black mantillas.
  
She thinks that tender sighs
and cries disappear
into currents of wind.
  
Wearing black mantillas.
  
The door was left open,
and at dawn the entire sky
emptied onto her balcony.
  
Ay, yayayayay,
wearing black mantillas!
  
Cave
From the cave
come endless sobbings.
  
 (Purple
over red.)
  
The gypsy
calls forth the distance.
  
(Tall towers
and mysterious men.)
  
In an unsteady voice
his eyes wander.
  
 (Black
over red.)
  
And the white-washed cave
trembles in gold.
  
 (White
over red.)
  
Encounter
For you and I
aren’t ready
to find each other.
You…as you well know.
I loved her so much!
Follow the narrowest path.
I have
 holes
in my hands
from the nails.
Can’t you see how
I’m bleeding to death?
Don’t look back,
go slowly,
and pray as I do
to San Cayetano
for you and I
aren’t ready
to find each other.
  
Dawn
Bells of Cordoba
in the early morning.
Bells of Granada
at dawn.
You are felt by all the girls
who weep to the tender,
weeping Solea.
The girls
of upper Andalucia,
and of lower.
You girls of Spain,
with tiny feet
and trembling skirts,
who’ve filled the crossroads
with crosses.
Oh, bells of Cordoba
in the early morning,
and, oh, bells of Granada
at dawn!

Hurry, for the horses are galloping along the road.
Our death is being saddled now.  They are tightening the cinch.
Just keep shouting, "My heart is never bitter!"
  
Come, only a moment is left, the sun is touching
The sea at Point Lobos; those waves that Jeffers knew
Will soon wear the Lincolnish coats of night!
  
You’ve waited so long for me.  And where was I?
Whatever pleases the greedy soul is like a drop
Of burning oil to the heart.  What shall we do?
  
While they saddle the horses, just keep shouting,
"My grief is a horse; I am the missing rider!"
The grief of absence is the only bread I eat.
  
Whatever pleases the heart is like a drop of burning
Oil to the greedy soul, which can’t bear one moment
When men and women are tender with each other.
  
You know the writer of this poem has a thin
Hold on the reins, and is about to fall off.
Hold on.  The horses are galloping toward the night.

I remember a Harvard student
who couldn’t admit to himself
that he was gay,
suddenly one day
telling everyone
he was a lampshade.
He was so convinced
he tried to stick his fingers
into wall sockets.
The ambulance squad
wrapped him in a straight jacket
and drove him away.
  
Somewhere he may be lighting
someone’s darkness—
 whatever—
More likely,
he is still a lampshade,
perhaps pressed tight
upon a hot bulb,
perhaps accordian pleated—
as they used to be—
in the opulent fifties
after the Second World War,
when factories turned
back to confetti
and women took off
their overalls.
  
Poor boy
he only wanted
to love some man—
who knows who?
  
And speaking of real sin,
we had just dropped
that bomb on Japan
and radiation
was two miles high—
just dust in the blue.

The calendar calls.
  
Without you
the seasons cannot change.
  
We will remain forever ramshackle,
forever pastoral even in the city,
forever eggs,
forever afternoon,
forever murderous sweet nothings
of Scott Peterson and Amber Frey,
forever this humid humanity,
forever expressionless expressions
of love and disgust and distrust.
  
Dear days going and gone by—
  
We do not even mind so much
that you are numbered.
  
Like butter the sun melts
on your milky fleece.
  
Carpets flower beneath your hooves. 

You don’t want me to tell you about death,
but I’m going to tell you anyway:
it smells bad. It gets into your nostrils
and just sits there, stinking up everything.
It won’t go away.  Death creeps up on you
when you’re least expecting it, even when
you can see it coming a mile away,
and rips your heart out through your throat and leaves
an empty place in your life you can’t fill
with memories or exercise or wads
of sterile gauze, and walks away laughing.
Or maybe just slips out under the door
and floats away like mist dissipating
before sunlight on an autumn morning.
Death minds its own business and everyone
else’s, too.  Death does a little jig,
then lobs a grenade into your kitchen,
but it’s only a dud.  What a joker,
you think, just before it explodes.  Death feels
sorry for nothing and no one.  Death feels
nothing at all. Death drives an SUV
with a husband and two kids in Gladwyne,
loses control, crosses the median
plows head-on into everyone sooner
or later, takes out a mortgage and then
skips town without paying a penny back.
Death takes a holiday, but not today.
Not tomorrow, either.  Maybe next week,
but don’t bank on it.  My mother-in-law
died twenty five years ago, but my wife
still cries out in her sleep for her mommy.
Sometimes my wife isn’t even asleep.


when elizabeth bishop painted
INTERIOR WITH EXTENSION CORD
Â she must have realized in some untoward
unconscious fashion or semiconsciousness
that i who finally came to read her poems with
excitement when i finally read them as a sister
writer instead of a member of some intelligentsia
if that is the word for it—when i finally read them
then a few days later was not in any way heading
to maryland for my second sober anniversary without
her white covered sunburst book of collected poems
on my lap under my arm in my hands under my awkward
pen as it wrote exictedly some lines besides hers or in
the margins or the white spaces of the page=dreams
—she must have realized that years later a reader/fan/
writer in his/her own rite would look to enter this
interior from the suggested door from the mountain
heaping flower side door to look up once in the interior
to see the extension cord form that vantage point as
a spider web of sorts not that she painted it at all that way
but it looks like the beginning of something alligned
partly with the wall-meets-ceiling line and the slight
"hooks": visible holding it in place to wall and ceiling
looks like a day to start something or keep starting something
not to end something like a writer’s life even when he/she
feels the invited or uninvited call of the so called end

Poor, dear, innocent Nuns who have suffered in my jokes—
I’m sorry. Sorry that I have subjected you
to seatless bicycles, and frozen orgasms from men with candy.
I apologize for the holy water gargles and the lewd questions
from Saint Peter. I know that you are good and earnest people,
people who teach school and do good nunly things,
like praying and feeding the poor.  I know that after Vatican II
you do not always wear wimples or habits, and that my
stereotypical depictions of you are unkind and unfair.  So, in closing,
about that time I made you walk through the revolving door
with a spear through your head, I’m sorry.  That was just wrong.

Today I am afraid of ghosts, the things
I searched for in you, sang of you.
Shining hazard, roundabout,
piece of myself you’ve never seen: never
your somewhat puzzled self, combing out
your westering hair, shaking your head
at something you’ve just read.
(Days and nights I spent as
contradiction, tattered flag
which now goes by your name.)
I look back or don’t look back,
I can’t remember now
how I will write it down, or come
to think such words were mine.
The poems that ratified your loss
would have been self portraits
stripped of all defense. (There you are
pinned to the lyric distance, small
point of reference I call love.) I’d stare
into your eyes, fall somewhere
in between, while you
faded further into someone else’s
underworld, a flickering affliction
the color of a muse.

the nurses on the cancer ward call it
because, like acid, if it spills
from the needle onto skin, the patient
has to have a skin graft.  Red devil
for how it singes the inside of
the veins, causes the hair to fall
out and the nails of the hands and feet
to lift from their beds, to shrivel
or bunch like defective armor.
  
Now the test reveals the heart
pumps 13% less efficiently.
Never mind.  Your heart
was a superheart anyway.
Now it’s normal.  Join
the club.  Get tired.  Learn to nap.
Watch the joggers loping uphill
as if they were underwater, as if
they had something to teach you
about the past, how sweet
and useless it was, taking the stairs
two at a time.  They still
call you hummingbird.
Sooner or later you’ll be flying
on your back to prove
you’ve got at least
one trick left.

What I can tell you is that he is my neighbor.
I can tell you we live next to each other in separated worlds.
  
He stays inside behind shut blinds.
His yard is a mess.  He puts his garbage out at night.
  
His wife keeps to herself, and she looks up only at distance.
Their child plays in the street near the other children, but
        none of the children play games together.
  
Sometimes, my cousin refuses to visit, or when he comes he refuses to stay,
        because he remembers the beatings and the prods to his balls.
  
My brother is convinced my neighbor is responsible this happened.
My sister shakes even at the thought this thing has happened.
  
My neighbor is losing weight; he is already a small man.
His house needs painting, and the leaves from the tree are choking his drains.
  
I am thinking of getting two dogs, and I wonder what my neighbor will think.
I am thinking of replacing the fence.
I am thinking of raising my attic, bring light in from the sky.
What will my neighbor think?
  
What will happen if there is an earthquake, shaking us out of our houses
        into the street?  Will it be necessary to speak to my neighbor?
  
Will I ask him about my cousin?
Will I mention the leaves from the tree?
Will I ask him how he raises his child,
  
        whether he and his family need candles?

A jackal among hedgehogs.  At the meeting,
N. looked around, not sure why him,
  
why he was forced to occupy a room
with these almost-but-not-quite paragons
  
of beauty, all magnificently groomed,
but whacked in a way he knew he was not.
  
And N. knew their grooming was the artifice
of grooming, the way some animals lick their paws clean
  
after stepping in shit.  But they visually appealed
and he didn’t mind looking at them,
  
one in particular, the more-and-better
of her elongated neck, the kind men sculpt statues
  
to immortalize, in the row before him.
When her neck moved, the woman’s shirt moved,
  
lifted to show the black line of a G-string
and the tip of an angel tattoo.  N. liked the way
  
the wing’s veins etched low on the woman’s hip,
the dark lines that arced in and out of view.
  
He liked imagining the tattoo’s complexity,
the pain it must have caused her,
  
and began thinking of ways he’d follow the neck,
from curve to hip, cast the angel earthward
  
before the night was through.  Then, N. got distracted
by the pristine condition of his own hands,
  
the length and width of his delicate fingers.
He thought of how the woman
  
would notice his hands first, the way all women did,
and how she’d be unable to stop herself
  
from thinking about what those fingers
would feel like inside her, which would force her
  
to shift in her seat, which would raise her shirt,
expose the G-string, and play in N.’s mind
  
like the opening of a sonata, which in turn would
thunderbolt down his torso to the back of his knees,
  
and, for a second, feel something like shame.
It passed.  The meeting broke.  The woman
  
stood and turned.  He was already thinking
of the beautiful and various ways he could leave her.

His eyes laughed with sin
His face streamed with the light of heaven
At the entrance to his soul his lips were silent
But his desire danced like a flame without refuge
  
Self-conscious and full of longing
With a look that had the colors of drunkenness
I looked into his eyes and he said:
From love you must gather the ripened fruit
  
In the mysterious shelter of the night
A shadow over a shadow bent
A breath on cheeks trembled
A kiss lit a flame between lips 

Here’s a turnip from the garden
near the brook, or, to be accurate,
  
two tomatoes from the market.
I’m confused by the correspondence
  
of their forms. I believe physicians
have a name for the condition.
  
Not mine. She shows me drawings
of spiders and asks, Are these sketches
 

the inspiration for the webs
under your eyes or are your eyes
 

the source for all the silk in China?
Well, yes and no. What they show
  
is wayward—a recipe that frees
gorse from gorp. Today, bored
  
of five digits on one hand
and incriminating fingerprints
  
on the left, I decide to dumb down
the skyline’s blocks of gutless planes.
  
I wish to embue each impotent
edifice with the shrapnel
  
of emoting that comes from bombings
or pilgrimages to a seaside chapel.
  
Each time I end up whaling.
Today’s practitionerrs use
  
computers to deadeye a pod
a thousand miles away. In turn,
  
the church owes a great deal
to the sway of baleen rain-chutes
  
over their great roofs in the guise
of extrapolative bull’s balls.
  
To harpoon with sonar and TNT
one must be one with occasion
  
and far more than, simply, a bald
head bowed into the immediacy
  
of a doodle. My doctor believes
in a world like a waiting room
  
whose magazines are decades
out of date and the receptionist
  
isn’t sure that your HMO is
on her list and yet in the midst
  
of that slog and gloom mending
breeds between two humans
  
in an utterly inapt manner—
like a hand of one-man checkers.
  
To transmit such hokum into
action demands occlusion
  
or pillarization as well
as occasion, or, in my case
  
a special trek to a chapel
in Houston and a night at sea,
  
irrelevant to design, praying
to be deep-sixed by sea monsters.
  
I earned it. But I can breathe under-
water so don’t bubble for me.
  
Instead, invest in angles, develop
friendships and associations with
  
a mob of chic nouns. One of us
deserves to come into view
  
from the blend and provide for
the odd profiles. I choose you.

If it isn’t the birds
covered with ashes,
if it isn’t the cries beating on the windows of the wedding,
it must be the delicate creatures of air
that pour out new blood in the unending night.
But no, it isn’t the birds
because the birds are ready to be oxen;
they can be white rocks with the aid of the moon
and are always wounded youths before
the judges raise the sheet.
  
Everyone understands the grief that comes with death
but true grief is not present in the spirit.
It isn’t in the air or in our lives
or in these terraces full of smoke.
True grief that keeps things awake
is a small infinite burn
in the innocent eyes of other systems.
  
An abandoned suit weighs so much on the shoulders
that many times the sky gathers them in rugged herds.
And the women who die in childbirth know in their final hour
that every rumor will be stone and every footprint pulse.
We ignore that thought has outlying boroughs
where philosopher is devoured by Chinamen and caterpillars.
And some idiot children have found in the kitchen
some swallows on crutches
that knew how to say the word love.
  
No, it isn’t the birds.
It isn’t a bird that expresses the clouded pond-like fever
or the longing for murder that oppresses us each minute
or the metalic suicidal rumor that gives breath to each dawn.
It’s a capsule of air where the whole world hurts us,
it’s a small living space to the crazy unison of light,
it’s an undefinable scale where clouds and roses forget
the Chinese clamor that bustles on the docks of blood.
Many times I’ve lost myself
in order to search for the burn that keeps things awake
and I’ve only found sailors leaning over the railing
and small creatures of the sky buried in the snow.
But real grief was in other plazas
where chrystallized fish agonized inside the tree trunks;
plazas of a strange sky for the ancient untouched statues
and for the tender intimacies of volcanoes.
  
There’s no grief in my voice. Only my teeth exist,
teeth that go silent in the isolation of black satin.
There’s no grief in my voice. Here only the earth exists,
the earth with the doors of forever
that lead to the shame of fruit.

At night he comes in my dreams, pleading,
tells me it’s not too late, that I can adopt,
that I’m hurting him, that if i don’t,
the line ends, that his life will have been
for nothing. I ask why I’m not enough,
and he sighs, looks at me pained.  I say
he’s being melodramatic, pull the covers
up over my head, ask him to go, but then
all the fathers are in my room, the long line
stretching backwards, grandpa before the
stroke, great grandfathers I’d never seen,
and they all go after my Dad, tell him that
it’s his fault, that he raised a selfish child,
and he’s crying—I’ve never seen him cry—
and I say, leave him alone, but I know
I can’t comfort him, that I could never comfort
him, and that they’re right: I am lazy
and selfish and I am nursing old wounds.
I ask them to leave him alone again, but
really it’s just a ploy—guilt, one more of their
patrilineal tricks.  I ask them all to leave now,
to take their united front and go—I try again
to explain: It’s that I want to die alone.

I PROVIDE FOR YOU, BOY CHILD, LIKE GOD
and like God, I will cast you out.
  
Your eyes blue as a drowned thing.
  
Your harshest lesson:
you are no part of me. 
  
Learning that
will cost you ages in which
your eyes will take on the human color: grief.
  
Coming to words won’t even help you
name you suffering.
  
You will embrace
false idols.
  
Yet those women can let you
back in that primal crawl space
no more than I can.

yes I went to the ocean
because I wanted to live expansively slopping
over recklessly
unheeding every warning I gave myself

take me I said to the ocean

do me up like the comics in lurid
golds and greens above the horizon clouds
big as boulders seemed about to topple ocean

I have not come to hear the tiny smack a snow-
flake makes touching down I have
come for the fizzy the bubbly the foam
my morning cappuccino drifting in

to lick you up to keep spooning miles of creamy
swirls unswirling who knows what sweet
new ideas trapped still frothing

call me extravagance call me lolling about

to loiter at the edge of amplitude why not

look how the ocean pushes up against me
its nakedness oiled and slathered how it showers
me in rhinestones and glitz

tomorrow it may come rolling in milks
and ermines three crones crooning

oh lambent umpires of the wily wastes should love
be given its own tense unfettered
by the pasts and futures

to found or to founder says the ocean

succeed or surcease cry the crones love is
the antidote to its own poisons

hwaet I say to the ocean chasing after it hwaet

does the ocean say that is one way to begin

does it cry tie yourself to the mast or
master your cry rage sing

the rage of or sing what is all the rage

oh those ragas those regal rags raging

A cell phone is a kind of clock.  You don’t use it to check time. Though
of course you can.  You use it to check that you exist.  On the porch—am I
still here?  In the driveway—am I here?Â  In the car—what about now, am I
here?  At the intersection—oh golly strangers everywhere—buses—trucks—
mama I’m turning keep talking for god’s sake yeah. You pat yourself down
more efficiently than any arresting cop.
  
A cell phone is a mobile bed.  A security blanket.  Saran wrap for the Reichstag
of your head.
  
Cell phones are a new dimension.  They have revolutionized the concepts
of out & in.  You’re never really out.  Unless you’re comatose.  And when
you’re in, you’re often out.  You can be in your car, perched on your honey’s
knee, virtually.  Or sullen on the couch, staring at your buzzing phone.  Are
you "in" or "out"?  Impossible to tell.  A cell phone offers many inexplicables,
always in quotation marks. 
  
A cell phone is a motor. You plug your head in & before you know it you
have exchanged one set of familiar surroundings for another. A cell phone
is a stun gun of the in between while simultaneously allowing no other state.

Beauty is sexuality, and sexuality
is the fertility of the earth and the fertility
Of the earth is economics. Though he is no recommendation
For poets on the subject of finance,
I thought of him in the thick heat
Of the Bangkok night. Not more than fourteen, she saunters up to you
Outside the Shangri-la Hotel
And says, in plausible English,
"How about a party, big guy?"
  
Here is more or less how it works:
The World Bank arranges the credit and the dam
Floods three hundred villages, and the villagers find their way
To the city where their daughters melt into the teeming streets,
And the dam’s great turbine, beautifully tooled
In Lund or Dresden or Detriot, financed
by Lazard Freres in Paris or the Morgan Bank in New York,
enabled by judicious gifts from Bechtel of San Fransisco
or Halliburton in Houston to the local political elite,
Spun by the force of rushing water,
Have become hives of shimmering silver
And, down river, they throw that bluish throb of light
Across her cheekbones and her lovely skin.

The attic fan rattles quietly in its perfect tin house—as seemingly ceaseless
as the body’s unquiet engine.  Today something’s gone awry: the drone,
usually poised, a silent arpeggio, has become a disinterested scream.
This is the third heat wave of July. Again the fire department
sounds a citywide alarm & then police cars wail. Rome is burning!
But Rome is not burning.  Instead I am reading, in a shrill hum,
about Marcus Aurelius—because this is what I do on days too hot
to move—the heads of the red geraniums steaming in their planters—
too hot to imagine that we might send up our lives in flames.
The mind is more than a simple container, the junk drawer
behind the stove.  My thoughts clang like pennies in the dryer.
O, my racket—ice against the blender’s wall of glass.  The Eternal City,
Brodsky writes, is like a gigantic old brain, one that’s grown
a little weary of the world.  And what have we here?  Tarnished keys.
A chipped teardrop from some dining room’s chandelier. The trick
must be to love both the blade & the air it shatters.  A flock of birds
meets the airplane’s roaring turbines.  We pass the stuff from which
we’re made—look, a single pocked marble & an exhausted emery board—
through our own propellors.  The phone rings, but I don’t answer
though I’ve been expecting it.  It stops, then rings again. Still—
I don’t pick up.  Loneliness, our one defendable empire.  Aurelius, too,
loved metaphors: the inland lake on the island Aenaria; in that lake,
there is another island, it, too, inhabited.  O, my acrobats, in the dark
capital of nested boxes, be with me always, secure & tumbling.

My friends, the worriers, make themselves miserable,
I suppose, in preparation for the misery to come.
They must be practicing for the time lightning will destroy
their houses, or for when their spouses die
on that famous fog-plagued strip of road. Bird flu
and if their hotel room will be too close to the ice machine
often begin to live side by side in their minds.
They can’t help it, they say, these servants of catastrophe,
often adding that I seem to suffer from underworry,
which causes them to worry for and about me the more.
And so, since worry always trumps the absence of worry,
to live with them is to live on their terms. Don’t worry
I’ve learned not to say, which is other-planetary language
to them, cold, unsympathetic, the language of someone
whole wouldn’t help them build a bomb shelter
after they’d seen the end of the world in a dream.
Try to be reasonable, is the button that triggers the bomb.
I try to love them for their other qualities,
like being right about most other things, or how good
they are in the kitchen or the workplace or the bed.
But if not for my sake, then for their own, shouldn’t
they worry less, or at least privately? Every once in a while
shouldn’t they say, Forgive me my worries?
But a semi is always running a stop sign, one of the big
hemlocks topples in a storm. Then they point to the world
news. What’s wrong with you, they want to know.
Don’t you know what’s out there? A failure of imagination,
they say. A man who’s a clear danger to himself.

Smooth stones have always appealed to me.
River stones, I guess they’re called,
though the best ones come from ocean shoreline
where cliffs are crumbling and tides are rising
and falling
and perfecting what they have broken.
In Maine, for instance,
there are beaches of big smooth stones—
the stones are piled deep
like those plastic balls in a kids’ carnival attraction.
And each night, and each morning,
in comes the weight of the water,
the weight of the ocean,
under which the stones turn on one another
until they are smooth,
until they demonstrate submission to a kind of rule—
we might call it the rule
of the weight of what is thrown.
The stones are smooth like eggs, sometimes,
or like a palette;
whatever shape they are,
they are evidence of the rule,
evidence of the always diminishing shape of origin.
This is what we mean by decorative.

I say like an egg, but what a strange egg.
Think of a creature of bone—entirely of bone.
Such creatures are not born;
such creatures are made.
I suppose it’s appealing to suggest that something other
than human artifice could be a maker.
That is, it’s satisfying to think
that the weight of the ocean
and the weight of meaning
could be in some way connected.
Perhaps we can’t help but to explore that fantasy.

A smooth stone, like a word,
is artificially refined.
Pick it out of its bed
and take it up into your grasp
and it is strange.
Why is it strange?
It is strange because it is so telling—
because, like a corpse, it so plainly confronts us
with its nonsensical independence.
How could the earth be a heap of smooth stones?
How could speech be a heap of words?
But unlike a corpse, it’s appealing
to take a smooth stone to hand.
A smooth stone is a weapon, and,
assuming it’s the right size, an attractive weapon.
It’s a weapon, moreover, that promises a great event.
The event is great because it alludes to
and calls for a certain talent,
a certain potential in its thrower.

A language, at any given moment, is so many words.
It’s one beach, let’s say, along a world-ocean.
I think of the way they named the portions of beach
on D-Day: Juno, Sword, Omaha, Utah, Gold.
Expand that map and you can picture
all the earth’s language-beaches.
Some are so close to one another that they overlap—
others are quite far apart.
No matter how far apart, however,
their differences are superficial.
Each beach is smooth stones,
and the stones have not been born—
they have been made.
Not made like a bicycle, mind you—
not made intentionally—
but made by weight,
made by a great thrown force,
thrown by No One, really,
for who-knows-what reason.
Perhaps this is why, when someone hurls words at us
like they are his own,
like the weight of the words is his own weight,
we are so mistrustful, so appalled.

Only the voice of No One
is really moving.

Hey, enemy.  I swear.
Who gave you leave to go so absent,
just when I was starting to enjoy the ride?
  
I just noticed: it’s red and swollen around your ribcage
as if it contained a thing and the thing got wrenched.
A mess.  Your tented head, full of space.
  
We were cadets on either side of the trench.
We were having some action
and then you went missing in it.
So you missed all the action.
I’m acting out, acting it out so you won’t again. 
  
You wanted a war, and I’m the prisoner.
Take me.  This could go on for months
with blindfolds, metal cots, drops of water
and the Geneva convention over us in the cold.
  
Or you and I could get into spanking.
I mean, really get into it. Shock the world.
Get married in a civil ceremony. Lose ourselves.
Find our names later on some stone slab in Arlington.
  
You see, we have lots of options, amigo.
Amerigo.  Not just this one,
wherein once again you hold the gun
and I pull the pin from this fine drab hive.

When I signed for her ashes

I received her, as once
    she received me
into her lyric hold
    and let me ride anchor there,
smaller than the letter alif.

They gave her into my hands,
    seven pounds, two ounces,
as once they had given     
    me into her hands.

I set her on the hearth shrine,
    as she set me once a place at her table,
among her other needy charities.

After nine months I scattered her
    back to that cold, delphine Atlantic of hers,
to tidal squalls that rip 
    and sigh their salt across the rocks,

as once she let me fall

unready 
    onto this world’s 
gasping, shouting, love-stained shore.

I rode my bicycle through Bellingham
and all the poets were fascists
and my hair was pink
and I thought, this is not New York,
there are no Puerto Ricans.
  
I screamed,
Where are all the Puerto Ricans? 
  
It was a sccene out of Fellini
but there was an absence of Italian women
  
so I hit the town square
while the rain kept on in sheets
circled it and sang
and everyone was white;
  
Ah christ, I screamed,
Where are they? 
  
Then pedaled my green Schwinn
through hailstorms
and the foothills of Mt. Baker,
sped up and down the coast,
fought off grenade wielding wild salmon
in search of Pedro,
  
a kid I knew once
who could graffiti an elevator door in thirty seconds
  
then slip outside till midnight
while his hairless chest burned fire-house red
like some ancient Aztecan God
  
Oh, God, I thought
where are you
  
my brown-skinned compadre
and the flipped fingered hand slap we invented
in a schoolyard daze,
two kids in the Columbus Avenue filth?
  
Where are you now, Pedro Gonzalez?
Stand up, I can’t find you.

Some men carry you to bed with your boots on.
Some men say your name like a verbal tic.
Some men slap on an emotional surcharge for every erotic encounter.
Some men are slightly mentally ill, and thinking of joining a gym.
Some men have moved on and can’t be seduced, even in the dream bars you meet them in.
Some men who were younger are now the age you were then.
Some men aren’t content with mere breakage, they’ve got to burn you to the ground.
Some men you’ve reduced to ashes are finally dusting themselves off.
Some men are made of fiberglass.
Some men have deep holes drilled in by war, you can’t fill them.
Some men are delicate and torn.
Some men will steal your bracelet if you let them spend the night.
Some men will want to fuck your poems, and instead they find you.
Some men will say, "I’d like to see how you look when you come," and then hail a cab.
Some men are a list of ingredients with no recipe.
Some men never see you.
Some men will blindfold you during sex, then secretly put on heels.
Some men will try on your black fishnet stockings in a hotel in Rome, or Saran Wrap you
 to a bedpost in New Orleans.
Some of these men will be worth trying to keep.
Some men will write smugly condescending reviews of you work, making you remember
these lines by Frank O’hara:
I cannot possibly think of you/other than you: the assassin/of my orchards.
Some men, let’s face it, really are too small.
Some men are too large, but it’s not usually a deal breaker.
Some men don’t have one at all.
Some men will slap you in a way you’ll like.
Some men will want to crawl inside you to die.
Some men never clean up the matter.
Some men hand you their hearts like leaflets
and some men’s hearts seem to circle forever: you catch sight of them on clear nights,
bright dots among the stars, and wait for their orbits to decay, for them to fall to earth.

They struggle like men trying to be proud
before the sea.  From a distance,
it’s hard to tell if they are soulless,
or if something huddles up inside
like a hutch of rabbits; and up close,
it’s painful how their posture
will not please them or pull them
far enough from itch to matter.
  
On a middle ground, though —a raise
that neither praises nor degrades them
—we can see that they were born
content (maybe in a caul of darkness,
a sharp nest of shapelessness) not knowing
who they were or what their danger is.
  
Some may accuse them of morbidity,
of waiting for the ambulance to form
from the wind’s high pitch through dunes.
But their job, if it can be named, is reminding
us we each grew up in one sort of countryside,
among decompisition and the high grasses:
  
We are, all of us, a product of our own
pre-industry, a tool-less time
when voices weren’t heard rasping behind
air, and our own hands filled our gloves.
We each saw as individuals the fox steal
onto the trail.  We memorized that
exact topography, the one we thought
we’d come back to in years to come:
the trail cutting clear through the acreage
and into farms abutting like dialects;
soil slightly different, figures rearranged.

If I could see a still life,
I would see it changing.
  
She is more fluid than I
and calls to me.
(We are different objects now.)
  
It is the only thing
happening—this moment:
so small the circle of her curving.
  
With a terror
I let those
bits and pieces go
(the trivial)
  
to flow into the image
to burn
  
into another world
where I am not known.
  
In the night, where I am,
I don’t need to be a figure.

There are people who do not see a broken playground swing

as a symbol of ruined childhood

 

and there are people who don’t interpret the behavior

of a fly in a motel room as a mocking representation of their thought

process.

 

There are people who don’t walk past an empty swimming pool

and think about past pleasures irrecoverable

 

and then stand there blocking the sidewalk for other pedestrians.

I have read about a town somewhere in California where human beings

 

do not send their tuberous feeder roots

deep into the potting soil of others’ emotional lives

 

as if they were greedy six-year-olds

sucking the last half-inch of milkshake up through a noisy straw;

 

and other persons in the Midwest who can kiss without

unpacking the imperialist baggage of heterosexuality.

 

Do you see that creamy, lemon-yellow moon?

There are some people, unlike me and you

 

who do not yearn after love or fame or quantities of money as

unattainable as that moon;

 

Thus, they do not later

have to waste more time

defaming the object of their former ardor.

 

Or consequently run and crucify themselves

in some solitary midnight Starbucks Golgotha.

 

I have news for you:

there are people who get up in the morning and cross a room

 

and open a window to let the sweet breeze in

and let it touch them all over their faces and bodies.

There are things you can’t tell
a child — they’d sit too heavily
upon him, like the crowns
of young royalty:
Tutankhamen holding up
that twelve pound crust
of gold and emeralds
on his slender neck.
  
So I gaze at my boy
only when he’s sleeping,
when the torrent
won’t sweep him off
the cliff, when the beam
won’t scroch his retina.
  
He works out now,
lifting cold black
barbells, his muscles rising
like good bread.
  
Think of every great thing:
rush of grain
through the elevator shaft,
the crush of water
fathoms down, glaciers
calving, the surge and weight
of tectonic plates. I shut
the door on my love.
Just a faint glow seeping
under the crack.

 2.
When Morris Imposternak throws his round shield
Down during, say, the battle of Phillipi or something
  
Who knows what poems, what true propositions
Will rise out of the sticky, fragrant loam?
  
If he were a monist philosopher,
His principle would monism,
  
But it’s hard to believe your own thoughts
And phenomena can be so distracting…
  
And books can be so disheartening…
And anything can be just so anything:
  
Thus Russell developed his theory of types to get rid of the Village Barber
 Paradox,
But who cares about the theory of types?  What’s really interesting is the
Village Barber Paradox!
  
Or take the phenomenon of love:
He felt such tenderness toward you,
  
That writing "tenderness" I sigh
"Alas, poor Morris!"
  
Yet, since no one from the scientific community has ever explained love
 to everyone’s satisfaction
Scientists fall in love or do not fall in love
  
Without any of them really knowing when they are in love or not,
Whether they are in love or not.
  
This is true.  It is also true
That where there’s tenderness, there’s suffering:
  
Hence when we say that an elbow is tender,
It means we have a booboo,
  
And money, announcing itself as "legal tender,"
Causes suffering, but in such a way as to absolve the beneficiary thereof
 from responsibility therefor.
  
Look at the sea!  Don’t you think that the sea too suffers
When it pulls up its skirt at low tide
  
And shows the varicose veins, the ingrown hairs, the splotches
Along its cold, pale, swollen, hypertensive leg
  
It is possible that ideas don’t suffer —
Such as the idea of suffering, for instance, —
  
But we are not ideas, are we
Morris Imposternak, at least, is not an idea.

1.
At the end, the only thing left in my parents’ house was the piano
and an oversized portrait of them on their wedding day.
At the end, he died in my house, in Las Vegas, and I called I love you, Dad

through moments struck open, a lid on a truck that was our life together,
struck open, in his dying. At the end, the firemen and paramedics,
the coroner from Chicago smoking on the porch, and the captain saying

would you like to pray? At the end we did, struck open, the bed
that was his tomb still in the guest room, and yet no angel telling me
of the risen Lord. At the end, I kept returning to the room

to look at my father. In the end, they placed him in a bag, I heard
the zipping and though I didn’t watch, I heard the effort they made lifting,
and he was gone, no sirens, before my son woke.

2.
In the beginning, in 1924, Lenin died, and Stalin ruled for 29 years.
Calvin Coolidge was president and there was no vice-president.
Clarence Darrow, a man who unlike my father, believed in law,
helped Leopold and Loeb escape the death penalty for the murder
of their 14 year old cousin.

In the beginning, Ruth Malcomson from Pennsylvania was named
Miss America, and George Gershwin’s Rhapsody in Blue debuted in Paris.

On April 3rd, 1924, my father Edward Thomas Keelan Jr., was born
in Compton, California to Marguerite Keelan nÃ©e Kearns and Edward
Thomas Keelan Sr., the boy between two girls, Peggy 2 and Patricia,
the baby. This is the autobiography of everyone

because all lives and books
begin and end. This is the autobiography of everyone
and is for all of us still alive in the broken middleness, mouthing our stories.
 
 
 My father fell into this world from a woman’s body.
And yours?
This is the autobiography of everyone
because it was my father who taught me to distrust
distinctions that separated the simple subject
from the compound subject, particularly, and to begin with
the subject I. I’m hungry, I told my father.

The world is rumbling, he said, and placed a piece of bread in my mouth.
I’m thirsty, I repeated and he pointed towards
the split in the dream and handed me a hollow stick.

3.
Of death, Gertrude Stein writes in The Geographical History of America:
 
 
 Now the relation of human nature is this.
Human nature does not know this.
Human nature cannot know this …
Human nature does not know that if everyone did not die
There would be no room for those who live now.

This is true. Almost everything Stein said is true.
I know because I’ve felt it happen, human nature.
Human nature is interested in itself.
One day, human nature finds a place
where human nature loses, in a flash, first distinction,
and finds itself suddenly something other,
one’s whole understanding of a glorious singularity disappeared in an instant.

How large the world has become in your loss!
You have understood the purpose of death.
Having done so, you understand the purpose of life.
You must give your self away. Then you can sleep.

Stein: "This is the way human nature can sleep,
it can sleep by not knowing this.
The human mind can sleep by knowing this."
I have spent my life asleep,
standing by the window year after year with my mother,
waiting for my father to come home safely.
This is the autobiography of everyone asleep in one room or the other.
Natural mind, have you seen my father?

4.
In the beginning, Walt Disney created his first cartoon and another invention,
The Teapot Dome Scandal, debuted in Wyoming, and Elk Hills, California,
not far from where my father worked the oil wells years later.

Harry F. Sinclair of Sinclair Oil Company was sentenced to prison for contempt
of the senate and for hiring detectives to shadow members of the jury in his
case.

I liked the dinosaur in the Sinclair oil sign, just as I found the oil wells
themselves, perpetually making love to the edges of Interstate 5,
oddly comforting, though a little sad.

In the years before my father was born, the Southern Pacific Railroad
monopolized California. William Hood was the chief assistant engineer who saw
that tunnels were the only clear route through the sometimes impenetrable
mountains. He envisaged eighteen tunnels in twenty-eight miles of track

climbing down the Tehachapi Mountain to the San Joaquin Valley below.
The Southern Pacific Railroad was as merciless as it was inventive.
When a town denied access to the company, it simply built another town.

The farmers, too, felt the brunt of the railroad’s power. Allowed to settle on
isolated land, in Tehachapi, in Boron, and many desert regions of the state,
many had cultivated the barren land into lush fields.

5.
In 1878, the Southern Pacific Railroad took titles to the land and appraised
it at twenty-five to fifty dollars, instead of the two dollars and fifty cents
initially quoted the farmers.

Outraged, they went to court where they lost every case; by the end, eight
farmers died and two hundred families were evicted from their farms.

Earlier, in 1881, the Southern Pacific joined the Atchison, Topeka and Santa
Fe Railroad at Deming in New Mexico territory to become the second
transcontinental railroad.

My parents sang the song as we drove along, and so did we, along with
I’ve Been Working on the Railroad, Give me a Ticket for an Airplane, wanting,
I suppose now that I think of it, to be anywhere but the car.

For all their invention and cruelty, the founders of the railroad obviously
had a vision of shared beauty built into their machine. The dining cars
of the early railroad were elegant meeting places where travelers

met over fine china, eating roast pheasant, exotic relishes, and drinking
California wine as they gamboled together towards different destinations.
The gilded age of the railroad ended in 1910 when Hiram Johnson was elected

governor of California and methodically broke the political hold
of the Southern Pacific Railroad. A United States senator from 1917-1945,
Johnson was the Progressive party’s nominee for Vice-President in 1912.

6.
As a senator, he was an isolationist, opposing membership to the League of
Nations and the United Nations. A large state on the edge of the Pacific,
California itself is contained, isolated, and like all things in isolation, it has no

concept of boundaries. Apotheosis of the "bedroom community," the suburbs
of Southern California are predicted in the next century to reach Las Vegas.
The golden state, El Dorado, California was the destination dream spot

of millions of immigrants from the 1800’s when pioneers traveled the
California-
Oregon trail, to the present day when Mexican Ã©migrÃ©s are smuggled across
the border, camouflaged as part of the car’s seat.

It can be no mistake that in the years during Johnson’s political career,
the oil companies laid the foundation for the state’s eventual enslavement
to the gasoline combustion engine. With the downfall of the Southern Pacific

Railroad, the oil barons took, and continue to hold, the transportation realities
of the millions of Californians who now inhabit El Dorado, alone, or commuting,
and mostly in traffic jams, in automobiles along the state’s freeways.

7.
A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE MAJOR OIL COMPANIES IN THE GULF REGION
1889: Standard Oil (Indiana) founded as subsidiary of Standard Trust Oil
1910: Standard Oil of Indiana founded with the dissolution of Standard Oil
1911: Standard Oil of Indiana purchases Pan American Petroleum
1932: Standard Oil of Indiana sells Venezuela operation to Jersey
1954: Pan American and Standard of Indiana merge. New company is called 
American Oil Company (Amoco)
1957: Amoco begins joint venture with Iran Independent of Iranian Oil Consortium
1959: Jersey strikes oil in Libya
1979: Jersey changes name to Exxon
1972: Saudi Arabia, Abu Dhabi, Kuwait and Qatar acquire 25% interest in 
Exxon’s production operations (in country), with right to increase stake 
to 51% by 1982
1981: Exxon sells Standard Libya to Libyan government
1990-present: Amoco, Getty, Exxon, Ashland Oil, Chevron, Conoco and 
many others continue to operate in the Gulf Region

8.
"But there is no remembering in the human mind." —Stein

My father died on July 21st, 2001, and on September 11th, 2001, fourteen
boys in airplanes crashed into the World Trade Center, the Pentagon and a
Pennsylvania field, killing themselves and thousands of people.

This has something to do with my father, with oil, with me.
My government and with you.

Since my father’s death, I’ve slowly begun waking to my childhood.
It’s mostly full of other people’s words, as is time in general, the specific
a rare event, relying as it does upon an individual member being awake.

I’m waking to my childhood in my own child’s life, the driving he loves
in video games, a version of the driving I loved, asleep in the backseat.
May all his crashing be virtual.

In remembering is re-membering.
Heart and mind, body and soul, time and space, father and daughter,
we are separate; we are attached.

The mind knows this when the heart pulses freely,
dependent upon its muscle.
The soul itself is a muscle, both housed
and independent of its own body.

I’m aware of its contraction now, in the arc it’s making outside me as it follows
the automobile’s whine, which is a pulse, too, that surrounds each moment

of modern life. Time is eternal in space. Trapped radio waves prove it,
as does my dead father’s DNA wound through me.

Heaven then spirals in a dragon fly’s hovering, look, just now,
and in its vanishing.

I met a man last night who is afraid of dogs.
He said, in Sweden pit bulls are outlawed.
We built a fire from dead yucca
and talked about the selective biting habits of domestic felines:
his cat attacks some women, but not others.
We talked of mimicry: the mimicry of the oppressor
to copy the style of the oppressed.
The female tiger butterfly mimics the monarch
matching its wing design and sun colors
without ever having to feed on poison milkweed.
But he was talking about Hip Hop artists
and women forced to veil themselves.
  
The man who is afraid of dogs, his girlfriend, and I
go out into the cold night air to collect more yucca.
the girlfriend says to no one in particular
that her shampoo contains yucca
and that her eyes itch, but she cannot cry.
I tell them St. John’s Wort has done nothing for me.
I don’t tell them about the dream I had of my children
burning inside a small hut.
  
The man who is afraid of dogs
lives just below the Arctic Circle,
where for three months of winter the air is black,
without sun. He wants to know why we Americans
are consumed with the history of other cultures
and not our own. He wants to know why in New Mexico
there are so many crosses on the sides of our roads
and so many churches without bells.
I tell him all the buffalo were slaughtered.
I don’t tell him about the miracle staircase.
  
I confess to the Swede that I too am afraid of pit bulls -
I’m afraid of the type of people who own pit bulls.
I don’t tell him about my non-violent lesbian
friend who owns a pit bull samed Sugar
and that I have put my hands inside the dog’s mouth.
I don’t tell him about my Chilean painter friend who
in his younger years backpacked through Europe.
He liked Sweden very well, with fond memories
of being in bed with a woman and her mother at the same time.
Or should I say a woman and her daughter.
  
The fire is going out and the moon is falling.
The man who is afraid of dogs wants to know
where my husband is. He calls me a grass widow
but has the diplomacy not to ask
where it’s war or famine.
  
I imagine myself mimicking the faithful woman
standing on the shore, looking out to sea
waiting for the return of my seafaring husband.
But the truth is: I don’t stand on the shore often.
I get in the water, and I like the water cold
and the waves hurricane high. 

Four daisies
by the mosque window
when I look up
from prayer,
and blowing
from town
the smoke
of a guitar.
Simple daisies.
 Simple.
The window
could be a painting.
The distant player
just practicing.

Little burnt villages. Strong drinkers.
Incredible. Such is my influence.
We’re ducks.
I took the distribution and the title after Joshua.
Arms are a genuine feeling.
These are our mouths and palms.
Frogs are resoled.
O God, how near we are to each other.
We lick god’s mind and roll over like turtles.
The swallow’s dome has pity and destroys.
Heaps of sand. Mothers, mothers.
The enemy is tortured and juts out.
Mommy carries the chapter.

If God had come to me and said,
if you are willing to forget yourself,
 
you will find the cure for heart attacks and compose
the greatest symphonies,
 
I wouldn’t have been sure of my answer.
Because there wouldn’t have been enough
 
attention to my suffering. And that’s unforgivable.
But I keep on forgiving myself
 
with God’s love.  And it’s strange I should say this
because my mother died of a heart attack
 
after months in a hospital room full of a silence
that lodged itself like a stone in her throat.
 
And she thought I was wonderful
 
and would do anything for her.

Vanilla comes mainly from Madagascar, and grows
on a vine, its flowers both male and female; from planting
 
to pod can take 5 years. The language of Malagasy has no
grammatical gender. It is not a Romantic language, but has
 
borrowed a little from the French who took so much.
It’s an island language, Austronesion, and plurals are managed
 
with a beautiful efficiency: more than one book: book-book;
more than one child: child-child. It’s hard for the Latinate
 
mind to imagine. They say men give love to get sex and
women give sex to get love, and today a man told me
 
he doesn’t trust a woman who gives blow jobs. It’s all
about power, he said, and her need to control the man.
 
I didn’t buy it; I have my own conspiracy theories, prefer
real vanilla to synthetic, sugar cane to HFS. I rarely give in
 
to a sweet tooth, but now and then, I do, and when I do,
I want it, not like jet fuel, but a slow, complex burn,
 
the line between control and surrender delicate and uncertain,
like dependent economies, and tenuous like the vanilla flower
 
blooming for only one day, both male and female, the thinnest
of membranes between them waiting to be stripped away.

Molded him out of shit and spit and love, mud
and a box of matchstick bones
to be my child, the son I'll never have
to comfort my young age, ages from the here
and now of sunlessness (the deepest blizzard
ever written down), a week
of overcast, a month, a year, and snow
I had forgotten to remember
to forget. Mined him out of my scarred history
and stories stolen from late night songs
on FM radio, in stereo to call my son,
out of contaminated blood,
it's dangerous to love these days
and nights of zero zero something or another
's coming. Something unpromised is coming,
something uncompromised, a something
wished for and given up, what was his name
I heard myself calling to supper? I hear him
calling father, further, faith in me, I thought
I heard him say wait for my signal to wake up
before you, or remember
who I might be, make me the apple that seizes
thine eye, heard him and then did not, my
never all over again. I made him stop, or maybe
that was my biohazard blood, said Closed
for business, please come back
another day (I'll do my best not to die
till then), a week of rain when I had thought
I saw some children playing at being snow, a child's
footprints in snow. Mixed him up
from memories and refrigerator magnets,
stirred up regrets and recompense, my confusion
made him shine, and rise, my son.

They are giving birth control to squirrels in Santa Monica, the homeless capital of the world. The 
world's tallest man puts his world's tallest arms in the throats of two dolphins and pulls.

A girl sits in her living room for five weeks with hiccups. News reporters, talk show hosts, 
cameramen. She stops. They stop. Then she starts up again.

I am driving across the Mississippi on a bridge the color of old denim. It's early, the sun is 
barely, fog lights are on. All but one.

When Picasso was asked to illustrate a fairy tale, he drew a man with a buffalo's head and a 
buffalo's body. I knew he was a man because of the way he wanted to eat her, but couldn't.

Someone is dead, so is her son, and no one can decide where to bury her. I watch the footage on 
tv. Everyone is crying--boyfriend, hairdresser, even the judge.

On the science segment of a radio broadcast, I learn that time-travel has more to do with loss 
than math. A man loses his father. We aren't supposed to count backwards.

Last night I stood in the park a tornado clipped a year ago. It felt empty. My raincoat against 
your arm, people around us like buildings. Others like cities, rising up.

On the front page of the local paper, award-winning cheerleaders. From afar they look like a 
forest on fire or soldiers piled up, the ones on top with their hands in the air.

Pictures are there to remember when we were more than ourselves. In black in white, two 
children are sad, perfect statues. In color, they're just kids with a fire hydrant between them.

A man told a woman in a book I just finished that if you bend two trees together and you still 
can't cross the river, you are being told something important.

I have learned this year that truckers are the strongest men alive. They carry everything across, 
especially at night. Once I kept so close to one he might has well have towed me.

They're interviewing a kid from Kansas who's started his own bumper sticker business. There are 
funny ones and some serious, like Papa's Pad when Mama's Mad and Pray Already.

A woman walks a little dog, looking down. A kid digs a hole for her doll, looking down. 
Hardhats dot the overpass, holding men.

At the World's Largest Truck Stop, one woman says to another woman, You have to undo it. 
They're stringing tinsel on a pile of tires. It will feel good, she says, when it's undone.

On the bad days, accidents are mile markers. Here, a car like a letter someone crumpled in anger, 
then burned, just to be sure.

A truck, I heard somewhere, can weigh as much as ten elephants. A flatbed pulls a house over a 
bridge. I've never seen a stampede before.

Ginny, a hospice nurse, says that you can tell in the eyes, when it's time. Think of it, she says, 
like cargo. We carry it this far, then we unload it.

My father keeps a blue, never-used, two-person kayak in his basement that his closest friends 
bought him for his fiftieth. Every time I go home, I look at it.

I think about how he must have imagined it. Early morning, the boat light on his shoulders. He 
lays it on the dock, careful, the tip into the water, he wavers in after, has to rest for a minute, 
steady his self. Then he begins the paddling out.

When I'm gone, I won't be here anymore, if you can imagine that. I can.
I can imagine being gone, and then being somewhere else, somewhere
entirely different from this place, but with mist like at Dak To,
only with softer greens and blues, and no small arms fire chatter
in the untroubled trees, and no poison tipped bamboo sticks.

And when I'm gone, I would bequeath the space I had occupied
to the dreamers, and to the disenfranchised, and to the lost singers of songs,
so they might pitch their trash bag tents in peace
and ease back into the darkness that I love, when I'm gone.

When I told my mother the joke—the new kid
at college, who asked where the library’s at,
and the sophomore who said, "At Yale, we do not
end our sentences with prepositions,"
whereupon the frosh said, "Oh,
I beg your pardon, where’s the library
at, asshole," she shrieked with delight.
"’Asshole,’" she murmured fondly. She’s become
so fresh, rinsed with sweetness, as if she is
music, the strings especially high and bright.
She says it and sighs with contentment, as if she has
finally talked back to her own mother.
Or maybe it is the closest she has come,
for a while, to the rich, animal life
she lived with her second husband—now
I can see that of course she touched him everywhere,
as lovers do. She touched me there,
you know, courteously, with oil
like myrrh; soon after she had given me life
she gave me pleasure, which gave her pleasure,
maybe it felt to her fingertip like the
complex, clean knot of her Firegirls
tie-clasp. She seems, these days, like a very
human goddess. I do not want her
to die. This feels like a new not-want,
a shalt-not-want not-want. As soon as I
dared, around fifty, I called her, to myself,
the A-word. And yet, now, if she goes,
when she goes, to me it is like the departure of a
whole small species of singing bird from the earth.

The day after I’d written a poem about her,
my new friend asks if I sometimes steal stories
from other people’s lives. She doesn’t know
many poets, but she once met a woman
who wrote self-help books about dating.
We’re at a diner, where great stories
are often exchanged. The writer utilized
my new friend’s tale of woe but made it even worse,
more embarrassing than it actually was.
I say writers are always stealing, we can’t
help ourselves, and she says she understands
though it gives her the creeps. I don’t confess
my own theft but instead tell her about a poet
whose ex writes thrillers. One of his recent characters
has her name, her physical traits, and her most
unflattering of habits. Worst of all, the character
is stabbed to death in the final chapter.
Writers must have a lot of issues, my new friend says, lifting
the limp pickles off the pale inside of her hamburger bun.
We both fall silent. She eyes me suspiciously
as she salts her fries. I stop asking her about her past,
about her day, fearing she’ll tell me something so good
I’ll be tempted to take it for another poem. Our diet cokes
are almost drained when she wonders if the poet,
having suffered her own fictional fatality,
has changed her ways, has stopped using her friends
as subject matter. Imagine how you’d feel
if someone recreated your life and it wasn’t very pretty.
I start to write the poem in my head, the one
describing my blubber, my crowded teeth, my penchant
for gossip, the smell of my feet after a long day
in plastic sandals. My character is cheap,
fearful, controlling, duplicitous, a dunce.
Want to split a slice of pie? I think she says,
but I am already slapping a twenty
on the Formica table, sliding out of the booth.
I have to get it all down before someone else does.

I love you
I know as much as anything
for your courage
so companionably invisible
as it is
that it passes mostly
as simple
good sense. I don’t mean you’re
practical at all—god forbid—
only persistent
as far as dying brothers & cold calls
are concerned—not violent,
not weak, but like a lantern afloat on a wave
open if necessary
to sinking your light
offshore. Onshore
I am as you would know
strongly sometimes
impatient & inside a swarm of loud thoughts
self-absorbed & locked-up.
If you were to die
who would remove me
from those thoughts?
When you lean your forehead
against mine
what you hear inside there
are all those
sounds likely, vibrations
like windowpanes rattled by headland squalls
or bullet trains
late forever & loaded down
with passengers green
as hoodie-wearing witches.
I lean my forehead against
your forehead
gently knowing both
will shortly vanish.
"First of all," says Virgil, "find
a protected place
for the bees
to make their
honey, a place that’s
safe from wind."

1.

With a pillow and a yen.

You were meant to be the god.

Brown eye crowning in its
       jellied boat

       through the unlined winter of your hand.

                       ——-

But to view her, not become her.

To have her be your personal god—

Divine bandage
       for each of your wounds, impersonal mother

you could love and love
       and not have to give a thing back—

White Tara. Heart uncurling from the snow of her chest,
       turning blue

       in the Himalayan air—

You bought it in a store.
       After the mother had dropped completely

                       ——-

dead—

Face down
       in a pool of spit, heart’s

       fist—

She made you put the gift boots
       back in the box, she said How

could you do this to me? when you had to tell her you’d got
       the clap—

Smotherer, eating up all the breath—

She kneels, bearing a heart attack.

                       ——-

And the poets say,

       You will not say Mother, you will not say Father—

       We have overthrown
                   the chromosome, we have

                   emerged full-throated from a void.
2.

Build it from rot.

From the mouldered soil
       of the neglected shit-strewn yard—

Crap-box
       for the neighbor’s cats, they love the smell: alive alive—

Out of elm sticks
       from the weedy trees, crush and glitter
of yellowed leaves, you must
       build it—
jamb and sill, a frame
       through which she can come

and be the god on the bedroom wall, White
       Lotus—

Seven eyes on the suffering world, Rescuing
       Mother—

Still
       in the clothes she was wearing, when she

                       ——-

smacked face first to the floor—

Rescuing Mother, the poets say.

       Who for.
3.

And the poets say,

       You may not admit to bone or flesh, you must not have nerves
                   in the tips of your fingers,
       you may say fist, you may say teeth, but you must not
                   put them in a sentence
       together, you must not put them
                   in a body

                       ——-

                   together—

Self-annihilation.
       That is the infection

whose vector you seek,
       Sick Hunter. In the cemetery

you pore through the loam.
       To find the cold well, its lip lit

by an oil
       squeezed

from her bones: Wrong-Bodied Never
       Accomplished Enough a dose

in the inner ear, how could she
       be the murderer

       when the murderer is in the mirror—

                       ——-

In a skin of milk,
       a moon-warmth, white and cool.

Soft and sentient,
       you furl out a parentless hand.

To cup the head of the one
       who’s been calling you—:

                   I hated her and then she died—

                   she died and then I

                   couldn’t tell her it was all a lie—

Blood beading the perimeter
       of an almond-shaped wound

       as the eye of compassion slits through.

I love you for shattering.
Someone has to. Just as someone
has to announce inadvertently
the end of grief or spring’s
splurge even as the bureaucracy’s
spittoon overflows. Someone has to come out
the other end of the labyrinth
saying, What’s the big deal?
Someone has to spend all day staring
at the data from outer space
or separating the receipts
or changing sheets in sour room after room.
I like it when the end of the toilet paper
is folded into a point.
I like napkins folded into swans
because I like wiping my mouth on swans.
Matriculates, come back from the dance floor
to sip at the lacrimal glands of chaos,
a god could be forgiven
for eating you, you’ve been such angels
just not very good ones.
You’ve put your tongue
into the peanut canister
of your best friend’s girlfriend’s mom.
You’ve taken a brown bag lunch
on which was writ another’s name.
All night it snows a blue snow
like the crystallized confessions
you’ve wrung from phantoms
even though it is you wearing the filched necklace,
your rages splitting the concrete like dandelions.
All that destruction from a ball of fluff!
There’s nothing left but hope.

Tim Mullinax and I
were setting army men on fire,
  
lobbing safety matches
at a whole platoon
  
waist-deep in kerosene,
when the purple flames
  
leapt up his arm
and around his throat
  
and coiled in his hair
where, looking up,
  
I saw things clearly 
for the first time in my life:
  
the perfect sky
still perfect as he burned.  

Rarely do I remember another month, August. 
Rarely another day do I remember. 

I threw tarps over a life 
and never could they reach?

still hastily I gathered 
tarps more rare by the hour 

in the city of nothing to spare.
I draped true but thin shores 

for the shipwreck 
as the radio said:

Rarely does as rarely has 
grown tired of not doing.

Take your rarities.
Take your household gods.

If you have no gods:
make them.


Last night my neighbor was looking a little enlightened,
you know, the way bodies do
after spending the afternoon having sex
on an old couch while responsible people are suffering
with their clothes on in cubicles and libraries.
He had that look vegetables get
in really nice grocery stores where the tomatoes aren't just red
they're goddamn red!
He was like that. Like a glowing, off-the-vine Roma
sitting in his living room picking pineapple off a Hawaiian pizza
and telling me about his father who was a real mother
fucker. I ask him if he still loved his dad, or if he loved him more
now that he is dead. Sure, he says, I love anything that's dead.
Someone's hand floats up onto the beach
while the body is still lost below the current, a vase of lilacs
turned brown, the black archipelago of mourners marching
up the hill. My neighbor is there to greet each of them
with a box of chocolates and a barbershop quartet in the background.
When my father died, he says opening a beer, he was no longer
my father. He was no longer a man. It's easy to love things
when they're powerless, like children and goldfish.
This is the way with enlightened people. They say things
that are so infuriatingly simple when the world is not.
So I put down my Pepsi and pull out the big card.
What about Hitler? I ask. You can't love Hitler!
My neighbor puts a piece of pineapple on his tongue like a sacrament,
sucks the juice out of it, chews it up, then turns
his head slow like a cloud and says I can love anybody I feel like loving.
And I say that's ridiculous.
And he says what's ridiculous is that you don't. And there he is again,
shining in the grocery store, pulling the bow off
the heart-shaped candies and putting one softly into his father's 
           mouth.

Together with the Apron whose house infiltrated, her meadow 
ravaged by tomatoes. Together with Miscreant whose torso 
damned and scrapped, Damsel joined the lament. The devoted 
lamb, to cement the Shepherd regarding his shepherding, to 
give him no respite from his mandating, alarmed him for the 
sake of her bleeding cleavage belatedly she bleats. She 
reproached the Shepherd for the sake of his sanctuary 
belatedly she bleats. She reproached him for the sake of 
his tomato-infested meadows belatedly she bleats. She 
reproached him for the sake of his swaggering wreck before 
him she bleats her belated lament.

It's my thirty-fifth birthday and some old friends
are visiting. We drive up to Pioneertown's
one bar and (separate) bowling alley
where the singer who calls herself Cat Power
has left her scoresheet on the wall.
We bowl better in her glow and original
pinks and greens of 1951 the alley's saved.
Back in our civilian footwear we walk
sand to Pappy and Harriet's Pioneer Palace
and drink our beers, play Quiddler with a fresh
deck as the band begins its roadhouse fight songs.
A marine with shaved head and band aid
on his nose plops down and steals my wife's beer.
She snatches it back, looks to me, my words
forming in my hand. The soldier's buddy
apologizes, says he's just returned
from the sandbox that afternoon, forty Iraq weeks
and they're getting him drunk. An officer,
my age, in slacks and button down, leans in
from the table behind, says he's watching,
not to worry. I've been here before, in dark
on a side road of my little town beside the army base.
I remember how beating felt, how good
in cold to smile at ways they beat me.
I'd always been hungry to be touched, and bread
they fed me was sweet. All things that happen bad
are soft to lay down on later. Once comfort
I hoped for was gone, what was sharp and bitter
was my mother. That was first Gulf War.
Back in the roadhouse we finish our game,
the bar closes, our wives go back to motel
and we still thirsty drive into town twenty miles
through summer's forest fire to Joshua Tree
Saloon, downroad from where Gram Parsons
died twice in 1974, overdosing on heroin.
The first time, his hooker expertly shoved
a cube from the ice bucket up his ass,
brought him back to life, yet he knew enough
of life to shoot up again an hour later,
when she stepped out for a cheeseburger.
It's hard to save your own life, to take
such extreme measures alone. The woman
at the saloon, heavy with heavy curls
collects drinks and asks are you a marine?
as I bruise past to the bar's blue ATM,
and I do feel underwater, undersea
five thousand feet above its level.
And when I wake from my drowning,
outside motel window the mountains
are still deciding what gown to wear.
Quail know the story. Between bushes
they sing it. A hawk listens from the arm
the Joshua tree waves with. My wife pours
orange juice into a green glass on kitchenette
beside black crumbs of birthday cake.

I'm sorry I will not be able to support any soldiers
at this time. I have a family and a house with slanting floors.
There is a merciless dampness in the basement,
a broken toilet, and several of the windows are painted shut.
I do not pretend my dread is anything like the dread
of men at war. Had I smaller feet, I would have gladly enlisted
myself. In fact, I come from a long line of military men.
My grandfather died heroically in 1965, though his medals have been
lost. I try to serve my country by killing houseflies. I am fully
aware of their usefulness, especially in matters of decay.
Napoleon's surgeon general, Baron Dominique Larrey,
reported during France's 1829 campaign
in Syria that certain species of fly only consumed
what was already dead and had a generally positive effect on wounds.
When my grandfather was found,
his corpse shimmered in maggots free of disease. As you can
tell, I know a little something about civilization.
I realize that when you said "Freedom," you were talking
about the meat we kill for, the head of the enemy leaking
in the bushes, how all of it makes peace possible.
Without firearms I know most violence would be impractical.
And thank you for enclosing photos and biographical information
of soldiers who might suit my household. I am sure any one
of them would be an excellent guardian of my family.
I admit I have no capacity for rifles or gadgetry.
I cannot use rulers accurately.
I have not been able to drive off the flies. I can see
that they all have teeth that are the very masticates of democracy
and I thank you for noting the one with a talent
for making the eagle tattooed across his back rear its talons.
I realize my support comes with a year long subscription
to the gentleman's magazine of my choice.
I realize were it not for the sacrifices of these young boys,
America would no longer have its source
of power. I have given considerable thought to your
offer, but at this time, I simply am unable to offer my support.

xxix
 
Between hope and despair, a large house in the desert sits empty. The wind, from time to time, thrums the grand piano, even though the piano is shut tight. And the windows are sealed, so the alarm rings and rings, and no one responds.
 
Mice are no longer saved who have fallen into our saltwater pool in the hours before dawn. They descend to the bottom. Mostly babies. The manager of the dead comes once a week, Tuesday mornings at 7:30, and lifts them out with a net and puts them in a dark pouch. Where do they go from there?
 
Once, on the wrong anti-depressant, you became hysterical about bugs in the pool, each one of which you needed to save. I thought I was strong, and could help you, could see that your sympathetic nervous system was flaring, because you would at any cost, the cost of your own life by drowning, need to save them, the flies, the mice, the snakes, the butterflies, the swarming bees. And many were saved but not all. And finally you saw this was inevitable, this was living and dying. I never could help you, although I lived through all your hysterical ailments. Your brown eyes did not want me to help. Eventually I turned away, and now my gaze goes from the inside of my head to the night sky and skips your gaze entirely, as you willed it.
 
If a person would lie to the person she loved because she had to, because circumstances were such, then it is in character that this kind, hospitable liar would trowl down to the bottom after a helpless Chihuahua, a prehistoric looking creature who has made an egregious mistake that could cost her her life only because she was so thirsty. In your right mind, every thing and everyone was worth saving,
 
but the more we tried, the more saving and loving each other became incompatible. In the end, it is a fact that you lifted a young and therefore highly venomous snake to safety, and inflated the flat, depleted moon, when it fell into our pool, and returned it to the heavens, calmly, responsibly. In a culture that is unaware of poetry’s magic and its mythologies, I beseech you — you who once wrote poems, which is how you no doubt came to be a familiar of celestial bodies — please, become one of the helpless who did not mean it when she said, you sad peripatetic moon, I am no longer in love with you.
 
Separated from you, I see the frown of crescent moon, so you have not taken up the request. When it lowers, slowly rocking, and finally falls, I can return you the favor, sincerely, and put it back where it belongs, as I suspect you always hoped I would, and despaired that I was not capable. Granted, it is merely a shaving. The rest is in darkness.
 
Thank goodness no one can see me looting the dark pouch for the dead mice.
 
Northgate, midnight

November wind. The feeling of knowing
something before you said it, all over everything.
As in, shadow take me into the side of the mountain,
As in, open up the earth and get inside
Leaving doesn’t mean much. Arriving
means everything, how you came to be where you were,
even if later it will hurt to think of it.
And the forgotten, aren’t they always
the most remembered elsewhere, before they perish
when someone has their eye on them,
and later when the shrines are made
with local flowers and icons of heroes, roses
in midsummer, angels on winter wings?
I’ll leave your customs to your own imagination.
Leaving, though, always a kind
of unfolding of the act of staying. Last night
I knew it was the East wind not asking for me arriving
because the door to the kitchen blew open, last
night, at the edge of sleep, like someone using only half the alphabet.
The book about Brecht separating at the seam
because my reading had been the last one it could take
before breaking into Exile and After, California
in the middle, with the playwright in short sleeves,
bored on the PCH, looking at the dramatic
cliffwork with a friend who meant well, driving,
arriving at the slumlord dockyards saying at last scenery.
You must forgive me or forgive the book for breaking:
it was tired, you see it was a paperback, from the time
people actually wanted ones like that, thought
books like that should be held in hands
on beaches or in cars or in cafes. Sleepy, almost sleepy,
falling asleep, awake, now, I admit it,
I was completely awake, listening to the wind which I cannot defend.
Nothing in the mind but that reckless pleasure
and somewhere in the book Brecht saying the truth is concrete

My sick heart and my sick soul
I'd gladly fasten in a bag
and drop into an ocean-hole
to float in darkness as a rag.
Would it learn to make its light?
Maybe in a million years.
A million years of constant night
in which it can't stop its fears
flaring their nightmare tentacles
and bioluminescent eyes
as cold and sharp as icicles
under moonless, starless skies:
medusae, spookfish, cephalopods,
jellies with no eyes or brain,
lethal and beautiful as gods,
locked in an endless predation chain.
How seamless then the world would seem,
which life on earth never did,
the living water like a dream
teeming with prowling vampire squid
that want only to stay alive
among other monsters innocent
of all but the pure drive to survive
without self-judgement.
 

Like actors in summer stock
we played our best selves
visiting her rustic cabin.

I lay on the floor in a back
room with the difficult
grandson

and played Candyland 
until he went down
for a nap. 
 
Paula played Bach’s
cello suites
on the screened porch,

each note a mournful
summons, 
orderly, unfolding. 

*    *    *    *    *    *
On the dock 
with their father
the boys learned

to extract the hook
without tearing
the flesh, to cast

their lines 
in a joyous arc.
Leslie swam 

across the lake, 
her body a rhythmic
voluptuousness,

her steady plashing
a signal to the terrier
ashore. Miriam hailed 



and embraced summer
and winter people
in the annual

June convocation
at the beach, updates
and invitations

all around.
They could see
she was sick, bewigged, 

but she was here,
now, steadying herself
against the piling,

going in slowly, 
the burning chill
on her thighs,

on her hips, her waist,
as she studied the familiar
lake, its inlets, pines 

and boulders vivid 
as the cabin’s manifest,
the list of essential linens

and batteries and cast iron 
pots passed on each year—
revised and copied—

for her beloveds.

*    *    *    *    *

Grilled vegetables, 
Beet soup, corn, and nine
of us round the table

pouring and laughing, 
stories of the day 
taking on their initial

color and flavor
before we cook them 
in legend and myth,

summer’s brine.
Beneath a full moon,
inside their tent,

the boys undress,
and we see their limbs—
animated cave paintings

against the tent’s fabric—
or a shadowplay 
enacting one summer day.

Scrabble players
assemble at the table.
This year Jules wins

every game, and when
she laughs, her red hair 
ripples as it did 

when she was ten
and wild as her eldest 
awake in his sleeping bag,

looking up at his grandmother’s
sky, imagining the salamanders
he’ll catch tomorrow.

1.    Odori, Ospitalità    

What happened to Blanca? What happened to Rome?
Is it happening to me?
            2004, Blanca the gypsy 
looks six,  
rubbing against men, rubbing against women
at the no-name Caffé with red plastic chairs. 
Her name can’t be Blanca, everybody calls her Blanca.
She cadges money and cigarettes, kisses my hair,  
steals my colored pencils. Little bird nose, 
petite smile, pain in the ass. I’m thinking about 
getting pregnant. 
               2007, Blanca sleazy, writhing, 
adorable, ignores me, chats with men 
who pat her face and belly. At the produce stand, 
the Nigerian fruit-seller yearns at a Ferrari 
idling curbside. Blanca shivers and snickers 
when he puppy-scratches behind her ears, 
play-slaps her cheek. The Ferrari backs 
down the Piazzale, farting into Rome traffic. 
The color is “argento titano” (titanium silver); 
costs—I looked it up—€185,000 base. I love 
that its noise says who has the money deserves me.
Blanca palms an enormous comice.   
The fruit-seller bellows, she bites to ruin it, 
he stamps at her, she weighs it in her hand, 
walks smirking away. He mutters 
back to his cash-box, sucking his lip 
up under his nose, chops odori for minestra.    
      Yesterday 
the wife of a naval officer was robbed, 
raped and murdered in this neighborhood. 
A gypsy is arrested. Animali! says the mayor.
Nessuna ospitalità a questi animali! say crude posters
in ugly red writing, flaunting the Fascist tricolor flame. 
Gypsies are beaten in the street. The government                
of ex-Communist Romano Prodi loads gypsies in buses,             
returns them to Romania. Overnight, all Rome’s                
beggars are gone. We’ll never see Blanca again.  
This is not a tragedy, it only feels somehow pointlessly sad. 
Empty gypsy camps are bulldozed by the authorities. 
A stench of casual outdoor shitting remains. 
The dollar hits 1.40 against the Euro. I turn 40. 
Maisie’s eleven months old. 


2.    Padlocks, Suicidal   

Padlocks multiply on the footbridge Ponte Milvio.
They look like a swarm of bees that shine,
clipped to chains, clipped to one another. 
A novel began it: Lovers wrote their initials
on a lock, attached it to a lamppost, 
threw the key in the Tiber. Lovesick or loving,
copycats followed. We must keep this new tradition alive,
said the mayor when lock-weight pulled 
a lamppost down. A Mafia construction company 
donated stronger poles and cement. 
Padlocks of love puddle on the ground. 
Bangladeshis—Rome tolerates its illegals—
arrange locks for sale on crates. A girl buys 
the smallest, 1€, thumbnail size, surrounded 
by her girl-gang, no lover necessary,
giggling like the barely-burbling river,
then solemn, smoothing back curly-edged hair.
Rita! scream her friends when her key twinkles, falling. 
A Goth couple grinds and kisses, flesh-fat showing 
through intentional rips in grommet-spangled jeans,
grackle-colored hair mingling. Two men in suits
tongue each other’s teeth. The Nigerian’s radio sings 
beautiful girls, they’ll have you suicidal.


3.    Sunday Morning, Night  

Smashed beer bottles, crunched Marlboro packs
with FUMO UCCIDE in enormous letters
across the front. Rita-Gianni sempre 
in permanent marker, glitter pink nailpolish hearts
underneath. Love-lock graffiti 
has wiped out all others. No more USA merda,
circled A, hammer and sickle, Fascist rifle sight,
not even (Napoli merda) soccerfan jeers. 
Workers in maroon and orange jumpsuits 
painstakingly scrub the bridge clean. Rita-Gianni 
is back before they’re halfway across.                        

Slow Italian day waning, apartment blocks cut up 
silver dusk, sparrows fly rearing and bucking
past construction cranes, shimmering tinkertoys
laboring into evening. The yellow crane
unspools wire cord, bows to lower
a parcel of I-beams. The sparrows fly 
over the junkyard, the New York Steakhouse,
they funnel and swoop past the sports bar,
Smart Car dealer, truck bed full of flowers
and porcini, past the girl on the parked motorcycle
sitting sidesaddle the better to show
the clean yellow triangle of underpants.
Swirl down among Tiber plane trees’
blurry camouflage. Maisie zoning 
in her cut-rate stroller that sticks on bridge stones
laid down fan-form. “Birdie!” She jerks alert,
points. Knees locked, body arched. Birds shriek
panicked apart, contract en masse
into an umbrella pine’s black-green deepnesses,
crazed every time the sun goes down,
thinking it won’t rise again. 



4. Histories: Umbrellas

Rare days of rain, lock-vendors 
sell 5€ umbrellas by the bridge, water streaming 
down their faces. 312 A.D., Constantine 
saw a dream-cross in the sky, defeated Maxentius 
at Ponte Milvio, threw him in the Tiber                     
where he drowned. In 1849 Garibaldi blew up Milvio 
to keep the French out of Rome, lost                         
the revolution anyway. Umbrellas smoke                     
in the downpour. Kenneth Rexroth, c. 1949 
rode in on his bike: “The Tiber appears, and then a sign/        
“PONTE MILVIO.” We enter/Rome in the tracks of the first/ 
Triumph of barbarism and religion.” My umbrella blows to pieces, 
most times, halfway across the bridge. 
I buy another on the other side.  

5. Histories: 2000. July

My first time in Rome, our honeymoon, a cheerful place, 
Jubilee year: Slaves and prisoners are released, 
debts forgiven, God’s mercies particularly manifest  
and Catholics are absolved of their sins
if they walk to all seven basilicas. They troop 
in footsore double group-tour lines behind a woman 
holding aloft a pink umbrella. She murmurs facts 
to her mic; they wear headset receivers. 
There’s no more cacophony in art places,
just watery hiss of tourguide whisper. 
In the Palazzo Doria Pamphili, 
Mary, resting on the flight to Egypt, 
bends wearily over her foursquare baby, 
his tiny penis pointing from the canvas 
innocent and clean as a cap gun. 
“Are you hungry, Sister?” says a fat guy to a nun. 
“Would you like some McDonalds?” History
hasn’t happened yet. On the crowded flight home 
I sit next to a Texan who’s never been out of Texas before, 
she went to Lourdes, then Rome. She’s sinless. 
We fly over New York, selva oscura: 
“What are those two tall buildings down there?” 



6. Shame and Go Home, 2004

A year into Iraq Bush arrives in Rome. 
The huge cheerful protest march winds 
past Campidoglio, Colosseo, il Foro, 
Circo Massimo and the Baths of Caracalla, 
a better tour of ancient Rome than any bus.                     
We walk with a Norwegian couple, naming ourselves
Tourists Against the War. The Norwegians are surprised             
we speak “pretty grammatical English for Americans” 
and know as much as they do about U.S. politics
politely ignoring that we can’t—and they can—                
recite the names of every member of Bush’s cabinet. 
Bush as monkey, Bush as Hitler, Berlusconi as Mussolini. 
American flags with swastikas painted on, 
signs of the times.                 
Buttar giu il governo del neoduce!                             
Buttiamoli giu! Bush vergonati e vai a casa!                       
Throw the bums out. Shame and go home. 
Pictures from Abu-Ghraib photoshopped to show Bush grinning 
over a pile of naked bodies, Condoleeza Rice holding a prisoner on a leash. 
Cheney urging a dog to attack a man’s naked crotch. 

Attenti agli Zingari:      Woman in prolific skirt, hitched hook-and-eye
                                at her hips, little mirrors sewn in. Doped 
                                mosquito-bit baby, sleepily sucking in her lap, 
                                foot of the down escalators, Flaminio Metro station.

                                Man in the doorway of a church, 
                                collecting rice thrown after weddings, 
                                sieving it for cigarette butts. 

                                Beggar woman kneeling unmoving in July sun, 
                                ass in the air, face to pavement, 
                                weirdly clean fingernails, 
                                neatly-manicured little crescent moons,
                                peeks sideways to see who’s coming.

                                Pre-pubescent boy plays accordion 
                                on the tram, small and sulky in a wifebeater,                              
                               “Never on Sunday” virtuoso. 
                                He raises his arms. 
                                Armpits of thick black man-hair.


 
7. Song, 2007. Camp X-Ray Cages 

Men in orange jumpsuits.  
Fingers laced through the fencing. 
Via Flaminia Vecchia graffiti: Dux mea lux. 
Hope it doesn’t mean Duce, my light.
I get scared, writes someone 
in the London Review of Books, 
when I see Fascists demonstrate,
though I know they’re only a small percentage
of the population.                                     
The sky seems a kind of wallpaper.
The river a moving screen.
The bird-strung bridges are where we feel the air.
Trivia question: Where is Blanca now?


8.  Argento Titano. Now Dusk Purple

Can’t cross the bridge. Dusk. Forza Nuova,
the refounded Fascists, demonstrate at the other end.
No agli zingari! they chant, joyous, 
in their phalanx or tight scrum. Zingari might
or might not be as bad as yelling 
nigger in America. Cops stand at the end of the bridge,
see-through riot shields locked edge to edge.
Protecting us? protecting them? Lovers oblivious  
clipping locks to locks, clicking cell phone-photos 
with the Mussolini eagles of the next bridge over
as backdrop. Lamps glowing the color of the moon. 

“We don’t like these,” says Altadonna, 
pointing at the protesters and maybe the police. 
Sparrows roil great circles above us, half the time
going backwards while moving forward, 
getting by almost not getting there,
brown backs wink in unison, white bellies flash,
disappearing into their dive. Giuseppe shouts “Suicidio!”
and pretends to climb the bridge wall. 
“Giuseppe!” Altadonna scolds. “Everytime 
he sees Fascists he pretends he kills himself.                     
Rape and murder are not gypsy crimes.”                            
“Droghe,” says Giuseppe. Altadonna: “Yes, 
now they are into drugs. It changes everything. 
I had a girlfriend, 30 years ago she spent three months
studying music with the gypsies. She had no problems
living with them. Of course that was Hungary. 
Of course it was Communists. Communists
knew how to make gypsies happy.
Leave them alone.” 

First draft title: “On Listening for the First Time
to a €185,000 Ferrari Stopped by a Fascist Demonstration,”
couldn’t make it work. One line worth saving: 
“Backing out sounded like clearing the throat of god.”                    

Giuseppe and Altadonna write their names on the biggest padlock
they can buy, size of a hand. Argento titano. They lock it, 
throw the key in the river, now dusk purple. 


9. Batti Batti le Manine
    
At the Caffé, Umberto the tweedy Sicilian travel agent 
who came to Rome many years ago 
loves to hold Maisie on his lap. We call him Umberto Umberto.
He teaches us a song: “Clap hands, daddy’s coming,
he’s bringing cookies and Maisie will eat them.”
Settling down in his red plastic chair: 
“I don’t like to see any group targeted.”
Stirring and sipping his corretto.
“On the other hand it looks bad to tourists,
these shit piles along the Tiber.”

Tonight I sing 
batti batti le manine, to Maisie, 
my mosquito-bit, big-eyed baby,  
we walk down the bank to the next bridge 
che adesso vien papà
then back up the other bank, a half-mile, mile 
che porta i biscottini 
to get around a demonstration
e Maisie li mangerà                             

Something in the weather, a lightness. It’s fall but feels like spring. 
Rome rushes back, shapes itself around me.                
“What do I have to be anxious about?” I say.
Singing, I pick Maisie out of her stroller. 
My back aches.
Maisie leans and writhes. 

At Ponte Milvio, the demonstration breaks up,
there’s running, a stream of thug-boys 
weaving through traffic
down the path to the Tiber bank                            
where human stink remains. 
Face-masks, bandanas pulled down—
One has a metal rod.                                

Here are the infinitives. 
Spingere. To push (your teeth in where you want). 
Dire. To say (nothing). Interessarsi di, To (not) care.
Avere. To have (a people who are the only ones who matter).  
Restare impunito per
To get away (with it when you need to get away). 


10. Rome and its Night

I want Blanca back.
Go away, we’ll tell her, each time she gets near.
She’ll steal from us if she gets a chance.
Why wouldn’t she.
We’ll have a bad feeling about the sway of her hips, her pushing mostly up to men.
We’ll tell her go away.
We can’t tell her to go away.
The gypsies are hounded out of Rome.
Sparrows level out, a net with the sparrows as knots.
Fifteen men run out of orangey streetlamp light at the Piazzale’s edge.
Zingaro! Zingaro! Animale! down the river path.
Who they chase gets away because here they are coming back to the street.
They pull off their hoods and bandanas.
The crazy guy in the gold lamé vest with the shopping cart and the cross around his neck
shouts at the black crazy guy who drinks wine out of a carton lying around on planters all day.
Maisie sleepily points at them. She likes to point.
There go Altadonna and Giuseppe—they got across.                
Fascist boys going different directions now in groups of two and three.
One, I just noticed, alone.
Bandana down below his chin.
He has a puckered asshole for a mouth.
Holds his cosh loose by his side.
Batti batti le manine.
He looks around at sparrow noise sucking itself down into a tree. 
Restare impunito per.
He weighs the cosh. It’s heavy.
He walks head down.
He thwacks at weeds. 
Young, beautiful, frail as Blanca, he has a cross around his neck.
That has nothing to do with what I wanted to say.
On a Metro platform, a crazy woman banging her head against a pillar—            
            what do you do, just look away?
Bad things happening make you feel alive.                    
The moon high up is a Roman sight.
Umberto Umberto at the awning edge at the edge of night watches away from the thugs 
into traffic, not wanting to have this in his life.
The last of the sparrows sweep into the tree in a panic of similes, 
a choral cutoff, visual thump, 
like our 21st Century, an afterbirth.
Rome and its night breathing
like a man on an oxygen tank   
tubes shoved up his nose
opens and shuts his mouth, fishily,
rhythmically, trying for more air.

[VESSEL] 
I am with my newborn son and the man blood says is my father 
in a shit motel and if each of us is, as I sometimes believe, 
the room we inhabit, he is a bed used until it’s stained. 
Even if I knew this first meeting was our last, I would 
have nothing to offer beyond the life I have made without him. 

[THICKET] 
In the far south where history shades everything, 
there are people who fear trees. I once heard an old man say 
I may be black as a crow but I’m white inside. 
Nowhere else does the sky do what the sky does there 
where the graves are filled with dirt the color of fire. 

[RAWHIDE CONE] 
We drank whiskey until we were drunk as the couple in the photo 
my mother gave me to show him, the boy and girl swaying 
at the edge of my future. I watched my father curl on the bed 
like a leaf drained of its greening as my child cried 
the way rain cries when it is changed to steam. 

[BOWER] 
Because I believe the tree is a symbol of everything, 
one of us was the bough reaching across the road as fumes 
scorch its leaves. One of us was a door opening and closing 
in the darkness, one of us was a boat being carried downstream. 

[MAROON] 
My father and I sat in a motel room beside a highway 
Where his pickup was the shade of a bruise beneath the glow 
of the vacancy sign. Where he and his talk began 
to evaporate. We were two fathers watching the faces 
of two sons where the evening passed as it arrived. 

[LADDER FOR BOOKER T. WASHINGTON] 
Where the rain comes, long toed and crushing the high grass, 
swamping the land, where a slave talked his children 
out of running away with the bottom of his shoe. 
This is what it means to believe in ascension and fear climbing.


[SANCTUARY] 
In the far south where sap jewels the bark, the teeth 
of the saws are sticky and bittersweet. But I wanted to carve 
a door out of the wood and around that door I wanted 
to build a room because I knew what my mother wished for 
and I knew from far off what she would need. 

[C.F.A.O.] 
The arm of the boy falls around the girl heavy as a branch 
in the photograph with the gloss that’s been rubbed 
clean and the blurred inscription which nearly delivers 
its message before vanishing. I drove the long night 
to see the face my son and I wear like a mask. 

[SELF] 
Where history can be a downpour of joy or guilt spilling 
its wronged headed desire all over the body. Where 
a boy and girl fought in a motel bed to make me, one desire 
beating against another. Where my mother seemed to blur 
calling him her first lover even after she said she was raped. 

[BELIEVER] 
In the far south my father, the first time I met him 
where for that night and the next one, he’d sleep, 
said God made nothing sweeter than pussy. We smoked 
our history, we drank to our future until each of us was 
a head of steam, clouds above each other’s dreams. 

[DOWAGER] 
Where the plan was when I saw him to cut off his hands. 
Where because of this man my mother would want me 
dead, would want no limbs to branch inside her, 
no cluster of sound waiting in a drum. Where 
she wanted to, but could not shape her want into an ax. 

[DEADEYE] 
Sometimes my body is a guitar, a hole waiting in wood, wires 
trembling to sleep. To identify what you are, to be loved by what 
you identify, I thought This is how the blood sings into the self. 
I thought what was hollow in me would be shaped into music. 


[BIG AND LITTLE SAME] 
The first time I met my father I believed I would understand 
the line connecting me to him because a man rooted to his kin 
can never be a slave. But he was like the road, skid marked 
and distant, like the rain breaking above ground and beating into it. 

[SOME TALES] 
In the far south where as one man swung from the limb 
Of a tree, he said I may be as black as this bark 
but my heart is light. Where even when your lantern burns 
out, they say the flame lasts. Where everyone I know 
is ablaze with this story and darkened by its ash. 

[RELIQUARY ] 
Certain arrangements must be made 
if you want access to the past. With his room 
without rooms and his truck without gas, 
my father was a nail bent in the shaft of a hammer, 
a wound the length of a kiss, a mouth bled of its power.

[CIRCUMBENT] 
I am with the ones the blood says are mine and if each of us is 
as I sometimes believe, little more than a bray of nostalgia, 
we are like the village mule chained to its muling. My father 
fit a slim ragged hand over the head of my newborn son 
and said he sounds like a white child crying like that. 

[MALEDICTION] 
What if blackness is a fad? Dear Negritude, I live as you live 
waiting to be better than I am. Before sleep last night I thought 
how it would be to awaken with all the colors of this world 
turned inside out. And that was the name of my suffering. 

[BASK] 
The story my father told me did not reveal one body inside 
another, the arms of the boy who would become my father 
embracing the girl who would become my mother, it did not hold 
the sentence rooted to the beginning of my life.

[OLD MOLE] 
I am not doing anything now, except waiting like the bird 
who uses the bones and feathers of other birds to build 
its nest. I am on my bed of leaves thinking about the past, 
how my father dragged his shadow across the room 
the way a storm drags its rain. 
(stanza break) 

[CONFESSIONAL] 
Where there were too many trees and too many names 
etched into the trunks, where the knots in the wood 
Were the scars of old limbs, where, to be reborn, the birch pine 
must be set aflame, where the door if I opened it might have 
Revealed the love making or abuse still waiting to be named.

Happiness isn’t

Something you’re born with.  
You have to decide.
New year, new body, girl, guy…

Love tattoos your insides
With humiliating stories,
Teen angst, breakouts and blemishes,

In vitro antagonism toward your skin.  
You look in the mirror
And freeze on the verge of tears.  You aren’t trying

To be sexy.  A tentacle of suicide
You thought you’d hidden
Hangs from the hide

That hides you.  You thought
Your death would soon be over.
You did the routine for years:

Broken-hearted girl 
Hiding in a complete stranger,
Trying to choose to survive.

Girl, the information is out there:
Main characters 
Are not supposed to die

Of the birth of their lives.  You 
Are an episode
You haven’t been watching.

Sometimes you scare, sometimes you inspire,
Sometimes you buy the myth
Of your early demise.  Physically, mentally, socially stripped, 

You wake up sad every day, 
Too nervous to make conversation, poorly equipped
To grow up as a girl, stranded 

At body central.  Whether or not
You change your appearance, this is your chance
To get what you want.

You have that light in your eyes.  Radiant hints 
Awaken in your spirit,
The tears streaming down your cheeks

Together form one big shine.
You’ve lost yourself, your babies, your marriage, 
In the name of a blank canvas,

An innate connection that can’t be explained,
A wave secured with pins, approaching yourself
From every angle, wishing

For that inner wisdom, wild and desirable,
That will transform you
Into destiny.

You feel your body
Is in the way.  Your body
Is the way.  Exuberant, luscious, 

Young along the cheekbones,
Proud of what you are becoming,
Your skin speaks of singing,

Taking on tough roles, swapping lives
With the girl you couldn’t down,  
A hybrid of myth and fact,

Identity and kindness, 
A new year, a new body
Lifting your roots to your crown.

Margaret says it’s nothing more than perspective.
She’s right, of course: perspective
being “the art of delineating solid objects
upon a plane surface so as to produce
the same impression of relative positions
and magnitudes, or of distance, as the actual objects
do when viewed from a particular point”
(Oxford Standard), the point
being the full and light-filled moon looked at,
here in mid-October, from the perspective of walking away from it
down Beacon Court. Perspective was what I lacked
an ability with when I was an art student
trying to sight down the row of different-storied
buildings on the far side of the street,
each one distinct yet connected,
as in a Hopper or Utrillo,
sun shadow or pencil-marking rain. Night, though,
is another thing altogether.
I’d just turned to consider
the blue cloud passing like a floating island nation
on the opposite end of the sky, then
turned back only to realize how high the moon had traveled,
had, in no time, risen as if lifted.
Perspective, Margaret said: like the problem I had drawing
depth of field, the illusion of a line diminishing
(the famous looming stones of graves in Queens
foreshadowing the skyline of Manhattan),
since perspective is as much about
the imagination as it is about
Brunelleschi.
As memory,
too, like too much in our lives, is perspective,
and between now and then often all we have.
Those, for instance, whom we’ve loved and unloved,
forming a line behind us, eventually fade,
in the long century photograph,
to the size of children or the half
of half of nothing of what they were.
I don’t have the answer.
Come close, we say, but keep your distance
(as if perspective were a dance).
And as you walk away you’ll disappear
(as if you’d not existed, were never here).

1
Face cross-hatched by violet shadows that fall round her like a net,
she struggles through steel walls to squeeze back
onto the street just before I wake, as if an unknown planet,
 
cross-currenting earth’s gravity, tugged her harder, harder:
Planet Pizza Crust, Planet Souvlaki Scrap,
Planet of Her Little House of Cardboard on the Corner,
 
Planet of Her Little House of Rain When It Rains.
She seems almost to swim, her legs on one side of the detention
center’s walls, her head and shoulders bursting
 
through the other: tagged in white paint on the steel doors:
Dios es amor: and then she slides
on through, exhaust fumes shawling round her shoulders.
 
2
I’d wake, she’d fade: and all through my walk to work, threading
hi-rise grids of Cor-Ten steel, I’d feel my grip, in that planet’s
influence, slipping off my lower rung; or like swaying on an I-beam
 
80 stories high, could I freefall as far as her?
—Face shoving through the dream, bundled in holey sweaters
and men’s sweatpants bulging with newspaper
 
to keep warm, she’d stare right through the lady cops
threatening to shoo her off—but just as often turning a blind eye
while she sat selling crayons loose from the box,
 
scratched bottles of nail polish, tattered books and magazines,
even a beret. Once, a draggled kitten
peeked its head out from her coat. Once I saw a man trying
 
to hit her, her screaming back, Get your pinche shit
away from me, pinche culero—everyone looking
away until the beat cops happened by and broke it up.
 
And once I saw her coming out of the detention center’s
cable-gridded doors: escorted by a guard,
she shrugged eyebrows in greeting; I smelled her odor,
 
laminar as wet spring dirt giving off leaf-rot,
urine tang, sweetish, acrid mellowing of dried feces:
there was something stolid, pugnacious even in her jaw’s jut
 
that shoved past barriers; yet she held aloof, caught
behind her own fragile walls, eyes signaling Posted No Trespassing
to mine. And behind that depth of silence, what?
 
3
“Underclass” “street people” “homeless” “the poor”—
as if such terms didn’t dull the gleam, amidst cratered concrete,
of the mother-of-pearl butterfly comb holding back her hair,
 
her own sense of her inside different than the eyes that looked at her,
no matter the seamed lines raying her mouth and eyes,
mascara smudged; as if the city’s lights could afford her nothing more
 
than her little busted lawnchair tethered to a single square of ungiving
sidewalk … but of course I knew, my dream made sure
I knew, the real nature of that illumination: her face keeps dissolving
 
into the detention center’s floodlights sanding smooth her features
even as she tries to hoard what she can against that glare: and as I give
her a quarter, the dream envelops me, she bends down to where
 
I huddle in a ratty sleeping bag, walkie-talkie voices crackling in my ear
Move Move as I lie there, unable to flinch a muscle.
And now she’s saying, what, she wants a dollar?
 
And the dream fading out, I’m shaking my head “no” with that little
annoyed shake that says, “who are you to me”
as our eyes swim away even as we exchange strained smiles . . .
 
4
Soon after that, I saw her counting spare change into
her drink holder, her face shining an angry orange:
jaundice, I remember thinking, she’s for it now:
 
and two weeks later, she was gone: maybe she moved to another part
of the city, but I’d seen that same orange
on a friend’s face just days before he died … Weeks after that,
 
I couldn’t walk by that spot without thinking how “Fenix”—
the name the dream called her, I never knew her real name—was still
there: so that when I neared the corner I couldn’t help but tense
 
a block or so away and grip whatever spare change I had,
knowing it wasn’t enough even as I tried not knowing, ready to trigger
loose my coins and nod, with feigned ease, to her nod . . .
 
And even now, in that tension that makes her absence
present, her atoms seem to leave a trace
that some sixth sense in me feels the way planets
 
feel the gravitation of black holes:
I see her at the edge of all that energy being sucked
into anti-matter feet first because gravity pulls
 
slightly stronger on her toes. And without really thinking
any of it’s there, I see the rickety, flashing wheels of her laundry cart.
I see her hand thrust out, face unreadable, gone wooden, gaze pointing
 
at my chest right at heart level. And most of all I see her sunglasses
that say in florid cursive on one tinted lens Kiss
and on the other lens My Ass.

Boys in flannel line up to see who can throw
     them the farthest, sending them spinning through
     the air like suns too drunk from summer’s end.
     Some the size of a giant tortoiseshell mold into
 
the most wicked faces. Chinese believe this fruit
is the most lucky of all—so fertile and thumpy
with a satisfying knock on its belly to plim
pregnant women nicely round. Every year I beg
 
     my mother to plant a pumpkin so we can harvest
     it together. A giant birthday cake for the woman
     who was born the day before Halloween, who I
     once thought was a witch herself when she cut
 
my curfew in half with a wave of her thin hands.
Seed & gutrot // Stem & root. The salty crunch
of toasted seeds—the only protection my mouth
has against witches. No more pie or bread stolen.

When I rinsed my spectacles under the tap and wiped them with my undershirt,

When every night the striped spider rebuilt her web, triangulating with a car 
    aerial that every morning pulled the work apart,

When a man, and then a woman, with orange flags flapping from their 
    motorchairs rolled under the kitchen windows, he with one leg, she with 
    none,

When the poor streets bore names like Gold, Paris, and Temple,

When from the Second Baptist Church came a song of dissatisfaction with the city of 
    men, in which one tenor predominated, especially when he paused to breathe,
When a sign told how at this mission migrants  prayed pardonne-nous nos offences,     
    fed on franks and beans, were handed a few dollars to tide them till they 
    disappeared into the mills lit all night,

(mills long shut, town folded for years at dusk),

Here the brightness that caught the eye by the river was only a marble in the 
    grass, a wish-fulfilling jewel I put in my pocket,

Here someone mowed grass in circles around a black stone and a white stone, 
    which married the black stone to the white stone,

Here the Kennebec was too wide fast and deep to swim, though gulls stood safe on 
    a strange middle shallow,

Here my name inside the rusty box where mail comes, and under that a bed of 
    Solomon’s Seal,

Here the little dirt playground taught with signs the animals of my Neighborhood! 
    moose, deer and fawn, coyote, red fox, beaver, fisher, sea otter, skunk, raccoon, 
    snakes (won’t hurt you), ground hog, ospre, Great Blue heron, STORKS, OWL, 
    squirles, muskrat. We live in the right place, 

Taught if you were NOT there, don’t use your voice to spread rumors. FINI – END – 
    Adios – Aloha – hasta la vista, Baby, 

Taught if you can’t make a decision right now, tell the other person you will get back to 
    them later. Take your time and make the Right Choice. No Sadness, 

Taught A Hundred Years Go By Quick (not knowing then all this would be gone by 
    spring),

And a Museum of the Streets sign remembered this is the way the trolley went, 
    how “riding in the wood-sided cars, listening to the bell clanging, was a 
    pleasure … convenient, economical and pollution-free,”

And a sign taped to that sign said Maggy a longhaired grey aged one and a 
    half years is missing,

And a window warned “Never Mind the Dog Beware the Owner,”

Where some person entirely without irony let pink petunias overflow the
    windowboxes of a white cottage with blue shutters,

Where roses set their autumn hips again, and bittersweet its feral fruit,

Where there was water and the sound of water,

Where a urinous wall inside the former token-booth of the Two-Cent Bridge 
    (since 1973 on the National Register of Historic Places) announced I give 
    Good Head and have a Nice Dick followed by a number and Ask for Travis,

Where a polished stone explained THIS TREE IS A SYMBOL OF THE 
    FRIENDSHIP SINCE 1990 BETWEEN KOTLAS, RUSSIA AND     
    WATERVILLE, MAINE, an idea of Natalia Kempers who before she passed 
    was “translator of the many correspondences that arose through the 
    Connection,”

And a man in black, maybe Travis, stepped onto the bridge as I stepped off,

And the tent-moth hid its young in silken bags,

And according to the landlady, Ivan the three-legged cat dodged death at the 
    shelter by virtue of passionate leanings, wreathings and rubbings,

And there was porn for straights but none for gays in the back room of the local 
    video mart, where a sign requested please be courteous and put your choice into 
    the small black bags provided before you bring it to the counter,

When work carried me far beyond, Stephen my little wood dove,

When a pickup parked under CAUTION CHANGING RIVER BOTTOM at the 
    absolute lonesome bottom of an early Sunday morning boat ramp might 
    have been looking for a sign of love, 
                                                                       but started his engine and drove away 
    after I gave him my back for half an hour, didn’t turn even once to meet his 
    gaze,

When I washed my door with a rag, 
    and thought myself the first, the only, the one, the solitary, the unique.

Then filled the soul with doubt, with every kind of not-knowing, 
    and made a song of the cloud of unknowing, which sang

the terrible, deep modesty of creatures, every poor trickling momentary thing

And so we’ve all been told to shutup (Don’t talk, they say,
too fast, too loud, or for too long. Don’t take too much time
trying to tell the truth). But this is my work,
to break out —in the presence of strangers— into laughter,
to watch small children, for example, fill with the lucky gust
a poem can ride into the near stillness of a room
and dance. For that, I am always, as now, grateful.
 
My father tells me, in his seminary days,
during the Japanese occupation,
most of the priests who ran that school were German.
The boys, then, were to speak only in Latin,
and would surely be slapped three Sundays back
if heard speaking the language of my father’s country,
which is a beautiful country and a beautiful language,
and which has a curious word for being
so suddenly seized by affection, you clench
every muscle from your eyelids to your toes
for wanting to hold a loved one tight, to squeeze one
and kiss one so deep, you place yourself and your beloved
on the brink of physical harm. There’s no word for this
in English, no word for those small provinces of silence
or for the kind of love that will trouble that silence
into music. My work is trying to find the very word
rippling in my body, which is a woman’s body,
my mother’s, and a man’s body, my father’s,
and nowhere to be found in the languages
that have conquered the lands of my ancestors.
 
On the outskirts of every empire, there are man-made
lakes large enough to receive with ease
one hundred villages’ worth of bones tossed into them.
This is a fact: there are more than seven million Ilocanos
in the Philippines, maybe a million in diaspora. All of us,
at one time or another, have been told to shutup, don’t talk
too loud, too slow, or for too long, in Saudi
Arabia, in Madrid, in Tokyo, in Milan, on Bowery
near the foot of 1st  Street. We’ve been told this. Some of us
have been famous liars, Ferdinand for example 
(who married another liar, Imelda), and my grandfather,
kapitan of the barrio, who claimed to kick the shit
bare-fisted and single-handedly out of fourteen ruffians
in the small barangay of Santo Tomás. Actually,
he kicked the shit out of five – nine ran away. These are not
lies. This is the truth. I’m not wealthy. I can’t buy
space and time on billboards or websites. The name I inherit
doesn’t part columns in the city’s Daily Journal.
My family comes from a long line of farmers.
My cousins scrub their chopping blocks with salt.
They shush the goats before they kill them.

The voice (vow)
is a breath (brother),
a spirit, a spiral, a sphere,
it woos (waves — wives,)
 
the wild

I was born in minutes in a roadside kitchen a skillet
whispering my name. I was born to rainwater and lye;
I was born across the river where I
was borrowed with clothespins, a harrow tooth,
broadsides sewn in my shoes. I returned, though
it please you, through no fault of my own,
pockets filled with coffee grounds and eggshells.
I was born still and superstitious; I bore an unexpected burden.
I gave birth, I gave blessing, I gave rise to suspicion.
I was born abandoned outdoors in the heat-shaped air,
air drifting like spirits and old windows.
I was born a fraction and a cipher and a ledger entry;
I was an index of first lines when I was born.
I was born waist-deep stubborn in the water crying
ain’t I a woman and a brother I was born
to this hall of mirrors, this horror movie I was
born with a prologue of references, pursued
by mosquitoes and thieves, I was born passing
off the problem of the twentieth century: I was born.
I read minds before I could read fishes and loaves;
I walked a piece of the way alone before I was born.

a bayonet in a tattoo in the shape of a skull-at-arms
this was what we were up against
as girls stood up for their dream in the way of life
the fair sex will retaliate
the dark sex will retaliate
a fair break, justice in love?
what it takes: to break a stupor
what it takes: a new metabolic modus
what will it take: an antithetical hallucination?
new narrations, tensions, take back: stoned for adultery
all actions reversed in masculine time
horoscopes read & remarked upon
what is in my stars today? what planets rule?
take back the romance to die in war
saw “the camps”
saw the horror
go to a place now that engenders reverie
mythical anti-fascist space & be a mutable form,
a shape-shifter
be that little girl with her tiny instruments
who investigates the maginifcent cosmos
be next to her as she works overtime in the scriptorium

Women have always inserted objects into orifices.
Swan feathers are offered to pacify the sea.
I once refused a gift of a toy.
The original rosary 165 rolled rose petals.
Think of the hands doing such affectionate work.
My birth on May 25 makes me a twin:
one of me immobile on the mattress,
the other never leaves the mountain.
Women have always inserted objects into orifices:
oiled snakes and molted stones;
sphinx moths and cygnet eggs.
After the execution of Christ
Mary Jacobe and Mary Salome
were exiled to the sea –
banished in a small boat without food, water, or sails.
Black Sara, queen of the gypsies
swam out and rescued them.
Now every May 25 the statues of Sara and the two Marys
are taken out of sealed boxes
from the crypt of Les Saintes-Maries-de-la-Mer
and carried out on a boat to bless the sea.
Women have always inserted objects into orifices:
the tongue of a panther, the fist of a fox.
The juice of wild poppies drunk as anesthetic.
There are days when I can’t get out of bed.
Languor and legs weaving anamnesis and appetite.
Days when I can’t get wet, afraid of water.
So much is decided by the timbre of the sky,
by the particles afloat in my blood.
Somniloquy and the distillation of rose water.
The tongue extends itself to lilt on one’s own nipple.
Blessed by the visitation of pigeons on the lintel.
My hands tying together white sheets to make a ladder.
My hands unraveling the twine of a torn kite to the sky.

1/
What else is one to do — when one has so little and so little to look
Forward to? Today, I staked the tomatoes; tomorrow, it’s going to
     rain.
2/
A cool, wet spring and everything rotten —.
3/
Forget about your bones,
This wet gets in the soul,
 
The spirit, whatever you
Want to call it, that pilot
 
Light we’re all so proud
Of, and makes you wish
 
Its sad dim flame would
Just hiss-out — the water-
 
Logged fronds of the tin
Palms dripping, the gate
Swinging, sodden, on its
Hinge.
 
4/
          The thunder down its heavy leather
Lays and from the ruined garden by the lake a hazy murmuration
    lifts into the rain-lit
Air, blurs into the mists that swirl there,
Then settles in thin wing-swept breaths
Back
Into the maidenhair —
5/
 
          I have an idea, let’s all live forever!
6/
If it doesn’t rain tomorrow, maybe I’ll water the tea roses; maybe
I’ll weed something.

sulking two lane highway
hereford and steer wave
sad, watery eyes, mouth
mouthfuls of bad manners.
 
this mid-sized sportscar
momentary thrill, quick
escape from mulch, ominous
future. a crimson valley
 
just beyond the fading idea
of intersection, karen silkwood’s pale
imprint—lifeless silos, limping
tallgrass. a town named crescent
 
struggling to recover after death
her murder wrought three decades
gone. speed zone—55, 45, then 35
now 25, pentecostal church, bowing
 
a-frames, tasty treet, jail, post
office, then 35, 45, 55, 70—a memory
withering on the roadside.

In the sideview mirror of my car
through the morning fog I saw a human skull
that had to be my face, where the headlights
of the car behind me should have been,
or a morning star. I did not think
to step on the gas and race away from the skull
I knew it wasn’t behind me. Still it had me by the throat.
I can tell a raven from a crow,
a female evergreen from a male,
but I can’t tell visionary bone from ghost.
I’m used to my eyes fibbing to me,
5s are sometimes 8s, 2s, 3s.
I know the Chinese character for the word “nature”
is a nose that stands for breathing — life.
I need to see an ancient nose in the mirror.

Let us remember the wasps
That hibernated in the walls
Of the house next door. Its walls
Bulged with twenty pounds of wasps
 
And nest, twenty pounds of black
Knots and buzzing fists. We slept
Unaware that the wasps slept
So near us. We slept in black
 
Comfort, wrapped in our cocoons,
While death’s familiars swarmed
Unto themselves, but could have swarmed
Unto us. Do not trust cocoons.
 
That’s the lesson of this poem.
Or this: Luck is beautiful.
So let us praise our beautiful
White neighbor. Let us write poems
 
For she who found that wasp nest
While remodeling the wreck.
But let us remember that wreck
Was, for five decades, the nest
 
For a black man and his father.
Both men were sick and neglected,
So they knew how to neglect.
But kind death stopped for the father
 
And cruelly left behind the son,
Whose siblings quickly sold the house
Because it was only a house.
For months, that drunk and displaced son
 
Appeared on our street like a ghost.
Distraught, he sat in his car and wept
Because nobody else had wept
Enough for his father, whose ghost
 
Took the form of ten thousand wasps.
That’s the lesson of this poem:
Grief is as dangerous and unpredictable
As a twenty-pound nest of wasps.
 
Or this: Houses are not haunted
By the dead. So let us pray
For the living. Let us pray
For the wasps and sons who haunt us.

How horrible it is, how horrible
that Cronenberg film where Goldblum’s trapped
 
with a fly inside his Material
Transformer: bits of the man emerging
 
gooey, many-eyed; bits of the fly
worrying that his agent’s screwed him–
 
I almost flinch to see the body later
that’s left its fly in the corner, I mean
 
the fly that’s left its body, recalling too
that medieval nightmare, Resurrection,
 
in which every soul must scurry
to rejoin the plush interiors of its flesh,
 
pushing through, marrying
perhaps indiscriminately
 
because Heaven won’t take what’s only half:
one soul blurring forever
 
into another body.
If we can’t know the boundaries between ourselves
 
in life, what will they be in death,
corrupted steadily on each side
 
by maggot, rain and superstition, by affection
that depends on memory to survive?
 
People should keep their hands to themselves
for the remainder of the flight:
 
who needs another’s talent, good looks,
or insecurities?
 
Darling, what I love in you I pray will always stay
the hell away from me.

I love the story of the famous feminist
who decided to get married finally
after years of expressed contempt for it,
 
for what she had called the Declaration of Dependence
and “the sanctioned endorsement of
the testosterone conspiracy.”
 
But here she was, filling in that blank
on the certificate, her name in ink like blood
and she feeling a little dizzy after all the swerves
 
in that momentous signature.
Some people said it was a breach of revolutionary trust
but I liked the sight of her
 
walking her guy under the corny arch of flowers,
wearing her white, unbleached cotton
non-corporate-exploitation-third world wedding dress
 
-past the pew of rape counselors and libertarians,
the lesbian separatists no-so
separate anymore,
 
crying to see their friend so ordinary.
There are five different equally valid reaons
she would not like my
 
saying she is a better man than me,
but really,
what else do we mean by brave? -
 
having all your life tried to prove the opposite
and then one day to simply say
“I am
 
like everybody else.
Let me be folded back
into the tribe
 
like a stalk of grain
into the sheave;
like a word into the book.”
 
And the old convention of the wedding night -
all that frizzy grey hair
and laughter in the dark.

As for living to one side of yourself like a pile of rice
                   in the vicinity of the fish (as for being an eye-self
                               hanging above a body-self
 
content with separating cowboy stuff
                   from G.I. Joe stuff from Batman boxer shorts):
                               yeah, I’ve been there, I know what you mean,
 
don’t get me started.  There were, in fact,
                   ten rooms in one house. 
                               And dust and a couch and dirt and lamps. 
 
I was thus the body of the two hands
                   and the body of the feet
                               becoming somehow
 
the body primarily of the mouth
                   demanding bleach.  It’s not that I was
                               pitiful.  It was more like:
 
who else would eradicate
                   the rotten scattering of skin flakes
                               and hair and spiders
 
and such?  Who else would swab the spit? 
                   So sure it was wholesome at the river
                               when I was a new mom
 
but creepy is the point
                   to live for the wiping of boots
                               and the soaking of jackets
 
with my mouth open and my poor tongue sticking out
                   like I was hoping to comprehend
                               what was wrong
 
with being mostly as I say
                   just the eye part of something
                               soaking in the grimy particles
 
while all the other girls went on being actual girls
                   and I’m sorry to have to say this
                               since I know it’s upsetting
 
but that’s the way it was; I appreciate your asking
                   come again real soon
                               be careful watch your step.

The Americans tried and tried to see
the invisible Indians in the deeper jungle
of Brazil. Finally they put things in the clearing
and waited. They waited for months,
maybe for years. Until a knife and a pot
disappeared. They put out other things
and some of those vanished. Then one morning
there was a jungle offering sitting on the ground.
Gradually they began to know the invisible
by the jungle’s choices. Even when nothing
replaced the gifts, it was a kind of seeing.
Like the woman you camp outside of, at the five portals.
Attending the conduits that tunnel from the apparatus
down to the capital of her. Through the body
and its weather, to the mind and heart, to the spirit
beyond. To the mystery. And gradually to the ghosts
coming and leaving. To the difference between
the nightingale and the Japanese nightingale
which is not a nightingale. Getting lost in the treachery
of language, waylaid by the rain dancing its pavanne
in the bruised light of winter afternoons.
By the flesh, luminous and transparent in the silent
clearing of her. Love as two spirits flickering
at the edge of meeting. An apartment on the third
floor without an elevator, white walls and almost
no furniture. Water seen through pine trees.
Love like the smell of basil. Richness beyond
anyone’s ability to cope with. The way love is after fifty.

“I’m fat and I’m old and I’m going to die,” Dorianne says
as we’re taking our after dinner walk on the grounds of the Esalen Institute
which are gorgeous, but not very big, so we tromp back and forth
up the back entrance road, past the parked cars and the compost pile
where we turn around and start back again.
 
Dorianne’s smoking American Spirits
with an Indian in a feathered headdress on the pale green box,
packaged to make you feel they’re organic, connected to the native tradition,
bits of tobacco in a soft leather pouch offered to the gods
to ward off something—maybe the exact thing she’s feeling now.
 
We’re crossing over the arched wooden bridge, the river running under us
past a round redwood meditation hall neither of us has ever entered.
“I took a shower,” she says, “and as I was drying I looked in the mirror.
Wouldn’t it be enough to be just fat or just old or dying?”
We’re passing through the garden now.
 
There’s a virtual wall of sunflowers, each magnificent
full seeded head fringed with yellow flames,
and on the wide lawn ahead the yoga class unfurls their arms toward the sun.
The aroma of whole wheat bread baking mixes with the scent of salt and kelp.
I say, ” I’ve gained back the weight I lost, I’ve got my pot belly again.
 
Last week I asked Janet how much it mattered on a scale of one to ten.
She said seven. I thought she’d say two, or maybe three at most.
So I waited a few days and broached it again.
‘Maybe I’ll cut out desserts,’ I ventured, but she was reading about hive death
and raids on illegal aliens and lacing up her boots to go to work.”
 
We’re headed toward the baths. You’re not allowed to smoke
past the bench halfway down, so Dorianne grinds her cigarette into the dirt
and shreds it as we stride along. When we get to the bottom of the incline,
we can smell the sulphurous fumes, the hot bliss I now connect with sinking
into those stone tubs, but we turn right around and head back up.
 
There are so many things to feel bad about, just in our two families alone,
but we don’t talk about them now. I’ve cried so much this past year,
I just can’t cry anymore. We’re crossing the bridge again.
Someone has planted succulents along the edge of a stump
like a ribbon of green petaled roses. Dorianne lights another cigarette
 
with a Bic she slips from her pocket. “I stole this,” she says, “from the 7/11.”
“Oh,” I say, “do you do that a lot?” She takes out a smaller Bic.
“This one I bought. My hair looks terrible, even though I washed it.”
“I read,” I tell her, “the average woman has 12.5 miles of hair.”
“We get nervous with silence,” she says.
 
“Mostly we talk just to reassure each other.”
“Yea,” I say, “I’m not going to eat you. Don’t eat me.”
Dorianne slips her hand through my arm. There’s not a star visible in the sky.
The fog’s come in so thick we can barely see the tops of the cypress.
 
We’ve passed the compost again and are headed back down.
“Do you want to soak in the baths?” I ask. “No,” she says,
“Joe’s been down there already and he’ll be back soon.”
We’re standing outside her door. She says, “To me, your belly is only a two.”
“Probably not even that,” I say and kiss her and go to my room.

While he was gone, Mrs. Jeffers wanted someone around
who knew her son. So Mary went. Mostly to see
his trophy case. Mostly to trail the tension of her skin
along the etched brass that witnessed his victories.
Her palm cry quieted there, touching those lost spaces
inside his name. Mrs. Jeffers thought he’d joined up
for freedom. Mrs. Jeffers didn’t know her son.
She thought he would come home directly. But he didn’t
go straight home the day he crossed the line
with nothing but his name. Instead, he’d thrown gravel
at Mary’s window, and when she came running
to the yard, he told her why he’d joined. The recruiter promised
nothing more than a rifle, a backpack, and a hard time.
He told her no one had ever been straight with him before.
Then he kissed her. Kissed her like a man would kiss a woman,
after their children were asleep, if just that night,
his father’s noble battle lost, he’d held his body while he died.

Matthew Dickman went on a trip.
He put himself into a barrel
and shot his lithe frame into space.
When he got to Venus
he sent me a message.
It was a flower, a purple rose,
from the deep dark.
I will swim today, he said,
in the pink waters of Venus.
It might have been a vagina he was talking about,
but knowing Matthew Dickman means
that when the world looks like an onion
and two kids on bikes about to hit the mud puddle,
that’s about what it’s all about.
 
I missed him for a second, when I got his rose, and jumped
on my lawnmower to cut the grass
with no shirt on in the thirty five degree Columbia County breeze.
The air against my nipples and mourning doves’ song through the
            treetops
meant it was spring
even though it was Saturday.
Every daffodil had its head on straight.
Every beaver had a twig in its mouth.
 
And Dickman was up there orbiting and avoiding,
in full gallop
at 10,000 miles per minute. I shouted,
who the fuck can stop you now, rocket boy!?
But no one could hear a word from my lips,
the mower as loud as a concubine at midnight
between the wet grapes and Egyptian sheets.
 
The truth of the thing is,
when a man goes on a trip in a barrel
a million miles into space, there’s not a thing any of us can do to stop him.
He comes back when he comes back
and we bake a cake.
Whatever moondust got into his eye, whatever
vision of the celestial madness ricocheted into his lungs,
is his.
That song of solitude;
that slow burn of the beautiful abyss.
 
He’s up there now, Dickman, in the pink waters of his Venus.
I cut this lawn for him.

Now in the blessed days of more and less
when the news about time is that each day
there is less of it I know none of that
as I walk out through the early garden
only the day and I are here with no
before or after and the dew looks up
without a number or a present age


I can’t erase her voice. If I opened the door to the cage & tossed the magpie into the air, a part of me would fly away, leaving only the memory of a plucked string  trembling in the night. The voice unwinds breath, soldered wires, chance, loss, & digitalized impulse. She’s telling me how light pushed darkness till her father stood at the bedroom door dressed in a white tunic. Sometimes we all wish we could put words back into our mouths. 
 
I have a plant of hers that has died many times, only to be revived with less water & more light, always reminding me of the voice caught inside the little black machine. She lives between the Vale of Kashmir & nirvana, beneath a bipolar sky. The voice speaks of an atlas & a mask, a map of Punjab, an ugly scar from college days on her abdomen, the unsaid credo, but I still can’t make the voice say, Look, I’m sorry. I’ve been dead for a long time.

What time is it when an elephant sits on a fence?
Time for the chicken to wander lonely as a road, time
 
for the full-fledged conniption fit about what’s not
on the fence or the road—not that pink one! The other
 
pink one! The one with the blue balloon on its rump,
the one she’s grown fond of, used to, the one to grow on,
 
grown on, drone on, which is what time it is, and what makes it
so special? And he says sparkles, but I say a story I can’t quite
 
figure out. I say, we need a verb: to art! To take the ho hum mundane,
and sparkle-ize it. Catch my glittery drift? Mine glimmering eye?
 
As in degree of usefulness.  As in what the eye wants. Like billboards
salivating the dollar burger. Yes, we laughed when we saw the one
 
about the unibrow, but then we bought the ticket, bought it like the functions
of light and dark—sun equals crops, darkness tucks us into bed—
 
vs. all things good and bad. And also it’s tidying. Sensing there’s a mess,
making sense of it. Assemblage. Installation. Here, let me
 
untangle that. There, I unraveled the ball of yarn that guy’s
been twining since 1967. Hiring a maid, a ready-made.
 
Half the time de-conundruming, the other half
upping the chaos, making the messes, messes of messes,
 
going, you call that a storm? I’ll show you a storm, blasting
the viewer to Neptune’s 900-mile-an-hour winds. Riddling the regular
 
with reindeer rivets. Oh, and better make sure it strikes a chord
any Hindu, hay-seed, or Yoruba can grok (grok that?).
 
But really it’s just arranging, an arrangement, a bunch
of peonies, a couple irises, six long-stemmed roses. Not cut
 
and dried ones; real ones you put in water. Ungraspable’s
good, too, as in stung like stinging nettle. As in this could be
 
a dream of eating ants, or this could be eating ants. But how,
you ask, did the Brillo pad scrub its way into a museum
 
 
my three year old could’ve built? Read above, where I mention
billboards, degree. What does art guide or guard? A whisper
 
of irony,  a poke at documentary veracity, absurdity you may
or may not catch.  I should hope it welcomes spies in the house
 
of serendipity, the calling into question of everything hanging
on every gallery’s walls, but that’s just my Jackson Pollock splatting.
 
And then there’s wanting to crack the safe, break into that box
because tick-tock the game is locked. As in let me see, am I
 
seeing this right? It’s a pill, isn’t it? An insect eye? A sort of button
to push? A microcosm? A spaceship, no, yes, one of the 1,500
 
galaxies in Deep Field North? I knew it! I just knew it! A fertility goddess
walking her dog! Something that used to happen freely (freedom?)
 
that’s recently been fenced. Something like feedlot confinement, I bet.
Or, no: I know! A subdivision, plans for the Fidalgo Bay Expansion,
 
complete with where the water will go. A trilobite? Or. She’d had
an identity and lost it. Her identity now orbiting like that 28,000-
 
km-per-hour glove dropped by a Gemini astronaut, the most dangerous
garment in history. Art is a dangerous garment. Art is the dress
 
you don’t wear to work. Art’s best kept with the cowboy poetry
boots and the atheist-patterned tights. Don’t want to get art
 
on your face, either. It might make your neighbor edgy, especially
if you ask him to share his thoughts about the imagination.
 
Discuss, instead, mowers, whether to go with gas or electric. Ask
to borrow his edger. Ask if it’s time your lawn had more edge. Or.
 
She’d never been one for solving riddles, but she liked a good joke.
And fences make good neighbors.

Say it wasn’t your eloquence, as you supposed,
That won your wife’s affections but the odd,
Congenital squeak in your voice that reminded her
Of her dad’s voice which was squeakier.
Say you didn’t earn her as Jacob earned Rachel,
Toiling seven years, and seven more,
When you marked on your sample ballot at the polling place
The same losers she planned to vote for,
When you spoke of the many unfriendly porch steps
You’d climbed on weekends to canvass for true reform,
When you detailed the doors slammed in your face
Just as you opened your argument for higher taxes.
Why should it make you sad to leave the club
Of the self-made, where the meetings drone on
As each of the members lists his accomplishments?
Why not prefer the club of the lucky, the blessed,
Where you can muse in your garden under lilac trees
Already tall and fragrant when you moved in?
Once it seemed important that you clean the yard
By hand from a tangle of underbrush,
That you bricked the path and carved the fountain.
Let it now be more relevant to your pleasure
To muse on the box of miniature garden tools
Your father gave you fifty years back,
The ones your mother let you keep playing with
When the children next door called you to their games.
Wonder how she managed to resist her fear
You’d be a loner, where she got the faith
A friend was included among the gifts
Time was planning to send your way.

The neighbors’ baby died age one month
so they’re off to Big Sur “to celebrate her life”
and I stupidly agreed to feed their dog—
a twelve year old wire-haired mix, half blind,
half dead itself, its gum lines receded to a rictus grin.
What was I supposed to say when the husband asked?
“Your baby’s dead, but I can’t be bothered.
I don’t really know you.  Ask someone else.
I don’t like your dog.  I think it’s hideous.
What if it dies while you’re away?
I’m supposed to call and tell you that?
I don’t want to touch it.
What if your misfortune is contagious?”
But I said “Be glad to,” and he embraced me,
this Kurt or Kirk, I’m not even sure which.
“Siobhan”—that’s his wife—“can’t stand to kennel her,”
he sobbed into my shoulder, his eye rims moistening
behind his clownish owlish oversized glasses
he knocked askew against my clavicle.        
It startled me so much I couldn’t guess
who “her” referred to until I got he meant the dog.
All her’s: the dead baby, the wife, and now the dog.

I don’t like the dog.  It stinks.  It needs a bath.
Who washes a dog during a month like that?
But I’ll be damned if I’m going to do it—
dried dogshit or worse matted in hair 
the color and texture of rusted wire
caked with rotted moldy drywall.
The dog howls all day—and I mean all day—
as if these were the feelings left inside the house.
From outside all month the house had been silent 
except the one time early on the paramedics came 
so the neighborhood knew a disaster was happening. 
I never doubted for a moment there was wailing inside,
including the baby’s, which must have been constant. 
But the dog didn’t howl until everyone was gone. 

Siobhan has to be forty-something—
They supposedly did a doula water birth at home,
her husband assisting, no doctor, no amnio, 
no genetic testing—I think they belong 
to some megachurch where the pastor 
the size of a fish stick from the bleacher seats
projects fifty feet high with his bleached teeth
and they sing-along upbeat Christian music
ten thousand strong, as loudly as they can.
“To celebrate her life”: the pastor’s phrase, I bet.
If that helps them bear it, fine.
All I know is I have their dog to deal with.
One thing I’m not doing besides wash it
is walk it, so I called a franchised service
that sent a Belarusian with a crescent nose stud
(God knows what his story is)
who rang my doorbell after half an hour.
“I can’t walk dog,” he said.  “It won’t go.
It won’t leave house.  I think it sick.
You better take it to vet.”   So I did.
Again I picked one from the phonebook,
who charged me eighty bucks to find a loose tooth, 
although he offered a thousand dollars worth of tests.
“The dog is old,” he said.  Oh.  Thanks.
Then I tried at home pretending the dog was mine,
actually petting it (a bit) and talking in goofy baby tones
while giving liver chips and buddy biscuits and playing fetch,
but, while I napped, it scratched off the front door paint 
and started gnawing its way out.   
After I gated it back in the neighbors’ kitchen
with its blanket and bowls and dried bull pizzle,
it began howling again, which is what it’s doing now.

Maybe there’s something in the house still.
Maybe tiny syringes and bandages upstairs
the dog smells.  It would be too odd to go up there
where the baby was, into the baby’s room,
with the neighbors’ hopes there as furniture,
pink bunny or smiley angel or kiddie Bible wallpaper.
It would be like being inside their privacy,
their intimacy, their monthlong nightmare.
Maybe I have to call them after all.
I hate to call them—they should have peace
to grieve enough to live again in a house 
that no matter what they believe or understand 
will never be for one moment as they thought.
I don’t know what else to do but call them.
Their dog—their ugly old dog—is howling for them 
and will not stop.

Children play ball
In the crowded plaza

Not in spite of the crowd
But because of it.
 

This morning I rode my gray metal bike 
through the city throwing its trucks at me, 
sometimes along the narrow designated 
lanes with white painted symbolic bicyclists 
so close to the cars too close to my shoulders, 
and sometimes down alleys where people
on piles of clothes lie sleeping or smoking
or talking in the shade. Cars parked there 
have signs in their windows that the doors 
are unlocked and there is no radio. 
It is remarkable to me that downtown 
is always so remarkable to me. Every single 
time I feel so shiny mixing my intention 
with all the other lives, each so much 
more interesting and easy for me to imagine 
than the tourists muttering to each other 
over their maps in some garbled 
by traffic or wind foreign language I never 
quite hear. From my window the old 
brick factory building with its large white 
graceful letters seems to be actually 
proudly saying WILLIAM HENRY STEEL
to the sky, the building floats, up and to 
the right but it’s the clouds of course 
that move. Or is it? The earth moves, 
farther off a squat little tower with three 
huge metal cylinders that must be 
for sending some invisible electric 
particles out into the city. I only feel 
free when I am working, that is writing 
this book about a pair of zombie detectives 
who painstakingly follow clues they think
are hidden in an authentic Tuscan cookbook. 
It is really more a sort of transcribing, 
every day I close my eyes and see 
them in an ancient yet modern high ceilinged 
earth-toned kitchen, laughing as they 
blunder through the recipes, each day 
a little closer towards the name of their killer 
whose face will soon to all of us be clear. 
They have a little zombie dog, I name him 
William Henry Steel, and this will be 
my great work time has brought me here to do.

ANOTHER THING I'D RATHER NOT KNOW ABOUT MYSELF
Is what a good soldier I’d make.  A man
and woman come in to the coffee shop 
and talk about the dinner party menu
like it’s the divorce settlement.  I watch
them sit down, each ready to write
and argue, and he suggests jambalaya
and she says she’s okay with that
to which he says you don’t sound okay
with that and to answer she only asks
how it’s spelled so she can type the decision
into her laptop, finally.  And I don’t
mean to say I’d be a good killer, 
just good like she is at taking
small deaths in.  He’s shot.  Alright,
it’s happened, I would think, because
that’s what I’ve thought at every
bad turn in life: tire blown, it’s 
happened, money gone, it’s happened,
pipes broken so the sewage has been
piling under the house for a month,
it’s happened and we’ll have to get 
a pump in there to siphon it out.  
Like the woman pecking now
without grudge at the keys that make
the word jambalaya, I’m quick to forgive
and get on.  And I can see me there
on the battlefield, where nowadays
robots, I’m told, rank and move 
with the regiment and it’s not so much a field
with two sides charging as a zone in which
every bit of live body heat is fair game,
where we’re all programmed for peace
until a voice echoes in our helmet that
we should fire at will.  And fire we will,
all of us, and I think I’d be good
at staying willing, at letting each little
hit happen because there, it’s happened
and isn’t it little?  Doesn’t the grand
amount of flame-tinted shadows
on the infrared scanner make it so?  Yes
I’d be such a good soldier.  For
when the fire came back at us, too
and you fell next to me I would
forgive the firer and get on with firing
at him.  I’d forget about you
and engage.  I’d be okay with that.

The day the fat woman
In the bright blue bathing suit
Walked into the water and died,
I thought about the human
Condition. Pieces of old fruit
Came in and were left by the tide.
 
What I thought about the human
Condition was this: old fruit
Comes in and is left, and dries
In the sun. Another fat woman
In a dull green bathing suit
Dives into the water and dies.
The pulmotors glisten. It is noon.
 
We dry and die in the sun
While the seascape arranges old fruit,
Coming in and the tide, glistening
At noon. A woman, moderately stout,
In a nondescript bathing suit,
Swims to a pier. A tall woman
Steps toward the sea. One thinks about the human
Condition. The tide goes in and goes out.

Ah, timing. Woody Allen says
it’s everything. I say it’s nothing,
can’t touch it, wear it, hold it up
between your fingers and shake it
like a napkin. Timing is what you have
when you don’t have anything else,
a facility with the wine list, a joke
that hits the bull’s eye in the spongy
marrow of the funny bone. Or death,
that takes timing too, to elude,
you must bend to pick up the fork
you nervously, clumsily dropped
so the bullet that whizzed through the wall
from the shop next door where a man
of few words was holding up
a terrified clerk lost his balance
for a moment and the gun went off,
the bullet marked to end the next thought
in your roundly specific head sailing
straight through the window, shattering
the harmless glass, nicking the letter D
on the marquee across the street, a movie
you meant to see after dinner with a woman
who could become your wife, but who now
looks at you as if you were a wanted man, a man
with a foreseeable future, though not
in the way you had hoped.

It used to be more fun to be a poet
start the day with coffee and a sense
of bowling over people in a public space
with words that tell how I’m bowled over
this minute by the light
that pours across the city and its various shoes
and uniforms of occupation
troops whose ways of life I’d never share
but for the spaces
we separately passed through
I thought that I was different as I filled
those yellow pads with words
written in the styles of heroes
I wanted to be famous as, but younger,
the New York Ingenue School
of poetry and life but now I know
that saying that I’m different
from the rest because I make a poem
instead of shoes and uniforms
is how I drove my car toward death
too long—it wasn’t sloth
or lust or self-absorption
that put me where I ended up,
I was a poet, the same excuse
and boast my heroes used—the one
who was too drunk to see
the headlights coming, the one
who never left his bed, the connoisseur
of cure and re-addiction, the messed-up
child it used to be more fun before I knew
that what I thought I was and wanted
was death and my embroidery a shroud.
Say it loud, I’m not proud
of handiwork like that. I used to think
that poetry could serve the revolution
and that the revolution would transform
the world because the only way
that I could see things ever
changing was from outside
so I hitched my fortune to a threadbare star.
It was more fun to write against the war
when we thought the gifts our heroes
the downtrodden of the world
bore were truth and justice
instead of one more scam in Vietnam
my poems and self-righteous voice
helped give birth to boat people in Cambodia
to unspeakable crimes and now
my “US Out of Nicaragua” rap gives succor
to another ominous bunch of agrarian
reformers, this one with a top cop
whose first name is “Lenin,” a touch
straight out of a darkly funny novel
by Naipaul or Evelyn Waugh
It used to be more fun when other places
seemed better and more noble than America
even the obsessive money-grubbing swamp
of sanctimony that’s America these days
it used to be more fun when poetry
didn’t cost so much and when I didn’t need
the government to give me money to write poems
I liked what poetry could do
to street life, even and especially
when it came from the streets I liked
the poise and energy and grace
of black poets and gay poets and Dadaists
and unschooled natural artists
who fell into the workshops through the open doors
it was more fun before the mass
of canny grant recipients of many hues
took over it was more fun in my director’s chair
writing poems in an attic
than as a director, hurting friends
regretfully in the service of collective goals
it was more fun before I knew
my poetry could never be a spaceship
to speed me far away, or that I’d always be
outside it, like a parent,
seeing its resemblance to
my old intentions but unable
to make it work
and trusting it less
for the truths it told
than for the lies it didn’t

If you don’t believe foresight is a curse, then I wish you’d love a man,
knowing he won’t love you back.  Then you won’t kiss him
in the restaurant.  You’ll keep your hand out of his. 
You won’t believe him when he says you’re beautiful. 
None of us is beautiful when we see what’s coming.  Trust me: 
don’t spend the night.  Light will bow the trees, but notice
the dumpsters, overflowing white plastic bags of trash,
pierced open by birds.  Don’t be loved past expiration. 
Your body is not permanent.  The morning horizon is
its regular guillotine self.  The man will walk you out. 
Next thing you know:  I can’t complicate my life right now.  Don’t love
the tenderness in his voice at the moment of impact. 
He will not remember you even the shortest day of his life. 
Trust me: lay in the dark, head on his chest, watching
for his sleep.  Get up.  Fasten your pants without noise. 
Don’t kiss his forehead, don’t drink a glass of water, don’t scribble
your number on a kitchen napkin.  Ease shut the door. 
Just because you see what’s descending, even now—the boyfriend
dead in the crash, his body halved through the shattered windshield,
the man you love unconscious behind the wheel—don’t soften
his grief by holding him now.  The body he loves will not be shielded
except by the body he owns.  Passion saves only the blind.

My nephew Caleb, believes Jesus is a rabbit
Waiting for take-out at an Indian restaurant
I misread ‘Thank you for dining with us’
A rabbit, my sister mentioned

In a nutshell I might describe a knight 
As a foot soldier who can afford a horse

‘Jesus,’ I say as I sit, ‘Do you believe
this world to be an unstable location?’

‘Why yes,’ the rabbit replies, ‘there are blind faults, 
words sans serif, and don’t be deceived by star fish,
they are sly predators.’

‘Rubbish.’ I say, for I prefer English
‘Has Santa ever brought you a present, Jesus?
I wouldn’t think Santa forgets you.’

In a harsh climate, an animal can’t help
But to become superior

Only as example I then remember
The Icelandic horse, a hearty breed

Jesus disturbs my thoughts: ‘As a collective mind
we would lapse without forgiveness as an option.’

‘I know.’

As land mass, finally, once became critical 
My curry my dinner, is ready

Brief spells, over the course of months:
she no longer recalled the names of her daughters
and felt sure that her own mother — gone decades now – 
was on a train,  on the way, if only she knew at which station…  
                  
Then, standing over the washing machine, pouring in a cup of fabric softener 
(gesture she knew so well the cup seemed to fill itself, fill again),
she looked at her husband of all those years with a sudden shyness.
                 
Did he know then or later she had forgotten him? 
I would be afraid to ask, it would be terrible to ask.
                        
My friend tells a story, in one of his essays: how he met a man 
in one of the gone movie houses in Times Square, where desire played 
almost freely. The object of the seeker’s adoration: running shoes. 
                                  Or, more exactly, 
the shoes were gates without which the temple could not be entered.  
My friend wanted to be kind — he’d seen the man often — 
so when he needed new sneakers he said — they’d never spoken — 
Is there a special kind you like? Stricken, his longing wrenched 
into too bright a light,  the man could hardly — he whispered, 
as though through a throat half-closed, Light blue,
and he fled. 
              So Chip bought sky-blue sneakers,
but do I need to tell you? The one who’d spoken
was too stripped or shamed to take pleasure in what
naming his desire had brought him.
             
 There’s a man in the house, the woman would say 
to the neighbors later, I don’t know, he moved in. But that afternoon, 
when she admired him until she had no idea how many cups 
of flowery blue she’d emptied into the laundry, 

he took the cup out of her hands and lifted her,
nearly carried her into the bedroom,  and though only one of them 
had forgotten the other, they made love with the fierce curiosity 
of two who have just met.

When asleep I trusted you
not to run off with the first
 
ecologist; to relinquish doubt
and watch over me languishing 

like a mediocre gimp when 
your prints are what actively 

marked my broken instruments 
detecting half-tones between

land and ocean. Gray patches
spread and actions conducted 

relieved in a sense with a nostalgic 
piece of lint placed in a bell-jar 

and titled Snowstorm from our 
Window on Union Street. Unable 

to return home, sadness can
be transformed into self interest

others admire while away from me 
on this side of the mountain 

I didn’t feel the seismic activity 
sometimes shaking, aloof to 

consent and displacing ground. 
When asleep waves move through 

the earth’s crust. Let’s not make 
any more of it, the dangerous 

applications to a private life, 
various stakeholders affected. 

Take it easy, even the scientific 
method is subjective and 

temporary.  Apparently, we are 
born this way, operating at a loss 

over the course of a night, over 
the course of a single sleep, 

a procedure replays corridor 
gossip, household knowledge

and signals are interrupted 
and we wake with a zeal to study 

honeybees and the altering climate. 
Henceforth I blame you for the 

ka-bang, the new restlessness,  
the rush for gold in due course 

degraded in form. Let’s not make 
much more of lost time

compressed. It is impossible
to record. As to the measure 

of martyrdom or myth, a hunger 
whorishly uncontrolled defeats 

itself into loving like a whore. 
I’m not supposed to talk. But 

I could have, should have, and will.

My mother is wearing the mean ape of her mother
around her neck like a talisman 
or a historical python
which has begun to squeeze, to do
what is natural for it to do. Someone once said
that your only enemy
is the person you see when you look in the mirror. That person
was never shot in the head
or made to eat his First Mate because the sea had crushed their ship
and left them to float
into oblivion. He never had to
fold his brother’s laundry while the body
which was his brother 
rode in the back of a quiet ambulance
through an ocean of green lights. My mother 
is trying to loosen her mother
from around her neck. 
For sixty years. When people are allowed to be 
with other people
you can bet someone is going to pull a short straw
from the fistful of long straws. They will have to
leave the safety of the village and walk into the unknown
dream of the forest. They will have to
sit in the psychiatrist’s office and want to drink whiskey
but talk about their father
instead. Someone once said
that children and their grandparents share
a common enemy. That is why they get along so well. 
My mother can barely breathe. If there is an enemy
waiting for me
it is her. She is the city of Moscow. I am all of West Germany.
We are the 80’s. Her mother
is fighting hard to keep her. Not to protect me
but so that she won’t ever be alone. 
Someone once said
forgive your enemies but never forget their names. That person 
sat in the crown of his family. He was born into the arms of love. 
He died in the lap of his wife. He was never given a penny
or a tooth or a lock of hair and told
it was lucky, that it would protect him and guide him and keep him              safe.

There are two skies but one hawk only
There are good days
And now that rain has filled the waste spaces
There is another
 
I have begun to learn in sleep that sleep
Plummets from the skies and makes
A screaming sound becoming solid
Becoming sapphires
 
The moon is hawk of the waste spaces
Screaming through his eyes
 
I had a good day and then another
I was married to mountains on all sides of me
The roads made Christmas very early
Mother sang to her hat same color as the car

There are two skies but one hawk only
There are good days
And now that rain has filled the waste spaces
There is another
 
I have begun to learn in sleep that sleep
Plummets from the skies and makes
A screaming sound becoming solid
Becoming sapphires
 
The moon is hawk of the waste spaces
Screaming through his eyes
 
I had a good day and then another
I was married to mountains on all sides of me
The roads made Christmas very early
Mother sang to her hat same color as the car

I don’t know when the shitstorm of failed marriage
     took off.
I’m talking about people who I went to high school with,
    to college and Italian villas—
where we could see Vesuvius and if we could not see it,
    imagine it,
and if we could not do that either,
played with the sound of the word
as it rolled around like horny lovers
in the backs of our throats. 
 
There was Jack and Lucinda,
who spent three years building banjos
that neither of them ever played
but the plants flourished in their stinky apartment near Gowanus
so who cared.
The question persisted:
Who the hell am I
and what the hell have I done?
 
Then there was Katie and Todd who loved
caviar and sparrows. 
They wanted to have a kid and thank fuck they didn’t. 
When Katie left she blew up Todd’s motorcycle
and the neighborhood kids ran down the block for a second
to see the debris
then went back to their basketballs and bong hits. 
 
I wanted them to make it
for everyone on the planet.  I wanted her cancer and his insatiable desire for obese ladies
at the Target
to be beaten into death;
to prove to the 21st century TV newscasters
that nobody knew what the hell they were talking about
when they newscasted on TV
that marriage was dying like an obese lady
in the lingerie department
at the local Target. 
 
It felt weird,
like people weren’t getting divorced,
but more, like they were dying—
crawling into the earth with the worms and roots
to hide away in horror
while their children ran to the school bus and the Batmobile
and the EZ Bake oven that, of course,
could never, ever, ever,
catch fire. 
 
It made me want to beat up my mailman
and the woman who sold me my internet cable
and the telephone guy, Lou,
like all of this was some reflection on how we had forgotten to talk
to one another. 
But it wasn’t. 
It was age. 
The age of worn out marriage pants,
untended.  One leg torn at the knee,
the other, burned out in the crotch.
It was bad cloth, warped stitching, inseams with no in
and I knew it. 
 
And then I got hitched.
 
Eight years later,
my buddy Stu said to me:
How do you stay connected? 
I said:
You want to stay close, stay close. 
You want to be in love,
be in love. 
It’s like watching TV
Like ping pong after dinner. 
You pick up the clicker, you pick up
the paddle. 
 
But who the hell was I?
 
Some mornings I get up and can’t tie my shoes. 
I’m forty-four years old and can’t toast the seedless rye. 
My kid cries because her hands are wet;
my wife undresses in front of open windows. 
What am I supposed to do? 
I wake up.
I say good morning. 
I put on my pants.

When the neighbor’s drapes are open,                                    
I’m not like the kind of man 
who refuses to put down his binoculars
so that their steamy, good time
can remain his as well. No,

I’m exactly that kind of man,
wary of anyone who’d turn away
mid-view, skedaddle off to a room
that overlooks, say, a pond.
I’m so tired of superior smiles.

Something I’m unaware of is likely
governing me, which doesn’t excuse
these dark, bottom-feeding things
I tend to let rise into daylight.
I’ll take discredit for all of them.

Nevertheless I wish to be true to life, 
though not entirely to the one I live.
When in trouble I’ve been known
to give myself some wiggle room,
to revisit that once important sliver

of moon that slid across the Bay
to our table back when we were in love, 
to even change our names. In the world 
of feelings, aren’t attractive opposites
always nearby? — dogwood blossoms,
for example, and the springtime puffery

of rhododendrons trumping the memory,
at least for a moment, of that heat
my binoculars brought close.
Life itself is promiscuous. It feels right
to place a few renegade details together,
let them cavort. A moment later, 

it feels right to discipline them,
smack them into shape — the pink cadillac
that motored by while I was eating macaroni
and cheese, the meteor that fell
at a terrible speed and dissolved into darkness,
that apology on the tip of my tongue.

The music that Nirmala is playing today goes
By two names: The One Who Finds Lost Things
And The One Through Whom Everything Is Lost.
 
Tigers go on eating people in the Forest
Of Existence. The Gods agree to this. Saints
Admire whiskers that have been dipped in blood.
 
Women with their newly washed hair, the souls
Born again and again into sleek, fresh bodies,
Boards leaning against a barn…what does it all mean?
 
Men think ahead, and are mainly providential.
They laid out Egypt. But I like women so much.
They say: “Let the lambs come and be killed.”
 
And women suffer the most. Between every child born,
So many rugs are woven and taken apart. The water
Of a hundred bowls is poured out on the ground.
 
The hungry tigers follow the disappearing dogs
Into the woods of life. Women understand this,
For this is a world in which everything is lost.

The inverse is true. Not tonight 
or tomorrow, it’s one 

of the seven or eight kinds 
of self-abuse: the body a standoff— 

midnight and beer is when I think of her,
as almonds and Asiago, 

clementines and wine spread out 
on the floor of her apartment,

no chairs, just pillows 
and talk of the men

we loved who gave us grief. 
More wine and we’d find 

the ninth or tenth kind of abuse
with talk until sunrise,

until the men we loved were gone
or briefly solved, 

all absence and what we could do without
naming, but now she is gone,

unmetaphorically dead, 
let me say it again,

dead, beyond any thought 
she could have of me 

as Corona and cigarettes,
Monterey Jack and the men I still love 

but can no longer tell her about, 
it’s brutal, this wanting to call 

and tell, the eleventh kind of abuse,
no dinner tonight, and yes, 

I still smoke, the twelfth,
the one promise I made to her, 

but too thinly sealed now, 
the way the skin of the clementine

pulls away from a fruit 
that’s too ripe—

no, not tonight,
not tomorrow,

there are promises 
I can’t keep.     

While you made the case against poetry—
                             Plato’s critique of the irrational,
                             Homeric lying, deluded citizens—
                             to a group of poets in Prague

                             night deepened in old windows,
                             swallows gathered on a narrow ledge
                             and called to the vanishing twilight,  
                             and a beggar began to sing in the street.

 Twilight is what the tittycrested romanticists say,
    Referring to old age, Twilight! Don’t they know
    That things always get brighter, at least until
    They become invisible. Look at the sky. Full
    Of bright pains. And the earth, full of great
    Flashing fears. Sparkling explosions are every-
    Where. Highways run with the liquid fire
    Of angst and hypochondria. Moonlight
    On the cornfields mixes and flows like an
    Immense sob. The next time you see a line
    Of geezers shuffling toward the check-out
    Remember they are entering the arcade of
    Death. Flashing lights and crashing bells
    Surround them, and the only darkness is
    The space between the soles of their shoes
    And the floor. Hup, atwo, athree, afour—
    The slow march and the muffled drum. So
    Never fear, they will get there in blinding
    Dawn when the day of demolition has just
    Begun. Whoop-de-do and tum-tum-tum,
    Benighted night will never come.

There’s no answer to winter
watching the sun set over water

it falls so quickly
you have not been lost

branches, oligarchs of  the sky
everybody listening for silence

where and where did you go
twelve-stringed music, rejoin me

in the sun-year I swelled long shadows
in the moon-year the valley folded itself up

you are the beloved I would not love
at the fountain witless and still

a stream pours over rocks making music
could the water rush over me

the sun drops so quickly into its banishment 
could I please forget to breathe and drown

will the ocean rejoin me
you have not been lost

can I be reborn as a guitar
will you be reborn as music and hum inside me

one day you stopped looking at me
and I knew

the last note is lingering in the box
of my body

you did not vanish in the marketplace
I still imagine you in me as my breath

broken in thirds
corded to sound

I took your name when the sun came up
sun of winter, sun windless and wistful

come down across the water
undone sun give me the drunk go-ahead

last time I searched for you
this time I become wooden and resonant

prepare yourself in pure sound
last time I raved without senses

oh pluck me my angel my paper-maker
I want to feel you hum inside me 

pluck me pluck me
and hum

Dear Thunderbird,
Letters should he confidential but I’ve no confidences
so might as well write you a poem in the new form
only the initiate can tell from prose. Hello.
Hello Kenneth. Hello Janice. Hello Katherine. So you can scream like
power brakes. I hear from the Moustache by way of Jane. Grand.
It’s “fragrant May” (Leopardi)
(I’m typing in a pool of my own sweat)
and New York is blindingly beautiful
thanks to the aluminum people
who are not cast of Canadian metal - they have weekend
sunburns and suits bluer than heaven you can wash in the sink
yourself, even as you and I. What they got
we haven’t got is a lot of aluminum.
You run up some beams and snap
the aluminum whosies into place
and glass - sparkle! toward sundown
going east you have to walk horizontal. Except
the House of Seagram, austere and smoky
as a molten topaz. And now for personalities on parade,
while vending Picasso catalogues at MOMA
-that haven of have-not poets - I heard a guard say.

Burnt before pop. Burnt before
black. Burnt before taste of charcoal.
 
Burnt before. Before firecrackers at the public pool
and sparklers stuck into weeds
 
on my seventh birthday with as many candles.
Even before the breakfast table—
 
because dreams are merely “a physiological warm-up”
before one wakes up—
 
I rise and shower
and reach for whatever warm-body’s on the counter.
 
Before martini, before computer failure, before random street murder.

I want to go back to that day, when it
was broken in me, the loyalty
to family, when I was cut free,
or cut myself free, from the fully human,
and floated off, like an astronaut
untethered. I want to go back to the hourxq
some cord in my mind was cut, and I no longer
was fed by the placenta of the nuclear
or extended family, but aborted
myself or was aborted from that house. Once torn
away, once shunned and shunning, it seemed there was
little I could not write about, I felt
as if my disenfranchisement
had been undone, I was out on the wind, like a
spinster alone in orgasm,
like a witch, but I thought I was thinking and singing
for everyone, in every land
and time. I was insane. Was I insane? I thought
that someone driven out beyond the silence
of normal reticence could speak
for the normal. I don’t want to go back
to the hour I broke and ran, the broken
yolk and albumen shining in the toothed
bowls of the shell. I love to say
it might have been I who broke the contract,
as if it were not obvious
it was broken, physically, in me.
I want to go back to when I found the paper,
and the ink, as if the matter of the earth
wanted to chant, and be chanted, as if one could
think oneself loyal, being loyal to that chant.

I suffer a different kind of loneliness.
From the antique ringtones of singing
wrens, crying babies, and ballad medleys,
my ears have turned
to brass.
 
They resurrect a thousand extinct birds,
Emus, dodos, and shelducks, though some,
like the cerulean glaucous macaw,
could not survive the snow. How heavily
they roost on trees in raw twilight.
 
I will not admire those birds,
not when my dull head throbs, I am plagued
by sorrow, a green hummingbird eats me alive
with its stinging needle beak.
 
Then I meet you. Our courtship is fierce
in a prudish city that scorns our love,
as if the ancient laws of miscegenation
are still in place. I am afraid
I will infect you
 
after a virus clogs the gift economy:
booming etrade of flintlock guns sag.
Status updates flip from we are all
connected to we are exiles.
What bullshit
 
when in that same prudish city,
they have one exact word to describe the shades
of their sorrow, when they always sit together
and eat noodles during white days
of rain, in one long table,
though not all.
 
As a boy, my father used to trap
little brown sparrows, bury them in hot coal,
and slowly eat the charred birds alone
in the green fields, no sounds,
no brothers in sight.
 
Holiest are those who eat alone.
Do not hurt them, do not push them, insult them,
do not even stare at them, leave
them to eat alone, in peace.

Forget the year, the parties where you drank too much,
            said what you thought without thinking, danced so hard
you dislocated your hip, fainted in the kitchen,
            while Gumbo, your hosts’ Jack Russell terrier,                                                  
looked you straight in the eye, bloomed into a boddhisattva,
            lectured you on the six perfections while drunk people
with melting faces gathered around your shimmering corpse.
 
Then there was February when you should have been decapitated
            for stupidity. Forget those days and the ones
when you faked a smile so stale it crumbled like a cookie
            down the side of your face. Forget the crumbs and the mask
you wore and the tangle of Scotch tape you used to keep it in place,
 
but then you’d have to forget spring with its clouds of jasmine,
            wild indigo, and the amaryllis with their pink and red faces,
your garden with its twelve tomato plants, squash, zucchini,
            nine kinds of peppers, okra, and that disappointing row of corn.
Forget the corn, its stunted ears and brown oozing tips. Forgive
            the worms that sucked their flesh like zombies
and forgive the bee that stung your arm, then stung your face, too.
 
While we’re at it, let’s forget 1974. You should have died that year,
            or maybe you did. Resurrection’s a trick
you learned early. And 2003. You could have called in sick
             those twelve months—sick and silly, illiterate and numb,
 
and summer, remember the day at the beach when the sun
            began to explain Heidegger to you while thunderclouds
rumbled up from the horizon like Nazi submarines? The fried oysters
            you ate later at Angelo’s were a consolation and the margaritas
with salt and ice. Remember how you begged the sullen teenaged waitress
            to bring you a double, and double that, pleasepleaseplease.
 
And forget all the crime shows you watched,
            the DNA samples, hair picked up with tweezers
and put in plastic bags, the grifters, conmen, and the husbands
            who murdered their wives for money or just plain fun.
Forget them and the third grade and your second boyfriend,
            who loved Blonde on Blonde as much as you did
but wanted something you wouldn’t be able to give anyone for years.
 
Forget movies, too, the Hollywood trash in which nothing happened
            though they were loud and fast, and when they were over
time had passed, which was a blessing in itself. O blessed 
            is Wong Kar Wai and his cities of blue and rain.
Blessed is David Lynch, his Polish prostitutes juking
            to Locomotion in a kitschy fifties bungalow. Blessed
is Jeff Buckley, his Hallelujah played a thousand times in your car
            as you drove through Houston, its vacant lots
exploding with wild flowers and capsized shopping carts.
 
So forget the pizzas you ate, the ones you made from scratch
            and the Dominoes ordered in darkest December,
the plonk you washed it down with and your Christmas tree
            with the angel you found in Naples and the handmade Santas                            
your sons brought home from school, the ones with curling eyelashes
            and vampire fangs. Forget their heartbreaks
and your sleepless nights like gift certificates
            from the Twilight Zone, because January’s here,
and the stars are singing a song you heard on a street corner once,
            so wild the pavement rippled, and it called you
like the night calls you with his monsters and his marble arms.

We’ve spent a lot of time keeping some old men alive.
I don’t think you should criticize us for that.
Even old sailors keep their love of the wind.
 
We know so little of our neighbor’s sorrow.
He never told us what happened to his son.
What can it mean that Jesus had no sister?
 
We’ll never know anything better than a dog.
It doens’t matter how deeply he sleeps.
The sleeping dog leaves all the world for the floor.
 
It’s all right if the family gathers together at night
And sings like sailors when the wind rises.
The roof of the house will last the night.
 
I’ve never been an old friend to the wind.
Don’t expect me to be happy about haystacks
Scattered in a storm or blown-down barns.
 
Don’t expect me to talk about the Spanish armada
Getting into trouble off the Galway coast.
Even old sailors keep their love of the wind.

Just as I decide
There’s nothing true
About me (can’t tell
 
if I’m more despised
or ignored, my mind’s
warding off or reeling in
 
someone who could scald me
with a spoon of chatter),
just then I decide
 
in my seclusion, there’s a cabin
by the stream and the jangled speech
of a person is hushed enough
 
so I say Hello No One,
 
can you hear me?
In the rushes I spook
 
a few geese into flight.

Address older people as Sir or Ma’am
unless they drift slowly into your lane
as you aim for the exit ramp.
Don’t call anyone dickhead, fuckface, or ass-hat;
these terms are reserved for ex-boyfriends
or anyone you once let get past second base
and later wished would be sucked into a sinkhole.
Yelling obscenities at the TV is okay,
as long as sports are clearly visible on the screen,
but it’s rude to mutter at the cleaning products in Safeway.
Also rude: mentioning bodily functions.
Therefore, sentiments such as “I went balls to the wall for her”
or “I have to piss like a chick with a pelvic disorder at a kegger contest”
are best left unexpressed.
Don’t’ say “chick,” which is demeaning
to the billions of sentient creatures
jammed in sheds, miserably pecking for millet.
Don’t talk about yourself.  Ask questions
of others in order to show your interest.
How do you like my poem so far?
Do you think I’m pretty?
What would you give up to make me happy?
Don’t open your raincoat to display your nakedness.
Fondling  a penis in public
is problematic, though Botero’s black sculpture
of a fat man in the Time-Warner building
in New York, his pee-pee rubbed gold,
seems to be an exception.
Please lie to me about your pedophilia
and the permafrost layer.
Stay in bed on bad hair days.
When the pulley of your childhood
unwinds the laundry line of your dysfunction,
here is a list of items to shove deep in the dryer:
disturbed brother’s T-shirt,
depressed mother’s socks and tennis racket,
tie worn by soused father driving the kids home
from McDonald’s Raw Bar.  If you refuse
your host’s offer of alcohol, it is best to say,
“I’m so hung over, the very thought of drinking
makes me feel like projectile vomiting,”
or, “No thank you, it interferes with my medications.”
Hold your liquor whenever it is fearful
and lonely, whenever it needs your love.
Don’t interrupt me when I’m battering.
Divorce your cell phone in a romantic restaurant.
Here is an example
of a proper thank-you card:
Thank you for not sharing with me
the extrusions of your vague creative impulse.
Thank you for not believing those lies
everyone spreads about me, and for opening
the door to the next terrifying moment,
and thank you especially for not opening your mouth
while I’m trying to digest my roast chicken.

Was what came over you                           anything like this
                a cold wind on the neck                               an ocean of pigment
 
I ask because                     I have no real purchase                                on any of it
                I’m just beginning                           to find                 
 
filament-like                     the shapes of things       and their masks                                              
painful to remove           but also                                                undergirded with color                                               
 
I remember                       by virtue of falling                          the green
of groundswell                 as it rose under me                         though remember
 
is a strong word for it   and I’m cautioned                           against such use
mine happened                                                as I was reading
 
and all the dead                               to say I was dead             lie down                             
to say wakeful                  is a limited way                                               of putting it                                       
 
let’s say you were there                                               and I thought I could see you                   
let’s say                                something in you                            seemed in front of me
 
to pale the air                    it’s all right                                         to say such things in poems      
                at this point                       it’s almost expected                       to note the heaviness   
 
of one’s arms    one’s head attached                       as ball to string
perhaps this is near        what you meant                                              for I stood up   
 
as long by your window                                              your thoughts                                   half space themselves                   to half become                               I can’t imagine                                  but something in me                    
 
thinks to serve                  thinks drosophila           the socket behind the eye                           
and is quickly blessed                   not what             one means          but nearer                         
 
how one feels                                   supplicant’s stone                           in the hand        
and from long kneeling                                               a bruise on the knee                               

Yours was the death, yours was the dying.
 
I found you in
the pauper’s field
 
and something sang through me
(if there
ever was a song)—
which I could
speak to myself, very quietly,
and move along.
 
Oh in my heart,
do you not think I am a part of this?
 
Bless the failure, bless the flame,
bless my fruitless attempt,
the shame.
 
And what do I do with this love,
that sticks like pitch to my heart—and will never
let me go.
 
Why I am standing in your image.
Do not try to change it—
to turn it into something
joyous and free—
you are here—you are gone—
dead—
uncreated light.

Absolutely, I agree. It’s what we all
want to do. Unless by we
I mean Thanatos, but I just asked,
I do not mean Thanatos. I mean you
 
holding your daughter’s hand,
thinking darkly, despite yourself,
to when you’re dead and she’s old
and alone. That’s a loss you want
 
to stop, of optimism, the present tense,
of just being with her as you wait
for the bus, watching her watch a blackbird
that doesn’t have to go to school.
 
The man beside you in fatigues, camouflaged
from Wednesday, holding his son’s hand
for the last time before he returns
to shooting at people, being shot at
 
in a war he thought he was done with,
I mean him: he wants to stop loss.
What a beautiful phrase for the army
to support. In it, I hear
 
that we’re through with grenades,
the violent enterprise of steel,
we’re on to the new war, the war against
the cannibalism of war. Hurrah for us,
 
for you, fighting the impulse
to see the end in everything,
this spring day, the giant steps
of the bus she has to climb, literally,
 
as you would a mountain, not thinking,
for once, she will fall, but feeling,
for an instant, she will make it,
without ropes, in a pink dress, laughing.

Papa loves Il Trovatore,
so he understood what
I meant when I said:
Di geloso amor sprezzato.
 
he grabbed my arm
like it was an engine wrench
& began to twist.
 
His face screwed up like
an engine wrench. I’m
leaving this like an engine
unhinged from its machine
 
leaves everything it loves.

Even on their totally awesome chestnut-colored horses,
the Indians were fucked over and we knew it
so anyone who was anyone in the third grade
wasn’t going to be caught dead in an Albertson’s
paper bag cut down the middle, decorated
in red and yellow crayon “pictographs,” worn
as an Indian vest for the Thanksgiving Festival
            at Center Street School in El Segundo, CA
where, before 1934, there were four signs on the cardinal
             points of town that read:
“No Blacks, No Jews, No Dogs.”
 
No question that when she chose me to be an Indian, I felt
a John Wayne wild sense of betrayal
             by Mrs. Trachtenburg, who could have easily turned
                     me into a pilgrim, like Kristen with her Norwegian
            blonde hair, making me wear a paper-towel
                        white hat, simply by saying
             “Suzy Pearlman, you will be a pilgrim.”
 
                  I colored my vest along with Julie,
  who worked so hard in school, who everyone called
                  a “retard,” who had had a stroke
                         in the womb, who I thanked god
was a Christian because she would have never
made it through Hebrew School. Everyone
was nice to her only because they knew
that, at the drop of that pilgrim’s hat, they could be mean.
 
                        My “Indian name” was “Careful Dove,”
      because the class called me Butter-fingers.
Little bespectacled Indian Jew—Schlemiel—
          on a horse—fighting the white man,
                        at the Festival, in front of our parents.
 
We recited our Indian poems. Careful Dove
   said each line while Julie drooled:
 
 
Peaceful dove. Alone.
Fly around the town.
Oi, Vai! Careful dove. Alone.
Eat a pumpkin pie when you get home.
 
Then all of us pilgrims and Indians took
out our recorders (because the music
teacher had to fit a performance into the
curriculum) and played “Love Me Tender.”
     Even, Julie, who couldn’t play a C, pulled
            a plastic recorder out of her paper vest.
      We were told to play in unison but
we sounded like geese, lost in our own flock.

Mother’s milk in my belly
 
and a little of her shit, too,
so that I might eat
 
of the sour-green steppes
that opened endlessly
 
before me, though not long
after I slid into sunlight
 
and the grass-world I slid
again into the mudhole,
 
and screamed, and screaming
sucked clay into my trunk
 
till I lay on the bottom,
my milk-tusks not even
 
sprouted, a sweet undercoat
of fat ready for my first winter,
 
and I am still one month old,
and forty thousand years without my mother.

I could name some names
of those who have drifted through thus far of their allotted
seventy or ninety years on Earth
with no disasters happening,
whatever had to be given up was given up—
the food at the rehab facility was better than you would expect
and the children turned out more or less okay;
sure there were some shaky years
but no one’s living in the basement anymore
with a divot in his head where the shrapnel landed/or
don’t look at her stump. It is easy
to feel possessed of a soul that’s better schooled
than the fluffy cloud inside of people who have never known suchlike
events by which our darlings
are unfavorably remade. And the self
is the darling’s darling
(I=darling2). Every day
I meditate against my envy
directed against those who drift inside the bubble of no-trouble
—what is the percentage? 20% of us? 8%? zero?
Maybe the ex-president with his nubile daughters,
vigorous old parents and clean colonoscopy. Grrrr.
Remember to breathe. Breathe in suffering
and breath out blessings say the ancient dharma texts.
Still it does not seem right that some
are mountain-biking through the scrublands,
while she is here at Ralph’s Thriftway,
running her thumb over a peach’s bruise,
her leg a steel rod
in a mini-skirt, to make sure I see.

She says, It’s my birthday. I’m going tomorrow.
What's your favorite font? What should I
have him write? Serifs, I say. I like serifs.
I like old typewriters, the keys little platters.
I don’t answer the question about what to write.
The vellum of her back. I am not her mother,
who later weeps at the words written between
her shoulders. I get ready to retract the idea of serifs,
the pennants that pull the eye from one word
forward, but the eye loves a serif. When we
handwrite, we stop to add them to I. Read this
word like typeface, make me always published,
I am always a text. Write this on your back,
I want to say. Write that you are a lyric
and flying – serifed, syntactical. Becca chooses
Make of my life a few wild stanzas. She lies
on the bed while the artist marks her back,
his needle the harrow for her sentence. Make of
my life a place to stand, stopping-places, a series
of rooms, stances, stare, stantia, stay. She has
shown him a bird she wants perched above the final
word, stanza. It is a barn swallow – ink blue flash.
He says, toward the end, so she can know it will hurt
to ink so much blue, I am filling in the stanza now,
and he stings her right shoulder again and again,
filling the room of the bird. Make of my life
a poem, she asks me and him and her mother
as she walks away, make of my life something
wild, she says. I watch her strike out across
Number 10 Pond, the tattoo flashing with each stroke
and there is barely enough time to read it.

The cottony skirts of the Matilija poppies
            will wax old quickly,
as the panniers of yesteryear have done.
 
Carbs will turn to sugars, and sugars to fats,
so even the most hopelessly beautiful man
            might soften and dwindle.
 
But isn’t everything impossible to resist
what makes the living possible?
        And isn’t there a Paradise
                in the foothills above Oroville.
Formerly unincorporated Poverty Ridge.
            You’ll have to go with me sometime.
 
“Decent food despite remote location,”
Zagat might say, if Zagat cared to come
          crunch an apple some slow afternoon.
 
You’ll get a choice of sides with every entrée.
            You’d love the sweet potato fries.
In which case, I recommend the salmon.
 
And the wild salmon will return to the brook.
            The hives will sit fat with honey.
The least shall be exalted. Wow, you’ll think,
that could have been so much worse than it was.
 
I die a little all the time. And so do you.
            So do we all. It’s the little things
like that that keep us from getting saturated
in the panjuices of loneliness.
 
Otherwise, it’s a cookout. A veritable meatfest.
                        We light the charcoal,
            and the charcoal warms our little hearts.
 
We are practically at the bedroom door of disclosure.
            You’ve got me in this paper dress,
                        just the way you’ve imagined.
 
I. Boy. Tell. Telephone. Prompt, please. Can’t
         tell, something something, delight.
Oh, I used to be so good at this.
Turn on one of your machines, then, Jacky boy.
Tell me how much I’ve got to lose.

The city is quiet
as though it’s cried itself out.
Circle Market, its windows busy
with stickers for surfboard wax and bands
with names like Make-A-Mistake
is dark now too.  Last year
the owner was held up,
but he handed over the money
and wasn’t shot.
When I read about it,
I sealed two twenties and a ten
in an envelope and walked over
with my dog on a leash.
We went there a lot
when the kids were little,
popsicles and nights we ran out of milk.
Mr. Lee on his high stool
by the cash register, presiding
over the aisles, the dusty cans
of Campbell’s soup and Hamburger Helper,
Huggies and Ajax.
His body looked sunken now
and his eyes jerked over to the door
when he told me the man pointed
a gun at his wife—she’d been sitting
on a stack of the Sunday Chronicles—
and warned him not to reach
for the phone. After that
he wouldn’t let me pay for my pint
of Haagen-Dazs and added
an ice cream sandwich on top—
for the child he said, even though
the youngest is grown and gone.
When I protested he slipped in
a Snickers bar and when I insisted
he couldn’t keep doing this,
he tossed in a handful of Chiclets.
Last summer when my friend was visiting,
I sent her instead, but he’d seen us
walking the dog together
and wouldn’t let her pay either,
sneaking in a pack
of American Spirit Lights and a yellow Bic.
The Greeks believed
every human act is perilous.
I can’t go in there anymore.

Where we swam alone under the skiff,
its green shadow knife-shaped
far overhead,
ribbons of seaweed,
the soundless engine,
soundless the shouts
and the wind
shouldering the surf’s
white flowers, water
snuffed up our sinuses,
the beach-fire cinders
like phosphorous at night,
jeans caked with salt,
the funeral moon.
Beach with dark rocks and saw grass,
winter  keeps coming down from the north,
each grain of sand ticks underfoot,
each star whines overhead.
Beach with dark rocks, the long boats
drift, the children leave home, no one
speaks. Each night lying down
in our sea-wrack, each day waking
into our skin.
…
 
Come close and whisper the names
of the living, names of the dead returning,
sleepwalkers holding their hands out,
litter of sea-straw and sand like dark metal,
song of arriving and going away.
Forgive me my pride, inexplicable
under the circumstances,
storm coming in tomorrow night,
old raingear dotted with herring scales.
I ate the kelp blossom
down to the root,
eel flesh and crab flesh, I ate the shark meat,
octopus, yellow fin, scallops, clams,
delicate flesh of the lobster.
 …
 
What was the song she sang,
the sea lion cow asleep on a rock
near Point Reyes?
I hear the deep halls of water
filling up on the ebb
as she turns over, sighing into the algae,                     
I squatted still in the autumn sand
thinking of red roe and black hair,
women gone down into themselves,
funky, brash,
croaking and thrashing
eyes staring blind as glass.
…
 
Don’t be afraid to go sailing out,
don’t think of riptides,
storms,
huge seas
risen over the fly bridge,
threads of fire,
the jaws of a wolf eel
slithering out of the trawl.
…
 
One summer night the fisherman told us
he’d run aground in the river mouth, hull
mired deep in black mud. He said he saw
the hour of his birth, the swamp slowly
filling with light, kelp stretched out
like a vestment covering the flanks of the marsh,
the sea’s wretched age, monstrous and fecund,
hair full of dead leaves, rayed petals clustered,
shoals of dark gravel exposed.
Inside the wheelhouse one candle burning,
bunks tilted stiffly to starboard.
 
He told us sometimes he’d rather be dead
than face the gray rooming house
and a day-job, his heart like iron
remembering the sea and staring
at frayed pallets stacked in a warehouse
smelling of creosote. All
the gathered rubbings of shore trash
making him sneeze and itch:
stove-ashes, moth wings stuck to the screens,
dog hair, spider webs, elm pollen.
…                         
 
Always the sound of the hull slapping down
into the wave trough, always
the caulked seam of metal
its green wet-patch turning to sugar,
saltwater seeping down the spine,
miles offshore the snowy moonlight,
miles below the abyssal trench
where a creature with no eyes
and glandular poison sends its forked signals
into the murk, sleepless predator
prowling the blind shadows,
turning its stomach inside out,
vulnerable, sunk in its hunger.
…
 
This time of year you can hate the snow,
freezing the tie-up lines, coating the wharves,
falling into the jagged surf.
If you wait long enough you can ride
into town on the boom truck, its tire chains
shredding the crust, the engine
so noisy no one can speak,
the driver grinding it up into second
frowning with grease on his knuckle.
 
No place will be open now
except for the sad bar, barren of women,
except for the motel near the dunes
with its flocked wall paper
and rusty heater that moans
in the night like a tired swan.
The next day no one will look
in your eyes, transparent stranger
belonging to no one,
not the children sledding on cardboard
down through the frozen parking lot,
not the waitress humming a song
you think you almost remember…
 
If she asked you about your family
you could show her their silhouettes
in a drop of water
from Wingaersheek Beach
you  keep in a jar by the window.
You could show her
the rags of evening
fluttering over the waves
and a sofa’s blond fabric
dotted with burns
like the skin of a mangy leopard.
You could show her the plaster
Egyptian sculptures,
emblems of dynasty fallen,
the copy of Queen Nefertiti’s face,
its nose broken off,
her green headdress wound high
into the domed light
sifting down on the sink.
Thy sea is so great
 and my boat is so small
stamped in metal over the door—
your thin hands gripping the shovel
loosening dirt in the garden,
the restless claws of the ocean
turning the pebbles and rocks and sand,
tumbling the chitin and shell fragments
ceaselessly each day and night forever:
Quaternary, Cretaceous, Jurassic, Cambrian
onto the shores of this world.

I don’t believe desire is the root of all suffering,
though it’s better to pull up the roots
of the weeds you desire to be rid of,
rather than poison them. For nothing
will grow again in that dirt.
I never read philosophy. It hurts
the way a fall from the monkey bars does
or an argument with someone you desire
that goes round n’ round and ends in a knock-out
or an even less satisfying temporary truce.
Birds keep getting stuck in the body of my stove.
I open the soapstone door and they emerge
soot-covered, disoriented, batter
their tiny skulls against glass.
Eventually finding their way out
through one of the opened windows –
the way I want to find my way through to the real you
if there is such a thing - changing as we do
our passwords, our undergarments, the pets in our garages.
Desire cannot be the root of all suffering!
Hunger and loneliness, or ineradicable pain perhaps.
The boa is hard-wired to crush endoskeletons.
Every religion has their saints and their power mongers.
Some are allergic to strawberries.
To be human is to desire.
Eggs and garlic and the oil of the evening primrose.
The pollen hurting some, others unaffected.
The only agreed upon creed: Do no harm.
I like to be under the canopy of trees,
so you could say I desire shade.
The heads of tiny quail in puff pastry.
My children to outlive me,
that I may give them my land.
The dome of the cerebellum an umbrella –
white paint is falling from the eaves of my roof.
Today I loaded a stack of old coats
into black garbage bags and left them
on a loading dock behind the Salvation Army –
unsure that the portal into the sky
will fit us all.

  1
So from poet to poet we proceeded
in our celebration of Christopher Smart’s
long-undiscovered poem Jubilate Agno, composed
by this profligate, drunken, devout, mad polymath
between 1757 and 1763 while incarcerated
for a year in St. Luke’s Hospital for the Insane
and then for four or five years more in the less
bedlamic asylum at Bethnal Green.
Drawing on books he had brought or  
borrowed from other madhouse libraries—
to wit: an Authorized Bible, a Polyglot Bible,
Albin’s Natural History of Birds, Walton’s
Compleat Angler, Coxe’s Descriptions of Carolana,
Pliny’s Natural History, Anson’s Voyage Around
the World, Ainsworth’s Thesaurus, plus various popular
journals and occult writings — and availing himself
of his own waggery, his own observations and wide
learning,  his prodigious memory and excited imaginings,
—“For I am not without authority in my jeopardy” —
Smart extracted from his whirling brain one, two,
or three, lines a day, to keep himself sane—
for a profound sanity underlies this project:
to repair our connection to the natural world
by joining person after person – a Joram or Caleb or Ehud
or Haggith, or Bernice or Shobab or Joab — with an animal,
or insect, tree, plant, flower, or precious stone — almost any
living, or almost living, entity would do, from the Zoony
to the Great Flabber Dabber Flat Clapping Fish.
This grand but unfinished work, which Smart saw as
his “Magnificat,”  is witty and wild in its calls-and-responses,
in effect a long, healing roll-call of the earth.
 
                             2
And so, two hundred and fifteen years later,
twenty-one poets gathered on a February night
in a little church on Lower Fifth Avenue 
and one by one stood up and read or recited
to a large and ardent audience thirty   
lines or so per poet from Jubilate Agno —
mere floccinaucinihilipilification 
to the world outside, but to us a source of joy and truth —
the lung-ether of the living loving the long dead.
Some poets were attracted to passages they knew,
for their own reasons, such as Etheridge Knight,
who, like Kit Smart, had done time:
“Let Andrew rejoice with the whale,
who is array’d in beauteous blue
and is a combination of bulk and activity,
for they work me with their harping-irons,
which is a barbarous instrument,
because I am more unguarded than the rest.”
Or like Allen Ginsberg, who, moved perhaps
by Kit’s madness, in his gentlest voice allowed
that in writing “Howl” he had communed
with the genius of Smart’s prosody. Then he chanted:
“Rejoice with Buteo who hath three testicles,
for I bless God in the strength of my loins and
for the voice which he hath made sonorous.”
Whereupon Grace Paley born Grace Goodside
to immigrant Ukrainian socialists — here now
in her earthly glory — took herself to the podium
and lovingly bronxed: “Let Milcah rejoice
with the Horned Beetle who will strike a man
in the face …for I am the Lord’s News-Writer
—the Scribe-Evangelist.” Then Philip Levine,
who also had drawn singing breaths
into himself from Smart’s incantations
in his own great poem “They Feed They Lion,”
spoke: “Let Huldah bless with the Silkworm
—the ornaments of the Proud are from the bowels
of their Betters.” After him, came elegant
David Ignatow, followed by Allen Grossman,
our philosopher, and Nancy Willard,
our magician.  Jane Cooper’s tremulous piping
floated down from the vaulted ceiling 
and reminded us:  “Earth which is an intelligence
hath a voice and a propensity to speak in all her parts,”
and Gerald Stern, with his own joyful
Smartian super-exuberance asserted — as if, Eureka!
he had learned how to do it just yesterday:“The Circle
may be SQUARED by swelling and flattening!” Joel
Oppenheimer came after him, followed
by Harvey Shapiro and Gregory Orr
and a lion-tongued Thomas Lux who roared:
“For the coffin and the cradle and the purse
are all against a man…”  But Vertemae Grosvenor
— O Smartian name!— whose first language,
Gullah, came to her on the tongues of Sea Islanders,
called us back into happiness:  “Rejoice
with the Pigeon, who is an antidote
to malignity and will carry a letter.” Next
 Paul Zweig, beautiful doomed spirit, told us,
“For Harpsichords are best strung with gold wire,”
and from Allen Planz, fisherman by trade:
“Let Jude bless with the bream, who is melancholy
for his depth and serenity, for I have a greater
compass of mirth and melancholy than another.”
Then Stanley Plumly recited, then David
Cumberland, then me, and next
James Wright, who took the passage that Gerry
Stern might have been hoping for:  Kit’s éloge to his
Cat Jeoffrey,  his only faithful companion:
“For there is nothing sweeter than his peace
when at rest, there is nothing
brisker than his life when in motion.”
 
                                3
Last to the podium was Muriel Rukeyser,
who once wrote her own Smartian vow: “Never
to despise in myself what I have been
taught to despise, and never to despise the other,”
and who concludes her tender ode to the cockroach so:
“I reach, I touch, I begin to know you.”
Now Muriel was soaring with Kit Smart’s words,
and the faces in the nave all lifted
as one, amazed, all of them, by her huge head,
her heart-shaped face, her ferocious beauty,
and her voice a little growly at its edges:  
“For I have a providential acquaintance
with men who bear the names of animals…”
And everyone there was with her,
the little church swelled with light,
the podium itself seemed to be attempting
to raise itself up – “ for I bless God 
for Mr Lion Mr Cock Mr Cat Mr Talbot
Mr Hart Mrs Fysh Mr Grub and Miss Lamb.”
And now it was evident that the podium
was not rising but that Muriel was sinking,
toppling in fact, hauling down on herself
the microphone and the amplifier and their wires,
in a heap on the floor.  Then from this wreckage
her suddenly re-clarioned voice was heard: “Let Zadok
worship with the Mole—before honour is humility!”
As we disentangled her, she sat up
and said:“She that looketh low shall learn!”
A woman rushed out the door, crying,
“I’m calling an ambulance!” Muriel shouted
after her: “No ambulances!  I need a chair!”
A plump man came swiftly wriggling
through the audience, “I’m a doctor! A doctor!”
“No doctors!” Muriel shouted even louder,
 “A chair! A chair!”  Eased into a chair at last,
she smiled at us: “Let Carpus rejoice with the Frog-Fish—
a woman cannot die on her knees!”
 
                            4   
For all those who were at the Church
of the Transfiguration that evening in l978,
and those who may have heard about it later
and those of you hearing of it now
for the first time, and for Kit Smart who died
in debtor’s prison in 1771 at forty-nine,
and for Muriel, who would die two years after that night,
and for these witnesses who are also gone:
Paul and Etheridge and Jane and Allen and Allen
and Grace and David and James and Joel —
and the carrier pigeon, too — and for the rest of us
still standing — or sitting – or soon to topple —
let all of us rejoice and be made glad.

I can’t come to work today.  My son has a brain tumor.
Tommy can’t come to school today.  He has a brain tumor.
I said something like this.  But my voice was cracking.
It was Monday at eight o’clock.
I’d woken up at the children’s hospital.
It was a January morning.  It was really hot.
I looked out the window. The hills were beautiful.  I never thought
I’d be here.  Didn’t think I’d be talking about a brain tumor.
Didn’t know that morning about
Ogliodendromas, astrocytomas, the dreaded brain stem glioma.
 
That day, my son died, he lived a shorter lifespan, he outlived me.
The doctor was a pro: If this were my kid
This is what I’d do: take it out, tomorrow at 2 PM. 
So my intuition spoke, as my body was reacting with fear, with chills, with tears, with dread—
Sometimes the tumors just pop right out, the nurse said.  She was cheery;
We were all watching Cash Cab on TV before he left for surgery.
I don’t want to die a virgin, Tommy said.  He is a fourteen year old boy, after all.
He has a lot of things ahead.
 
The night before the tumor spoke as a seizure which left him writhing on the floor
I’d dreamed that I was on a ferry boat.
As we capsized, I was thrown
Like a person shot out of a cannon.
I felt like I was on the giant drop of a roller coaster;
I dropped and dropped and couldn’t stop. 
I fell neatly into the shallow water, surfaced, and walked to the edge of a river
Calm, in my wet dress.  Tommy stood waiting for me.  We went back
To the launch.  There were phones to use, and people gladly gave me coins.
They said they could get us on the next flight home. 
How kind they were: waiting to help me. I noticed
How willing they were.  All I had to do was ask.
There we were, all alone in a foreign country, and I wasn’t afraid.

After the rain washes some of the pollution out of the air
the workmen with their shovels and their picks
                                   stand along the street
 
—Just before the elections and the roads are being paved
because the governor wants us to remember him
                                         in the dark of the voting booth next month—
 
In Beijing this year I hear the fashionable women
                               are wearing four and five-inch heels,
driving the Chinese feminists crazy,
 
some say in emulation of the West,
some say in a renaissance
                                      of ancient foot binding tradition.
 
The problem is that they feel beautiful,
                      and how do you disagree with that?
 
I am thinking about this
                                  while on hold with the phone company,
 
waiting to speak to the person stationed like a punching bag
at the gate of that major corporation.
 
Their power is to add a mysterious charge to my bill;
my power is to shout at their least powerful employee.
 
Maybe you really want people to be happy,
but you also want to be thanked for it.
Maybe you’ve memorized the names of your mailman’s kids,
because you like getting your mail.
 
I don’t want to be the one to mention
                                     what should be already obvious,—
but the world could give a fig about your soul.
 
Just pay your bills on time,
                             and spread some flattery around.
 
Just set the mousetrap in the basement
                             with a dab of peanut butter—the extra crunchy kind.
 
Big news flash: That’s all that people want these days.
We don’t need to be pampered, or lectured, or adored.
We’re not goddamn babies anymore.
We just want to be manipulated
                                       with a little fucking consideration.

 
Call me hippo. Call the woman beneath me
a broken boat, a thin white skiff, a toothpick
unhinging a speck of pepper from between
my gaped teeth. Call the curtains closed.
Call that tour bus to cover my breasts.
Once, a man scraped me jagged as a pine cone.
I scraped him white as a star, then left him
and his head in a trough beside a pen of pigs.
Call the trough home. Call Daddy out
of this wet house. I can’t sing without hearing a man
slipping below water clean as butter, clean
as a roach sliding down the thin throat of a crow.
Call the road from Chicago to Memphis brief
encounters with an axe and a woman
who carries dust in her mouth. Call Jesus
down from that cross. Call my tongue a crown
of thorns, a patch of nettles sunk deep in an arm.
I’ve found every sparrow God has forgotten
to watch over. I’ve wreathed them in briars
and hung them from the back fence. They say
they’re tired of singing. They sang only to be noticed.
I am noticing. They are noticed. Funny, little beasts
often mistaken for something that should be pierced,
a spine broken on a thorn, then eaten—breast first.
Call me tiny, anything small: an acorn
lodged in the throat of a thrush. Choke. A claw
squeezed from the purple head of a flower. Prick.
A hunk of pork butt plucked from the gums
and placed back onto the tongue. Gag. Then swallow.
Feed me. Call my appetite a kind kingdom.
Call me Queen. King me.

1.

Might as well spend money 

on wine instead of new clothes



Might as well pour all the wine on these books



Might as well get drunk in a bar



Might as well pour myself 

a tearful glass of fire



Might as well stop dreaming

of heaven, legless



Might as well unlearn

the smell of your hair





                       I am old






2.

I poured out my heart

to her in a letter

I said it was the end of the world



I said my face is wet with tears

and that’s my best feature



What a waste of time

How many of the ancients’ love poems

actually worked?



The doctor said she was ill



The wind blew the clouds

away from the moon



The next day was beautiful



I knew it would be embarrassing

to be seen walking around

outside her apartment



                       I went to the bar




3.

I moved to the city

I was going to be great

Now I have to leave



I can’t afford to eat properly

the way you eat



The pigeons cooing in the evening

used to lull me to sleep



“Oh heart be joyful” I read

on a restroom wall



It was a terrible lie



Misfortune rises all the way

to heaven





                       But this too shall pass






4.

I said it before

and I’ll say it again

it’s not my fault



Like a parrot I said

what everyone else said



Roses and weeds 

are exactly the same



I’m still looking for someone

who thinks I’m cool



With wine stains all over my shirts

I’m not trying to hide anything



Sometimes I dream

I’m happy



                       Drinking wine

                       makes me happy






5.

It’s pouring rain out

Let’s get a drink



It’s too muddy 

to take a walk

Let’s get a drink



Or you could bring some wine over

and some flowers



Because the bars are closed

even if you bang on the doors



The rain is beautiful

for about 5 minutes

and then it’s annoying



your red lips

making a circle

replace the sun



                       If I’m lucky






6.

May you never have to sit 

in a doctor’s waiting room



May everything blow over



You are too beautiful

for that



The autumn winds rip off

the leaves 

but the tree remains



May you move unmolested

through the city



And if anyone even looks

at you wrong

May they burn in hell



                       Just leave it to me






7.

All I want to do

is get drunk with my wife



An endless glass of wine

both of us on the floor



So what if squares

look down on us?



Boring and misguided

are their miserable lives



When my wife is in the city

and I’m home

I want to cry



The moonlight 

on the cypress tree

is a bitter light



No book has ever kissed me

like she does






8.

The city is a beautiful place


The summer night lingers

just above the streets



And there is something

that frightens off the timid



Those who are drawn here

have a duty to prolong it



And gladly will they



Every evening in the city

is a deep pool of wine



Everyone who lives in the city

is drunk with it



And cannot leave



                       They are surrounded by friends






9.

In the morning

when I went into my garden

to pick a rose

a nightingale started to freak out



which

the more I thought about it

freaked me out



There was a deep and terrible connection



I could not bear



In a garden we believe 

life is eternal



                       Which we don’t even want






10.

The brisk wind pouring down

from the north

reminds me of my friend



It has the same cold magnificence



I lean out the window

and call out a sort of greeting



I know he is happy

he is doing well



I have followed him

many times

into the unlikeliest bars



Even hecklers 

cannot spoil his fun

Better to evoke drool, to vent, retort; better 
to banter than ebb, be a kook’s revel or bee in the beret  
than a bored tart. Bare those orbs! Rob those barons! To bait
boys, better be a lewd Lorelei than dowdy hetero 
drone. Don a boa, take a bow, take a lover, take a toke. Do it 
over and over. (And yet beware the ovary not bear 
a baby batter overdose!) Better to be Lotto than Keno, blotto on vino,
have one’s bed-vite written by bard than botanist. Better to be boned 
than bones. Oath, hath Saint Tits bit it? Never! Never! Never! Never! 
Better to be relevant yet wildly irreverent; to wrest 
away the old line throne than rest on tenterhooks. Better to be
than not to. To overtake, not be overtook. 
Hen to the rooster, tooth to the dentist?
Always better to be looked over, than overlooked.

Our neat nurse,
her shoes
like over-floured cakes,
separates us—
boy/girl.
We hold slips to say
we have been less
than careful.
 
What we hold back
is worth saying now:
this carelessness
had been our broken bread
some small hours before.
 
                 *
 
The waiting room’s light is:
             dark honey mixed
             into pasteurized cream.
or
             white fat
             cut with vinegar. 
 
or   (can we say it?)
       both: The honey and vinegar,
       the fat and the cream.
       The cream, fat, vinegar,
       and the honey, the honey,
       the honey, the honey.

For a long time I wanted to be a man who worked 
in a slaughterhouse 
with the big axe and the wide knives.  
I wanted to be a man who pushed the steer in as a steer 
then hauled it out 
as a T-bone, a rack of ribs, 
a half a pound of ground beef.  
These were the days when I lived in the city and hated the line of supermarkets 
that ran up and down Dean
with the cockroach-infested aisles.  
How would it have been to kill my own food
in the meatpacking mission south of 14th?
To smell the blood, taste the fat, finger the guts? 
Better yet, run through the hills of Flatbush and Canarsie
with spears, 
bows and arrows
to crouch in the bush 
and pounce.  
I don’t know how those Native Americans, those wide-eyed 
Davy Crockett-type trappers did it.  
I read once that if you knew your food before you killed it,
it sang to you in the belly.  
Now, I can’t even imagine putting a seed in the earth.  
I can’t fathom a day when I might cast a line into the Wallkill River 
to pull me out a rainbow trout, filet the sucker, toss it over an open grill
and chow.  
Now, I love the supermarket, 
The Whole Foods with its Haitian cashiers and bad-ass Mexicans 
who work the prepared food counter.  
I put my face into the cheese counter and inhale, 
take lion breaths, like I was at yoga
with all those ferocious Newton ladies in their hot spandex and cleanly shaved armpits.  
The Whole Foods destroys my manhood or any desire I might have ever had 
to be that kind of butcher, that baker, that sweet dick willy wagoneer.  
It cuts me off at the stomach, opens me up and pours in 
the fair trade organic, 
the macrobiotic basmati, 
the grass-fed rib eye that I should have slaughtered myself 
if I had only the muscle and wasn’t so goddamn scared.  
Later, at my picnic table— 
the steak perfectly marinated—
it occurs to me that my whole country 
has been killed by my Whole Foods 
and that there is nothing whole 
about a stalk of broccoli shipped in from Bali 
even though it has that beautiful purple sticker which reads, 
bio dynamic. 
So, I make my lion breaths deep and low, 
smile at the bloody cut 
then chew my American chew, quick, fast, 
full of buffoonery, 
sloppy with the happy fat.

America, if you think I could do better by you,
I have no doubt. Though I stoop conscientiously
to pick up my dog’s waste from the grass
with black biodegradable bags. And lest you suspect
some pretension, know my dog was the one at the shelter
no one else would take. He is fat & lazy,
& I could do better by him as well, though
I do not know if a long walk in the park
in 97 degree heat is a good idea. Please cue
a Presidential sound-bite to reassure me
all hearts are more resilient than I think. I confess
it would have been a moral error to have embraced him
if I did not have the means to keep him fed. But
I am writing tonight because there is something wrong
with your peaches. The ones from the supermarket
were so soft & cheap—half the cost of the ones
sold by the local farm—but the flesh near the pit
was so bitter & green. It is a fruit like the mind
we are making together: both overripe & immature.
Trust me, I still have the simple tastes you gave me:
I am delighted by the common robins & cardinals,
the way they set the trees at dusk aflame. Thank you
for Tuesday’s reliable trash collection. If you are
constellated somehow, a little bit inside
each of your people, I am sorry that there is more
& more of you lately I do not understand.
Sometimes I want simply to sit alone a long time
in silence. America, you must want this too.

It could have been a whale’s heart
she towed in her wagon.
 
It looked like an ocean sponge
with a red viscous beating.
 
We watched,
not knowing
how she managed.
 
It was sad and strange
how her heart had become her burden.

Dearest Father, forgive me for I have seen.
Behind the wooden fence, a field lit
with summer, a man pressing a shank
to another man’s throat. Steel turning to light
on sweat-slick neck. Forgive me
for not calling Your name. For thinking:
this must be how every prayer
begins—the word Please cleaving
the wind into fragments, into what
a boy hears in his need to know
how pain blesses the body back
to its sinner. The hour suddenly
stilled. The man genuflected, his lips
pressed to black boot as the words spilled
from his mouth like rosaries
shattering from too much
Father. Am I wrong to love
those eyes, to see something so clear
and blue—beg to remain
clear and blue? Did my cheek twitch
when that darkness bloomed from his crotch
and trickled into ochre dirt? Father,
how quickly the blade becomes
You. But let me begin again: There’s a boy
kneeling in a house with every door kicked open
to summer. There’s a question corroding
his tongue. There’s a knife touching
Your name lodged inside the throat.
Dearest Father, what becomes of the boy
no longer a boy? Please—
what becomes of the shepherd
when the sheep are cannibals?

My father wants me to cut his hair
in the laundry room, where the rotary phone
still hangs on the wall. Here, I took
and made so many calls to boys
he disapproved of. This is an old story.
A father, daughter, half-regrets. I fold over
his ear the way he tells me to and trim.
Nothing’s left of the lush, black swoop
or sideburns he always wore. I buzz
the white crown and snip stray hairs
from the bald part of his head. He’s
nothing like the man whose empty
cans I used to find in the trunk
of the car. I wonder, now, how
many times he knew my secrets,
but didn’t say a word. No one
really can tell you how not to mess up
your life. When I was young,
I loved the winter nights, watching
my father grease fishing reels
at the kitchen table, cranking handles,
clicking spools shut. Summer was miles
away, but he took such pleasure
getting ready. Especially when it came
to sharpening his fillet knife. I leaned
my shoulder close to his, shut my eyes
to better hear him whisk
that blade across a wet, black stone.

I like the inner lives of the silverware; the fork,
the spoon, the knife. I appreciate
how they each have a different reference toward
god, how the fork is Muslim,
the spoon, like a stone, is Buddhist, how the knife
is Roman Catholic—
always worried, always having
a hard time forgiving people, the knife kneeling
down in Ireland and Africa. In San Francisco
my lamp has become a temple.
Every time I turn it on the light moves out across
the room like a meditation,
like a bell or a robe
the way it covers everything and doesn’t want to
kill. Light is the husband
and everything it touches is its bride, the floor,
the wall, my body,
the bronze installation in Hayes Valley
its bride. The lamp chants
and my clothes, my hat thrown in the corner of the room
chants back: nothing, nothing. In my next life
I’ll have no fingers, no toes. In my next life I’ll be
a bougainvillea. A Buddhist monk
will wake up early on Sunday morning and not be a fork
and not be a knife, he will look down at the girl
sleeping in his bed like a body of water,
he will think about how
he lifted her up like a spoon to his mouth all night, and walk
into the courtyard and pick up the shears
and cut a little part of me, and lie me down next to her mouth
which is breathing heavily and changing all the dark in the room to light.
 

In Spanish
yo means I
 
and tu
is a you
I know
 
or at least
am comfortable
addressing casually.
 
In English
we have no
informal form
 
to indicate
the you
still in pajamas —
hair wild,
drinking coffee.
 
Intimacy, friendship,
easy access –
 
in English
the informal you
is “Yo”

It’s not the drug I miss
but all those minutes
we used to steal
outside the library,
under restaurant awnings,
out on porches, by the quiet fields.
 
And how kind it used to make us
when we’d laugh
and throw our heads back
and watch the dragon’s breath
float from our mouths,
all ravenous and doomed.
 
Which is why I quit, of course,
like almost everyone,
and stay inside these days
staring at my phone,
chewing toothpicks
and figuring the bill,
 
while out the window,
the smokers gather
in their same old constellations,
like memories of ourselves.
 
Or like the remnants
of some decimated tribe,
come down out of the hills
to tell their stories
in the lightly-falling rain—
 
to be, for a moment, simply there
and nowhere else,
their faces glowing
each time someone lifts,
like a gift, the little flame.

Today, I saw
A red car
Make an illegal left
 
And almost hit
A blue car
Running a red.
 
The drivers, suddenly
Angry survivors,
Braked hard, threw
 
Open their doors,
Jumped into the street,
And pummeled
 
Each other.
From this day
Forward, I want
 
You to be
Both of those
Assholes,
 
Simultaneously.

There was a small butcher shop in the North End
of Boston whose specialty was inferior foods.
Chicken feet and chicken heads. Gizzards, tripe
and beef hearts. Salty fatback and wet brains.
Prosperous people came from the suburbs to pay
too much for the food they ate in hard times.
The man living with difficulty in the winter woods
remembers as he looks at the fresh raccoon tracks
in the snow and wonders if they will tug at him
in the Mediterranean light, if he will write
about the classical bareness of cold and truth
while eating the suckling pig and fried bananas
of Indonesia. Will he miss the Mill River
with its slags of ice and the sound of crows
in the silence. Some years ago, a child was asked
whether he liked radio or television best. The boy
said radio, because the pictures were better.

I remember when I was born
said the old woman, it was so cold
it hurt so much
and giving birth hurt also
but often there was joy
always at birth there’s joy
and I am grateful for that
 
I remember it was not so easy
said the tulip
having to be beautiful
having to apply my blusher
and my dark streaks
in that unpredictable weather
as my contract required
 
Leading the double life that I do
while I’m licking my master’s hand
and he’s saying good boy
guess what
I remember furry wrestling, nipping napes
and the sweet little nipple
said the dog

Why does everything seems so impossible
            in the middle of the night? I wake up at three
with my mind in a knot, and I might as well be Incan,
             the ancient people of Peru, whose language
was not written in characters like the Chinese
            or letters like the Greeks and Romans or even runes
like the Celts, but knots on a string, so maybe when the Incans
            woke up at three, they could feel their knots,
whereas all I can do is review my worries or recite the poems
            I’ve memorized, a couple of sonnets by Shakespeare
and Donne, Hamlet’s “What a piece of work is a man” speech
            and all the lyrics to Highway 61 Revisited, my favorite being
“Just Like Tom Thumb’s Blues,” because when the lights
            are out you might as well be lost in the rain in Juarez,
and sometimes I forget how uncooperative the material world
            can be, though at moments all the pieces fit
like a Byzantine mosaic, which I’m thinking about now
            because I’m going to Ravenna tomorrow,
and I can’t sleep because the Piazza Sant’Ambrogio,
            which is right outside my bedroom window,
has become a late night hangout for braying drunks—God,
            the lungs on those people—and I can’t help but think
of all my mistakes as they line up like the bloody crucifixions
            I’ve been seeing in Italy this spring,
though the sky has been a glorious Leonardo blue, and the names
            of the artists, how could you not be great with a name
like Duccio di Buoninsegna, and you’d have to go a long way
            to find a better name than Dosso Dossi, so toss and turn
as I may, it is not Eastertime, but the beginning of June,                                                      
            and it was Luis Buňuel who said, Thank God
I’m an atheist, though my Bulgarian student Polina
            says that God is in other people, and it’s hard
not to believe in other people since there are so many of them,
            their screams bouncing off the Renaissance walls
of Sant’Ambrogio and into my window, and my train leaves
            at 7:30, and what if my mother has a stroke,
and there’s no one there to help her, and all my cats line up
            and list my betrayals: Annabelle, Sylvia Wilberforce,
Little Latin Loopy Lulu, and Bucky, aka, Mr. Suit Pants,
            Mr. Crazy Bacon, Mr. Pretty Paws, and I hope
he’s in a paradise where lost tails are sewn back on
            and torn ears mended, because I’ve had it up to here
with the everyday scarring, the laundry, the dust, so I might as well
            be asleep and dreaming of the tomb of Galla Placidia in Ravenna,
the night sky made of thousands of pieces of colored tesserae,
            or facing a tidal wave in a South American town                             
or riding a bus when a fat man in whitey-tighties and a black
            T-shirt gets on and starts shooting, blood flying
everywhere, but soon he’s bored by the mayhem and sits down
            beside me and asks what I am doing. Moving to keep
his bloody arm away from my white dress, I say, “Reading
            a newspaper.” “What’s that?” he asks. “It’s where
you read about what happened the day before.” “Read,”
            he says, and so I tell him about all the terrible
things people did yesterday in buses all over the world.

It is entirely in my hands now as it returns like blood to remind me—
the chains so soft from wear, in my right, in my left—
the first time I, trying for perfection, of balance, of symmetry,
strap your twenty two pounds of eyes, blood, hair, bone—so recently inside me—
into the swing—and the sun still in the sky though it being so late
as I look up to see where this small package is to go
sent up by these two hands into the evening that won’t stop
won’t lower as it should into the gloam is it going to last forever,
and the grace that I feel at the center of my palms
as if my hands were leaves and light were coursing through
some hole in their center, the machine of time coming in,
as chlorophyll could—I was not yet so tired of believing—
I was still in the very beginning of being human,
the thing no one can tell another—he didn’t find
what he searched for, she didn’t understand what she
desired—the style of the story being the very wind
which comes up now as I glide down the chains
to the canvas bucket to pull you to me,
eyes closed as your eyes close, and for the first time in this lifetime
lift you back and up as far as I can, as high as I can,
then let you collapse so suddenly as I push you away from me,
with more force than gravity as I summon from within
what I try to feel is an accurate amount, a right fraction, of my strength,
not too much promise, not too much greed or ambition
or sense of beginning or capacity for dream—no—just
the amount to push you by that corresponds to pity,
who knows how to calculate that strong firm force,
as if I were sending a message forth that has to be delivered
and the claimant expects it, one of so many,
accompanied by my prayer that you be spared
from anything at all, from everything, and of course also its opposite,
that everything happen to you in large sheets of experience
as I tug back the chain-ends and push you out
telling you to put out your legs and pump
although you do not know what I am saying
as you have not yet spoken your first word,
not yet on that day that seems even now it will never end
as you come back to me and I catch you and this time of course
as I am human I push a little harder
as if the news I was shouting-out had not quite been heard,
as if the next push were the real one the one that asks for
the miracle—will I live or die if I pick this fruit
as it is sent back to my waiting hands and this time
it’s stronger, the yes is taking over, your yes and my yes and our
greed to overcome what, into this first-ever solstice
with you in the born world,
let no one dare pick this fruit I think
as I cast the roundness of you up again now so high
into a mouth of sky agape yet without wonder
as if it eats everything and anything and does not know what day is
or time—this is our time—or that this next-on meal is being fed it,
as just under you the oval puddle from the recent rain lies
in the worn declivity where each one before you
has dug in her feet to push off or to stop—
and in it you flash as you go by
giving me for that instant an eye you its iris blinking,
the crucible of a blink in the large unflinching eye,
eye opened by the hundreds of small hopes taking on gravity at push-off,
and then the fatigue when for all the pumping and rising,
and how you could see over the tops of the houses
up and over to where your own house is down there—
and the housing development, and the millions of leaves, and the slower 
                                        children lagging behind
on the small road beneath—until the world stills,
and you alone are life, a huge bloom, a new force entering—
and then—even then—how the sensation of enough
swarms, and thought or something like it, resumes,
and your mind is again in your hard grip
on the chains which had been until then as if unknown to your body
during what might have been the interglacial lull,
or the period during which the original ooze grew single-cell organisms,
which grew small claws and feet and then had to have eyes,
till your hands become again hard, heavy, and all
the yearning re-enters you as lifetime,
and your feet learn to brake
by scratching the ground a bit more each time—
and that is where the eye comes from,
the final oscillations, the desire to be done with vision,
what this morning’s rain reminds us is still there beneath us
in an earth that will only swallow us entire
no matter what we push into it as here you and I again and again redo
the moment six months ago you first began
to push and cry out into the visible world.
It is here with me today in this hand grasping this pen
the weight of my transmission of force into you
the weight of catching you the first few times
the slow disappearance of your flesh from mine
as you hardly need a push when the centrifuge takes hold
and I just tap you a bit to keep you going
and we both feel the chains each in our own way
as they permit you to see over the given you shall never enter
no matter how long time is—never—
that gash you create in the evening air at your highest,
your own unique opening
which you can never fill,
cannot ever crawl back through and out,
except when that one moment comes and it will open and you will go,
once and once only and then, yes, you will.
I brought you in here I think in the evening,
in the grass and the town and the blinking windows,
in the dozens of lowering suns circling us in them.
 

When the batteries
begin to die inside its white 

plush belly, the assortment 
of cheerful noises it makes 

when you squeeze it
becomes singular 

and crude, the sound 
of a planet falling 

through one universe 
and into the next, through 

that one, too, falling 
and falling into god knows 

what, falling and falling
and never landing.  Still, 

the butterfly’s face 
(or whatever the hell

it’s supposed to be—little 
bird, bumblebee?) stays 

the same:  knowing 
smile, rosy cheeks.

 It shouldn’t have surprised me while reading 
Gorky’s remembrance of Tolstoy and devouring chicken 
on a blanket in view of the muddy waters 
that I should see a parakeet misnamed the Quaker parrot 
by some scientist poet with a sense of humor, 
not to mention fashion, because he found modesty 
in the way their lime color drapes over 
their backs and down each wing in a way that 
reminds one of a key-lime pie; though not 
the one with the dome of meringue which resembles 
the dress of a house finch, rather the wobbly 
body of the sad supermarket doppelganger; 
the impostor with the God-awful filling 
tinted green by they of the white aprons 
and soufflé hats who no doubt assume we are all children 
of Truth and would thus not know how to suffer 
a yellow-white pie with lime in its name; 
much less something important like the rapture 
that came and went last week 
for which the stores baked a special angel food cake 
labeled Manna and stuffed with so many 
mulberries it bled through; and no one I know vanished 
and perhaps it was a rapture that extinguished 
the tribe of Attsurs from which the parrot came 
that Tolstoy recounts to Gorky as possessing 
the last traces of the history of its lost people 
in its sickled tongue. And how long did it take the Attsur
scholar after he took the bird home, fed it dates 
and schnitzel from his own lips, to translate 
the precious words for “mama” and “wine,” 
“kitty” and “bye-bye,” and when the rapture comes again 
tomorrow and we finally vanish as predicted 
what bird will speak for us if not our monkish 
parakeet souring in the oak above us 
like a cheap piece of pie 
that calls out “hungry, hungry, hungry”? 

He is the man with the axe with its white edge.
He was born to a time of fire.
He took a pickaxe and walked to the rail
track and asked for work; and he stood
by the sparks and forging fire, standing
there as if the heat is food, pure food.
He is the forger of plans, and the man
who has vowed to be a friend
of fire, vowed to teach all flame
the democracy of heat.  He was
born to a time of fire; a man
born to turn broken engines
into piston and grease, a man that sees
the world as a machine, everything
will atrophy; all fires muster die,
but while the bellows blow.  Here is
an ordinary man, big hands, big 
dreams, moving through the earth;
a stranger always, as sojourner.
Trains thunder through the green   
world; a farm stretches away
from him, to cross from one end
of the country to the other, is
the journey from fence to fence,
the grand expanse of someone else’s
land that he knows like it is his.
Above, the crackle of a low flying
plane, and in the river, the clunking
of a steam boat—this is progress,
this is the machine, and a black 
man stands in the edge of the monstrosity
of iron and knows he must
be a forge where all heat will channel
energy.  Where a body can move,
break ground, full hands, where
a man can be at the top, commending
the elements; these are the days
of fire, the days of charred bodies
dangling fro trees, the days
of burnt out towns, negroes running
to find their way in the belly
of cities, these are the days
when fire must meet fire
he was born to a time of fire,
let him burn, baby, let him burn.

Spare us the spring. 
Spare us its garish light.
Spare us the nerve-thumping 
rhythms of hopping balls: 
empty vessels, sterile leather eggs.

Spare us the false optimism, 
the short-term vision, the hint 
that winter has been dealt a fatal blow,
that days will keep on stretching, 
an economy in boom. 

Spare us the emotion of 
the choked-up lawnmower
champing at resurgent grass.

And spare us, no less, the need 
for wonder: it demands 
too much suspension of belief.

Spare us our jaundiced view 
of daffodils, those clichéd ingénues 
that wizen limply into spineless stalks.

Spare us the tawdry pink 
of cherry blossoms, 
so precariously attached 
to branches
they are bound to fall to pieces, 
crumble at the first 
blusterings of a gale.

Spare us the shivering snowdrops,
paling quickly to insignificance, 
their holier-than-thou aura 
melting like Communion hosts.

Spare us the scare tactics 
of invading dandelions, 
that urine splash from which 
no clump of grass, 
no roadside verge is safe.

Lump in the leaves - it will be left to us 
to pick up their pieces, rummage 
through their trash when the tree market 
crashes and stocks are in freefall.

And spare us lilacs, scent so over-ripe 
suspicion of some cover-up is strong.

Spare us the lambs – bouncing 
with complete abandon, needing 
no counsel of a carpe diem nature, 
peeking from the milk-white fleece 
of their mothers’ blanket coverage, 
or savouring mint-green grass
 – on whom we pin dark, 
raddle-marked declarations of intent.

Spare us the ardent couples 
conferring at the paint store, torn 
conspiratorially between Dewberry Frost 
emulsion and velvet-finish Moonlight Bay.

Spare us the bees raiding every flower in sight,
leaving no anther pocket unturned.
And the tantrum-throwing wasps, 
in venomous mood, headbutting glass.

Spare us the spurned bird, egg on its face,
its singsong persistence in soliciting a mate,
its loutish whistling at wing-batting females.

And spare us the dawn chorus 
that outwears its welcome 
like a loquacious breakfast guest. 

Spare us, therefore, the spring, 
its fake sincerity, its unethical 
marketing strategies, its deceptive 
pledges, its built-in obsolescence, 
its weeds breeding like flies. 

 In the kitchen Elizabeth has been making marmalade 
with the luxurious crop of our lemon tree, 
and from my desk I can almost taste the caramelizing essence 
of citrus rind and vanilla beans and burnt sugar, 
and I can hear the piano concerto by Mozart she is listening to, 
which sounds like a pavilion constructed from lemon-tinted panes of         sugar-glass, 
and the Zairean music I’m listening to is like a tessellated and                       betasseled tapestry 
thrown upon the floor of a nomad’s tent, and the sands of the Sahara 
continue their migration into the timeworn grasslands of the Sahel, 
and the Virunga volcanoes comprise a fog-shouldered heaven 
to the last families of mountain gorillas awaking before dawn, 
shy, Herculean versions of ourselves, brothers 
from a simpler dream, luminous and transient as meteors. 
There will come no more into this world 
when we have killed the last of them. So many 
spools of golden sorrow to unwind, 
so much pathos to weave upon a loom of human agency. 
As if we were not ourselves baboons on the savannah, 
not jackals, not giraffes in our ungainliness. 
As if to desire the coat of a jaguar, the fur of a snow leopard,
was not a form of worship, as raw ore minted and coined 
resembles the child’s flattering imitation of a mastery it will never             equal.
Who would not be a great cat in the Amazon or the Hindu Kush?
Even the greenish pelt of a river monkey, its iridescent aura, 
even our too-human bodies shimmer with the weird, atomic eclipse-       light of life.
Talking to myself like this, in a blazon and an emblem, 
I realize I have never said plainly most of what I truly believe, 
I have shied from difficulty and misstated my deepest fears, 
I have not born full witness to the suffering in the streets of the cities I love, 
I have not walked a picket line against the tyranny of greed, 
I have been wily and evasive even on behalf of art, 
I have not praised the movies in tones equal to the rapture 
I have known there, 
I cannot remember King Lear, 
I did not finish Ulysses or even start on Proust,
even now I seek diversion in the candy necklace of delight, 
even now I refuse to commit, 
even now I would walk among jaguars 
wearing the skin of a jaguar 
as if it were not necessary to declare my allegiance, 
as if I did not have to choose. 
Which will it be, sugar or blood?

I was holding forth at the dinner table,
trying to fill what I perceived to be a void.
I had just read a book on music,
about which I know very little,
and, anticipating being corrected, was saying
something about the courage to have
a full stop, the courage to break off,
the breaking of rhythmic obligations.

Then the phone rang: my daughter’s lost cat
had been found.  I told everyone, and the void 
seemed to fill a little with good cheer,
like vodka at the bottom of a glass.

So I told them that the baby crow 
a hawk had tried to kill this morning
was still alive – three birds of different species 
standing around it as if on guard. 

The hawk was up on a nearby branch,
frowning, I said.  No one smiled or laughed.

But we were mostly a dour group,
long neglected reciprocity dinners
finally acted upon, payback time,
and the social scientists among us —
who wouldn’t know a good story
unless research confirmed it good —
wanted me to name the three species.
Nutfinch, plutark, free-to-be  – I couldn’t
help myself – and the void widened again.

I wanted to go home, but I was home.

How about the hawk, my friend
Bjorn, the clarinetist, said,
and the hungers of the strong?
And by the way, he added,
there’s no such thing as a full stop
in music – silence is a sound, an afterlife
for anyone with an ear.

I’d like to say I felt corrected,
not betrayed, and when I began to talk
about miracles and the Bee Gees singing “Staying Alive”
and Travolta being reborn before our eyes,
I’d like to say I didn’t know why.

Actually I wanted to confess that when discussing
music and obligations my mind had drifted
to baseball, its hesitations and double plays,
the beautiful choreography of dreams and errors.
I wanted to say that with some good stops
and luck it’s possible to survive.

I wanted to tell them that in my ignorance
I was serious, and that when things get lost
or are about to die all kinds of thoughts are legitimate.
It was my house, after all, and the floor was mine.

The tree
which was 

in equal parts 
earth and sky 

is now in equal parts 

house and fire
 
Sometimes when it’s raining, I dream 
of organization. Ha! I can hear Hoagland 
snort as if I’ve betrayed a principle 
he always knew I would, like I’m the King 
of Chaos bowing at last to the end-of-tangents
guillotine as if the heart too isn’t fire
and fire isn’t a waterfall, as if words
don’t come from the mouths of crushed stones 
and the match doesn’t say watch me consume 
the world and the wrist flicking it out 
isn’t also a song, as if enough negatives 
don’t plie up into a plus, as if a tree
didn’t tell us the gods disguise themselves 
not just to fuck us and leave us undestroyed
by their radiance but so they won’t recognize 
themselves just like we need to not recognize 
ourselves when what I mean is for a moment 
it might be nice to lay my hands immediately 
on Simic’s Book of Gods and Devils or Crimson’s 
Larks’ Tongues instead of rummaging through 
bookcases and drawers and that parked ark
of a sideboard although I always find 
a violet pastel pencil or letter from 
Dobby once I’ve stopped screaming how
this place is a mess to no one in particular
which is who I address autobiographically, 
so much better than what I intended like 
that drizzly evening I just wanted to avoid 
the dance and drink a beer under a big garden
umbrella and there she was, the love of my life
spark-lit.

MILES DAVIS STOLE MY SOUL
is not entirely accurate because John Coltrane was there, 
and Bill Evans too, and I forget who else 
because after they finished playing and fled the scene 
I felt kind of, not blue exactly, but green, 
the kind the old masters used to paint trees groaning 
or the warm sheen on a rotten ham. My soul 
had begged me to listen to jazz 
after we argued about the stoic on the corner 
selling flowers, ranting about paradise 
and how the soul was a kind of vegetable, a cucumber 
I think he said, which I wanted to believe, 
even if the cucumber is obviously a fruit. 
My soul knew this wasn’t right 
of course, it being the subject in question, 
so it sought to prove me wrong 
by inviting Miles and Co., while I was making a salad 
no less, two parts radish, one part joke, 
to dip their notes like ladles and empty 
my heart. By the time I’d chewed the last piece of lettuce, 
my soul was gone and there was no one left 
with whom to argue about the seemingly arbitrary 
best by dates on milk cartons 
which are meant to convey a sense of security, 
however fragile, or about the defect in every body of water 
an impressionist painted, who, for all their love 
of nature never set one ripple right, 
a fact I learned in the days that followed 
searching for my soul in lakes and rivers, 
dishpans and aquariums, because God is nothing 
if not a comedian, and when I still couldn’t find my soul, 
I found an intersection and lectured on charity and loss. 
I still remember the sweet faces in the passing cars 
when I began to pray for rain and dance 
the flamenco; I remember it was a Wednesday 
because nothing significant ever happens on a Wednesday. 

When no clouds bloomed on the horizon 
as a symbol of divine forgiveness, I returned home 
where I found the stoic with milk on his lips, 
skinning an orange, standing in the same place 
I had stood with my salad, this peddler of cucumbers 
whom I was going to remind about the laws 
of property, except he started singing, 
yes, singing, a song I hadn’t heard before 
but that I was sure was godly 
because I recognized Galilee and Adam and shame, 
as well as the white rolling of his eyes, 
which told me he was now a servant of the music 
making his throat open and close like a gate, 
releasing the warm floodwaters of his voice 
that filled and overran the hole 
I had still been calling my heart. 
If in that moment you had been flying 
in a plane high above the country of my body 
you would’ve been surprised, as I am now, by the sight 
of barren plains broken by a system of clear lakes 
shaped like a patch of wild cucumbers, 
a once noble fruit that saved nations 
because it was hardy, versatile, and demanded so little.

While Sophie lay in perfect symmetry
between death and life, I pictured da Vinci’s
Vitruvian man stretched within the hoop of existence.
Her blood was summoned out of her body and wheeled
through a mechanical angel that breathed
it back from the blue of night sky
to the iron red of oxygen. While she lay still—
a copy of herself—drugged beyond an eyelid’s
flicker, a stray synapse firing, nothing
to waste a joule of strength, 
I picked the tenderest string beans
on my son’s farm, thick fringe hanging
under leafy awnings,
some green, some a purple deep
as the dyes of royalty.
When the pods are young each is so slight.
We harvested for hours to fill a lug,
mounding the slender bodies as the sun blazed.
We dug up beets, rude lumps
the gophers inscribed with their incisors.
We carried melons against our breasts,
fragrant with sugar and time. We all know
one life is not worth more than another,
but who does not beg for mercy?
Who does not want to be the one
who slips through the fence
when the god on watch turns away to take a piss?
The phone in my pocket rang and rang
and with each call the odds fell.
I was already sweating as I started in
on the black-eyed Susans. Rows so yellow
it seemed such brightness could not have ruptured
from the dun-colored soil.
Tolstoy gave us the scene: Levin walking the streets
the morning after Kitty says she’ll marry him.
He’s dazzled by everything he sees—children
on their way to school, pigeons flying from a roof,
a hand arranging cakes in a shop window.
How is it that fear can also burnish the world?
The flowers opened their naked petals, shivering
gold in the hot breeze. I cut
only the freshest, centers packed with florets.
I stripped the leaves from the stems,
set them in water. One bucket and then another.
As the day wore on, the heat mounted, the light slanted
into my eyes. All I could see was the shadow
of the jagged corolla, blinded as I was by a sun
that I understood, for a moment, was a mortal fire
that would have its own death.
I remember the tough hairy stems. I remember
the green stain on my hands.
I remember my son with his face in his hands, my hand
on his shoulder, the bare muscle of his arm, his hardened palms.
And while Sophie lay still, unknowing as dirt,
we kept on—the gleaming eggplant, 
the humble cabbages, the scarves of heat.

Adamant in his argument against winter he plots the distance 
to the horizon by graphing tree against green, 
calculating the sum of the wind when yesterday is taken from it.

His azimuth splendor maps the city twice in time 
and he feels the drag of the tide pulling him along through millennia
into other cities each of which existed here in this same place.

Afternoon in sunlight, he climbs up the mountain 
away from the blue rebuke of the eternal shore
and arrives at the garden of flowers, 

there being no more resistant surface upon which eternity 
could make its useless claim, that the prayers you learned
 all your life mean no more to you.

Thrust up from the dark of the earth only to wither,
how are flowers in any way supposed to understand god?
They are no better than a human body that seeds and sprouts and dies.

And even if a body were to remake itself or rename itself as different matter
what would it matter? Briefly he wonders: is he a river then, 
furiously plotting a course. Or is he the boat floating down it or the person inside?

No mathematics can draw the geometry of the path of a city that doesn’t exist.
The storm of his body won’t abate, its numbers irrational, tempers extreme
like that of another poet-mathematician who lived a thousand years back or maybe

one who lived a thousand years on, drawing patterns in stone to cut for tiles,
piecing together a map of the universe: seven small planets swinging 
their cosmography of charlatan destinies. Is that his future or history unmapped?

He remembers that Ali warned the astrologers to cease telling fortunes
not on account of potential infidelity but because the book of the heavens
was impossibly infinite and so many stars yet unseen and uncharted


that any divination risked planetary imbalance. And so he never knew 
which of the still uncharted constellations truly governed his kismet: 
Fairy Prince. Lonely Brother. Angry Son.

At any rate, stubborn as a volunteer, he appears in the flower beds. 
Annually he clamors to be, along with the hyancinths, tulips and orchids,
gathered and carried to portal adornment. 

He learned his way to the heavens by guts and calculus, 
that science meant to plot the relationship between different objects 
unspeakable that move through the cosmos at varying speeds.

In the kingdom of heaven the belt of Orion is no belt at all
but stars separated by galaxies and light-centuries.
His hands on the bars of the garden gate grow dark in the dimming light.

It suddenly occurs to him the horizon is maybe nothing but the limit of what he sees.
It’s still a place to be paid homage to, not made pilgrimage to, never to reach it,
but worship it, fear it even, perhaps, like god, like the rubicund unfound planets,

like the end of the world, a cantata call to prayer that disappears 
wistfully over the silver-leafed olive trees and cypresses 
toward the now-dark unspooling devastation of the boundless sea—

I AM INSIDE THE HUMANITIES AND
  if I step
            too far out of it,
                  I’m dead. The figure
           at the top left corner is Securitas. 
     No rent! No work! No wages!
       No more!  For those thinking
   of disturbing the peace, let 
      the hanged man be your warning.
In order to write this poem,
     I paid daycare $523
            for the week. Make sure you premix
       the bottles, bring diapers. Make it worth
                    something, this time. Mayan
             countdown clock to Mayan
   countdown clock, two bodies,
uncivilized, in a bed wanting
        the water of the world to 
give them back a pyramid. 
         
       Also, the bronze head of Adam.
                Also, the world of children, 
         their toys, the plastic imitation food—eggs,
         miniature cereal boxes, deformed mirror
           to the real. I could not keep working
     to make money for the people I despised, 
         nothing is right, but I couldn’t afford 
       not to either. Late at night, Chris 
            said “I hate my job.”  The hydro-geologists 
              have to give permits to Gulf Oil
                   for more water or someone
         will lose their livelihood. It was winter
        in Florida, the path to all principles
       of all inquiries led back to this
 one statement, like a recite
from Publix: I was teaching
     the humanities again. 


In the garden of the fallen
      aristocrats, where no one sits 
on the lawn, it is as if heaven is on 
     one side, hell, on the other,
and somehow I have slipped very far 
     into the abyss between the two,
an abyss that contains suns 
      the way black holes
do not give back the history
   of light, the way a galaxy
                      turns like a clock 
        into the desperate desire 
for water and these flowers
            bloom like idiots,
            live as thieves. 

   Chris’ cryptic texts
from West Florida: “No coffee.
   nuclear power plant” and a picture  
          of some industrial 
                map of rust.
 
O Apollinaire, eau-de-vie,  
       in this garden, which is a mockery 
                 of all gardens, 
   in this Bed, Bath and Beyond 
of the intimate, remember me,
   I know what is real 
  and I will remember how to steal 
     back what is mine.

ACCORDING TO SCHOLARS, EVERYTHING
—so long these days: the nineteenth century,
the twentieth century, the novel,
and now the night: Prince of flowers: boat-less
oars at the edge of a cold beach: sometimes,
we are asked to prove who we are: stranger
in the house of strangers: here, I remember
the white bee making a black zero above
our heads, the hairs of a gray cat pulled
from the back of our throats, placed on a dish
that would bear nothing more remarkable
than this: refuse: fat moon: peach pit: lamp light
spilling its affliction over our feet:
your hand and now your mouth starting a gash 
below my nipple, a gash I do not wish closed.

Man my mother never
voted for, I hear you lived 
in the basement
apartment, underneath 
mine, in Somerville,
Massachusetts.
Crocuses, then daffodils, 
and the usual volunteers
of natives, even 
the groundcover blooms. 
Health care is a right
and marriage a gateway
to what most 
people want at three
in the morning. Thank you
for believing in
global warming. I love 
how you look at your wife. 
Let’s talk about airport 
security. The last
time I went through
an agent pulled the clip
from my hair himself. 
An abalone shell 
from the coast of California
still shines pink 
the color of a labia
in Massachusetts, where 
Dickinson loved
the circle so much
it became an American 
landscape. The day I 
realized my mother
would never vote
for you, I taught
a classroom a poem
by Robinson Jeffers: a beautiful
woman puts on 
the skin of a lion, and runs
into the cypresses on a rainy
evening, after her aged
father has died
so she will get shot 
by the son 
of her brutal husband. 
When I call my brother
he doesn’t pick up his
cell and my father
goes to the ordination of 
a priest for pleasure, 
on a Saturday, 
with a new wife. 
Man of state, how did 
you study, late
into the night, or at a diner,
the whole day a list
of errands? People talk
about the economy, what is it,
a paycheck or happiness? 
What I can’t buy
the dead I buy my friend
whose child shook 
with seizures
all last fall, and the crease
in the peach tulips edged in golden-
rod yellow let in a bit
of light, then a streak
of fade and though the bouquet
may have lasted less
time she’ll love it more
for opening like that. 
Into the ground, under a pine, 
chosen for its thick
root potentially, in another
generation, upending
not hers but the next
door stone, and even in that purchase 
we worried about ourselves and not
another, took note of and 
moved straight over their loss, though 
the tree might decide to hold
its ground and go deeper, not out, 
she and you 
became President. Obama,
I am closer now
if I never meet you or stand
in the same room 
with you than I’ll ever be
again to my mother. 
The air you breathe
parts molecules and circulates towards
my body, towards the state 
where I pay my rent.  
The waste you make enters 
the stream of general waste, and she
past waste makes nothing.

The man smiles
at his wife’s French

I’m walking walking
for at least 
a half hour
fresh flowers
dog in a cone
the two fingers
of God pointing
at each other
over the
legions of keys
Baudelaire Bastille
breaking glass
the breasts of the
man at the front
desk reserved
mouth bald French
I miss your face
in every window
Dennis has to
take a shower
& eschews
cabs. Where did
that book go
Marilyn’s translations
I find my green
notebook in a 
pile of towels
I’m lucky
I smile out a window
at morning light
I find my glasses
on the shelf 
over the toilet
man position
you saw them:  yes
I feel the needle
shift to not
lost at all
look forward to
announcing all this
to Dennis
but mainly to you
the day is a deep
deep well
in which I see
the sky
I’m smiling
at you.

Did it mean anything? The stone, the rose,
darkness, wood, wind, flame, the violin.
The practical man, the visible world,
the painted ponies, the sea, the wilderness
of cellophane, my last word, my crumpled message
to my friend? Was I in search of something,
tools maybe, or seeds, for many odd things
are stowed under the over-thinking.
Let’s begin to talk about things,
and what they should be named,
and whether it will be necessary
to draw any of them.
The sound of the tea-kettle —
it was the most terrible thing in the world.
Sometimes it was a wolf, and sometimes
a man or a woman, whatever it felt like,
even falling cherry blossoms, and always
it could take you out, and then it did,
leaving the whole room as impressive
as an unexplored cave.

Every morning breakfast became
the stage on which pills danced and sang,
assumed the role of hero, were gulped
into the audience of his flesh.  As they grew
in number, they fanned into colors and shapes,
textures and sizes.  Given the dailiness,
he learned to sniff them into an orchestra,
rolled them on his fingertips to script
a blind menu of their casings.  All of which,
he believed, would improve his fading
memory.  The short-term was going first
and hardest, and it wouldn’t be long
before the very map of his life 
sogged into a cereal’s milky spectacle,
the juice no longer cold, the coffee
rooming into dullness.  Staring out
into his garden, where hummingbirds
lapped the early flowers and stitched
the air with their mechanicals, as if
a great hand was moving them like a cursor
across the screen of a life that remembered
everything, it dawned on him
that his wife, if he had one, could bake him
a memory flan, melding into its lapping moon
the contents of these capsules, so that
he could at least remember, in the throng
of this warm moment, that this caramel host 
Petri-dish crown telescope-lens chalice nipple
was the globe, the cage, the very eye and lid
of the one taste that could deny 
what lived within it.

Tumbling through the
city in my
mind without once
looking up 
the racket in
the lugwork probably
rehearsing some
stupid thing I
said or did
some crime or
other the city they
say is a lonely
place until yes
the sound of sweeping
and a woman
yes with a 
broom beneath
which you are now
too the canopy
of a fig its 
arms pulling the
September sun to it
and she
has a hose too
and so works hard
rinsing and scrubbing
the walk
lest some poor sod
slip on the silk 
of a fig
and break his hip
and not probably
reach over to gobble up
the perpetrator 
the light catches
the veins in her hands 
when I ask about 
the tree they 
flutter in the air and
she says take
as much as
you can 
help me
so I load my 
pockets and mouth
and she points
to the step-ladder against 
the wall to
mean more but
I was without a 
sack so my meager
plunder would have to 
suffice and an old woman
whom gravity
was pulling into
the earth loosed one
from a low slung 
branch and its eye
wept like hers
which she dabbed
with a kerchief as she
cleaved the fig with
what remained of her
teeth and soon there were
eight or nine 
people gathered beneath
the tree looking into
it like a constellation pointing
do you see it
and I am tall and so
good for these things
and a bald man even 
told me so 
when I grabbed three
or four for 
him reaching into the 
giddy throngs of
wasps sugar 
stoned which he only
pointed to smiling and
rubbing his stomach
I mean he was really rubbing his stomach 
it was hot his
head shone while he 
offered recipes to the 
group using words which 
I couldn’t understand and besides
I was a little
tipsy on the dance
of the velvety heart rolling
in my mouth
pulling me down and
down into the
oldest countries of my 
body where I ate my first fig
from the hand of a man who escaped his country
by swimming through the night 
and maybe
never said more than
five words to me
at once but gave me
figs and a man on his way
to work hops twice
to reach at last his
fig which he smiles at and calls 
baby, c’mere baby,
he says and blows a kiss
to the tree which everyone knows
cannot grow this far north
being Mediterranean
and favoring the rocky, sun-baked soils
of Jordan and Sicily
but no one told the fig tree
or the immigrants
there is a way
the fig tree grows
in groves it wants,
it seems, to hold us,
yes I am anthropomorphizing
goddammit I have twice
in the last thirty seconds
rubbed my sweaty 
forearm into someone else’s
sweaty shoulder
gleeful eating out of each other’s hands
on Christian St.
in Philadelphia a city like most
which has murdered its own 
people 
this is true
we are feeding each other 
from a tree
at the corner of Christian and 9th
strangers maybe 
never again.

Think how tired she must be,
after she’s drawn letters in the dirt, 
jumped rope with beggar children.
cradled a man in the streets of Calcutta. 
She can still come up with phrases 
well worth writing down.
And here she is, in the 7-11, 
buying clove cigarettes to bring 
back the smell of High Mass.
Me—my purchase?  A bright red
Tootsie pop, hard-shelled exterior 
that only gives way and melts.
I’m thinking how bleak
the emptied city pool looked
on my way over, how it’ll be 
winter soon so sadness will set in.
She stands unswerving, probably 
coming up with another great quote.
It is only through repetition 
that we make ourselves.
Her heart, like this store, is never closed.
I follow her out the automatic doors
to the steamy black parking lot.
She slides into her seat, adjusts 
her habit, drives away.

1


The poets who wrote our Book 
Are dead and our fiction is their fault.
For they were those who taught
That women are slave and master,
To audiences predisposed to hear;
Our status early met disaster,
And what was posed haunt us to this year.
And because I have more than one mouth to tell,
I tell it well, and as our sister said:
“I do it so it feels like hell.”

The fable goes that good poets
Are always the best lovers,
But the old poems serve to show it—
Love breeds misogyny under covers .
A girl is not a nation,
But the worst would have it so;
The canon a spy’s oblation,
And poets’ lies, culture’s code.

2

See how the more he strives for love,
Things for Our girl are worse to go.

If you think that girls cause love to go wrong,
Hear the warning in my anti-love song;
A group of men is indeed a club—
Perhaps its time they close their meeting.
Their poems play like opinion polls,
Where different faiths and women alike
Take the blame for what is worst
On earth, assigning the greatest crime
To our mothers, simply for our births.

I’ll say what’s been said before,
By the truth that hides in history—
That each should defend her brothers
And her sisters—it’s no mystery,
Since together we are woman and man,
And with each other have made the race.
But this is my poem where girls come first;
Standing together we make our case,
And as for me, I could have done worse.

Let us speak 
Not of how 
Much wickedness 

We have within 
Us, but how amazing 
It is that we don’t 
Commit more 

Stick-em-ups. 
Celebrate it, sing—
Great shamalam! 

Bumpleberry 
Steamabout! I have 
Had numerous out 

Of body experiences 
With Halloween
Masks & through their 
Crescented eyes, 

Learned that our 
Mouths are wonder 
Cabinets. Gooseneck 

Inferno! Ripple me & snort! 
Let’s spend our remaining 
Days pretending to 
Share a heart—we’ll be 

Conjoined sisters, 
Sweating through 
Our magical panties. 

How breathtaking, 
We are marvelous 
Brides of daylight. 
We taste it all.

The most productive sound of the

past fifty years     is feedback



You make the amplifier hate itself     / You bring the instrument     too close you turn it up too loud

The music passes through and is     the show until it is

forced through / The forcing through becomes the show the feedback

Filling the moments when the music stops becomes the show     it blends in with

The music makes     the music richer     the music the     box

through which the music is heard not / Wanting the music anymore     of course     the amplifier



Doesn’t want anything

A tool is what it’s used for

 Last week, a woman smiled at my daughter and I wondered
if she might have been the sort of girl my mother says spat on my aunt
when they were children in Virginia all those acts and laws ago.

Half the time I can’t tell my experiences apart from the ghosts’.

A shirt my mother gave me settles into my chest.

I should say onto my chest, but I am self conscious—
the way the men watch me while I move toward them
makes my heart trip and slide and threaten to bruise
so that, inside my chest, I feel the pressure of her body,
her mother’s breasts, her mother’s mother’s big, loving bounty.

I wear my daughter the way women other places are taught
to wear their young.  Sometimes, when people smile,
I wonder if they think I am being quaintly primitive.

The cloth I wrap her in is brightly patterned, African,
and the baby’s hair manes her alert head in such a way
she has often been compared to an animal.

There is a stroller in the garage, but I don’t want to be taken
as my own child’s nanny. (Half the time I know my fears are mine alone.)

At my shower, a Cameroonian woman helped me practice
putting a toy baby on my back.  I stood in the middle of a circle
of women, stooped over and fumbling with the cloth.  Curious George
was the only doll on hand, so the white women looked away
afraid I would hurt my baby while the black women looked away
and thought about not thinking about monkeys.

There is so much time in the world.  How many ways can it be divided?

I walk every day with my daughter and wonder
what is happening in other people’s minds.  Half the time
I am filled with terror.  Half the time I am full of myself.

The baby is sleeping on my back again. When I stand still, 
I can feel her breathing. But when I start to move, I lose her 
in the rhythms of my tread.

FOR WANT OF WATER
an ant will drown himself, his body submerging
     into ease, his mandibles, head, antennae, baptized. How lovely
          to lose your senses to the cup of your want. A boy
                drags his mother’s body across the desert, her fluids rising
                      to God in order to quench her skin. How divine
                           her body must have looked, clutched at the ankles, her
arms reaching out in exultation, her head stippled in rings
      of sand and blood as he walked with her, slowly, her fallen
            and moving shape the fork of a divining rod, her body shaking
                 with each of his steps, and for water, shaking to find
                       that deep and secret tributary. I have dreams of letting go
                             of water, of waking my lover to a bed of my urine
as my brother did to me, his thin limbs shaking to discover
      the shame of his inside self. And what did we know that to have
            an inside wet enough to free was luxury? The boy
                 walks with his mother—he is only thirteen—the age I learned
                      to stroke on the toilet the blood off my fingers, and he can
                            not cry, because to cry would mean the waste of his own
wetness, to cry would mean to stop, to think, to differentiate
    the liquids moving down his face, to cry would mean
         to cry, so he goes on, and—this is a common story, the boy
                is not a boy now but every boy we have ever known—people
                       find him, they help him to lift his mother onto their hands,
                             their necks, they lift her to their own dark and desperate
dryness, and they make it, yes, when they make it over the border
   to a mall parking lot, they lay her down, they fall with her
      body as a clump of bodies behind a city dumpster,
          and people make calls from behind windows, not
              to the immigrants with the dying core, but to the police, who come
                 with their handcuffs and call her dead. No. To call
would be to give her life a name. Roundness to where there are now
   only angles. To call would be to remember all
       the other times that he has called for her, and the boy
           plugs his ears, shakes his head, doesn’t know that he cannot physically
              produce tears anymore—such thirst can rid us of these symbols—
                 only that now there are mouths around him calling other
names, as men run and other men give chase, because how much do you need
   to give up in order to stay? a boy? a mother? your land and inner
       land? Nothing. Nothing can be given, and he will remember
          nothing as he sits in a cell waiting for his sister to come to release
             him from his cellular pain. He will only remember water, that want
               for the clouds to let go their rain, and how seeing
 
them dropping, he kept pulling forward, their bodies steady towards that dark, uneven line.

At the orgy, everything slowed when Bethany 
explained why barns are red. Hundreds of years ago, 
farmers sealed them with linseed oil mixed with milk 
and lime and rust, as rust was an abundant crop 
and killed fungi and mosses, think of people getting by 
with what they had and those who followed 
honoring that tradition or not wanting to stand out 
with blue barns or green or yellow, she said, 
the apparatus of cock and tit, of tongue 
briefly educated, before the facts were absorbed 
and the process of consumption resumed. I learn so much 
at these things, Thomas said to Carol as they were leaving, 
who’d briefly lectured on The Magna Carta, tugging the collar 
around Peter’s neck the whole time, someone’s pinky 
up her ass, lips grazing her breasts, a lapping sound 
as of small waves against a pier as she closed her eyes 
and spoke of Clause 61, the establishment 
of a committee of barons who could overrule the King 
if he defied the Charter. But wasn’t the purpose 
of Clause 61 not the protection of the people 
but the removal of the King by the Barons, someone said 
from deep inside the chamber of flesh as Carol came. Yes, 
she screamed, some see it that way, and fell back 
and into or onto, between or with or as the touch 
of touch or the touch of sound, what was the difference, 
how could she tell where anyone began or ended, and why, why 
would she want to?

How easily the winter nights urge us on 
To sink deep into sleep, and once down
Roll over and over on the floor of night. 

Forty-five dreamers crowd into our bed
At night; forty of them don’t belong there. 
The other five are repeating dreamers. 

How easily the winter nights urge us on 
To abandon the bedposts, and go to sea
Looking for the island Robinson Crusoe never found. 

How many days we stand on the deck
Surrounded by drunken seamen and old ropes, 
Trying to recall the port we are sailing to. 

It is so easy to give thanks to the night. 
We give thanks to our bones for stretching out, 
And feel gratitude to our little toes. 

You know what it’s like! At midnight
The bar closes, the tables are stacked together, 
And all the drunkards are thrown out.

 Tho it’s true our fathers’ fathers nailed to their doors
wreaths of pagan balsam to winter over on plowed streets
far from dark pines, they were not winsome—
and as the children of their continuum neither are we—
we aren’t pretty-boys or high-hearted missionaries—
no church bells made of pig-iron have rung out
our return from months held hostage by a warlord—
neither are we about to hatch a plan to rid the town of bribery— 
there are no martyrs here among us; any flash of lightning
could tell you that—& if you are looking for one of us
to promise restitution or redemption, look elsewhere—
we don’t cheat each other, but we do sometimes
cook the books—we have the ready gifts we all
were born with, for better or worse—even if each of us
has woken at night & felt himself an immigrant still,
with nothing to call his own, just a stowaway’s code
and a cold window to touch a forehead to & cry. 
We tell ourselves that at least we know the difference 
between sleeping & waking—but the snow can see that
from a distance we look like all the distance it falls through.

 Take operation’s shimmy all the way back, 
spot where my hand on the fridge handle un-
hands whole networks: PG&E pumping 

its box-car’d, coal-jumped generators,
the hectic electric passing its bright idea
to last week’s Buddha Delight back there,

gone bad. I hold the door open till the hum
starts. Cold seeps from the chamber. A shiver
now at the neck. Then closed, then the sidling

miles of cable keeping me connected, the metals
dug, welded, smelted from cooling cores,
bauxite and ore, beat to unairy thinness, 

underground passages, new flanged steel.
All that’s rolled, snipped, fitted, piped 
to reach my unit, me, a paying customer, 

heart thumping steady, my veins branched
in need of these rivets, bolts, coils, rubber 
tubes and tape. The sum trained to wipe neat 

in a blink if dinner drips down the white 
laminate door when the container spills. Dear 
Power service, if I am standing before my coffin-

sized hole of near-freezing to take from, 
am I not the thought you think, one synapse
among the many, though so many have less.  

This season, teach me how to repent,
the cells of this body sitting down 
before my huge plate of food.

Monday we masked ourselves and thought about guns and babies: 
things with heft we could hold, things that could rip us apart,
things with crying and wish.  We could get them, we knew 
a guy, and why not the whole nation was walking heavy, packing, 
carrying the difference, only conceiving we went without.  Tuesday 
we played master and runaway slave, but which hatcheted one?  
Wednesday through Friday: suffragettes
with rolled up sleeves, 
pince-nez, and books hollowed out for the bomb, throwing 
ourselves in the way of the king’s horse, ready to disfigure a work
of art, ready to love or bungle as the need be.  There was more 
to the drunk weekend than was dreamt about in your philosophy, 
Señor.  Saturday, Sunday, the fluency and the terrors of self 
and state, the dream of carabinieri with Uzis guarding the bank – 
smagliante, dazzling in blue.  Did we want to blow up the bank 
or blow up the need?  Dream of explicit we.  Dream of furious
history.  Dream of kissing ourselves, kissing the need goodbye.  
The wind-blown tribes of us looking for onions, leeks, garlic –
the flavors of our captivity, our tongues made for unbearable,
baffling love and strange systems of sacrifice.  We sent an acoustic pulse
through the house that pinged off the submerged hull of the need.  
Did we make something then?  No, not then, not something, 
unless the sing through the autumn was something, unless feeling 
was something to ransack.  We began the waiting, the secret negotiation 
with the world in the form of pauses and burn, baby.  We began 
the work of Denmark Vesey and the other Dane, Prince Hamlet, 
if he were less princely.  We turned to drama and weapons and 
repeating.  We turned and turning we revised and cursed and obeyed
our ghosts by thinking, then rethinking, then acting badly, 
then dying by the plot.  We crawled back into the extortion racket
of the family.  Then the whiteness went, then the male stuff 
and with it our sympathies.  Was it better to know or love 
and which wanted language and which wanted unruly self 
applied like a compress to a wound.  The illuminated texts 
of matinees whose work was guns and kiss whose history 
was smoke and sky and little else.  The nation lost interest in us.  
Without the experience of need we needed self-punishment, 
and maybe another thing to blackmail success with.  One
boy’s scheme is another’s intercepted telepathy, one girl’s 
bafflement is another’s trance.  This must be the middle class: 
the All wrapped in hysteria like the bankroll of the hustler, 
a Benjamin masking the Washingtons.  A successful feed 
puts hunger and mother together at the right time.  A failed
need is a frenzy, need feeding on need, our selves as rivals 
to ourselves: wrestlers, fugitives, punitives, worriers, threats.

O man-made machine who fakes man as Thing and Foresaker, the rope
           shipped around our neck  of the woods, Come to enslave us
            to our owned hours, O body become Bot.
O Smart Phone, who flames from the mouth if a screen, waiting in the
            pockets, lights in the  mall’s smallest darkness, Come, recognize
            our vices.
O keyboard O Facebook, and Social Media and WWW, whose ever-
           widening “Buyer!” has been  let loose and pawned the words:
           Come, and bring forth “Friend”, let us bow together  before your                    
            Cyclops.
O keyboard and clicker of the Digital Age, who can recognize my face
           from among the masses  and hunt me down and destroy me from
           any remote location: Come, come and watch  over us.
O biotech implant, over become lover, O biotech Virus of Neural
           Plaquing, how skull no longer  offers isolation.
O Predator Drone, O Hummingbird Drone, O Bee Drone Swarm how
            hovers: Come, and, let us  watch a man-made machine unmake a
            man unto forsaken thing, Come into the  classrooms of our youth
            and hear how we laugh.
O robotic nurse, who can sing, who can dance, who stands ready with
           outstretched metal rubber-  encased arms and movement-tracking
           tearless eyes before our bodily suffering she shall  not waver:
          Come and deliver into their beds our soft bodies, pliable babies, into your  arms,
          into your arms, into your arms, forever more
          and more…

What should we believe in next?

Daniel Boone’s brother’s grave says, Killed by Indians.
 
We point at it; poke at it like a wound— 
history’s noose.
 
Below the grave, a cold spring runs. 
Clear, like a conscience.
 
Now, I’m alone.
 
Only me and the white bones of an animal’s hand 
revealed in the silt.
 
There remains the mystery of how the pupil devours 
so much bastard beauty. Abandoned property.
 
This land and I are rewilding.

A bird I don’t know, but follow with my still living eye. 
 
The day before me undresses in the wet Southern heat:
flower mouth, 
pollen burn, 
wing sweat.
 
I don’t want to be only the landscape: the bone’s buried.
 
Let the subject be

the movement of the goldenrod, the mustard,
the cardinal, the jay, the generosity.
 
I don’t want anything,
not even to show it to you—
 
the beakgrass, bottlebrush, dandelion seed head, 
parachute and crown,
all the intention of wishes, forgiveness,
 
this day’s singular existence in time,
the native field flourishing selfishly, only for itself.

There are some among us with no impulse control I mean zero 
Give them a pencil they’ll stick it in their eye
Show them a picture of eyelash mites no eyelashes seconds later

You strap them in a wheelchair crazy as hallelujah
Useless meat puppets                  Carnival of bad animals

Chaya in India believed the world would die when the Large Hadron Collider rebooted                    
She thought Earth would crack up and everyone would get pulled like a body just getting pulled
Her father tried to divert her attention no such thing                                                                  
A black hole that’s a bad end
 
 
 
 
 
The television is irresponsible saying an eclipse is bad omen
The rabble rushes to temple ignoring scientists saying nothing to fear calm yourselves calm calm
No wonder humans are called long pigs                 Not only for taste

Chaya ran from the evening news straight to the bleach you’ve already guessed she chugged it                                                                         That isn’t cosmic that’s a belly pain that’s human                                                             
Saying goodbye to your mother with chlorine on your breath

Hallelujah is the wrong word to begin with so start over
Tiny tiny crazy baby steps toward mass compulsion

It’s like the world went wild
Wild with me
And I couldn’t stop it anymore
I was a really good poet
But more than that
I wanted you to not have to
Eat the pigs with the other ones
Baby honey baby
When I think of your head and breastbone
I go wild
You wear the red necklace
And I sweat sweat on the pavement
Still I think I will take the crushing pain
To whatever narrative
The men talk of
Whatever thing they mean
Means fire
I think I will wake and walk
And walk with you
Until they put me under
Until they put me under
I will cross the blue forest
With only you on my mind
Dumb spirit
Only you on my mind
You made me dumb
When I had only you on my mind
So I took the red necklace
Dumb spirit
There there
Always always always always
Always always always
Always on my mind

The one trick I’ve always fallen back on is to make a man think
he’s the one rejecting me 
But it was so quiet in your room 
even if you had horrible books written by evil men 
at your bedside and in your possession that deep desire
to hurt and thus in my head scrambling between kissing you
and trying to maneuver how I would leave unharmed 
the way a woman has to manipulate both mind and body
I dreamed I was in a car and a man hit me over the head 
Please don’t tell me the story of the graduate student
who put a mouse in her freezer just to “see what would happen”
It was quiet though if even for a moment I drive around Tallahassee
to find one quiet place The way I love you is not as a sheriff 
searches for a walnut it’s more violent and I can’t stay in the moment
of this poem long enough for the feeling to unfold I owe the 
therapist $80 The woman wearing a fur coat with her six kids on a leash
who showed up to the South Georgia poetry reading in her stretchy jeans
I was proud to have been the host to that
the way one might write a hallelujah ode to a black hole 
with roses and tulips shooting out of it Oh the grotesquerie
 
John Keats, you don’t have to say “mother” anymore
This is my quietness, I am the bride and also the urn
And you are my foster child as I make you sit here
And listen to my prayers are sweeter than any rhyme
Sprouting out of a dog’s skull the beautiful bud on the cold stone 
 
When Walter Benjamin is all high on hashish, that’s when
he finally understands Poe or the lazy grass that grows along
this lake that fakes every orgasm 
and takes delight through deception 
Take these irretrievable zones of stupidity 
which are the little wings that grow at the end of my smile
which is I don’t know Zumba? Power yoga? Smoothies? Breakdancing?
The anthropocene is a disease that effects the heart 
lung machine is tripping on the setting day dazed like the end of disco 
I know how to waste the mellow hour glides like a swan 
 
Into the future (goodbye future) turns into swans gliding 
across the ice in Florida Some cursive tongues or calligraphy made
of pure value the mood descending like soft rains in the tropics
Every day is the dream of the desiccated Virgin Mary’s head
who hovers above my body to mock the lush plants to 
capture the line vanishing, the threshold vanishing, the apartment
 
vanishing, to connect one vanishing point
with another, how deeply one delves
into each side of the moment, how deeply the sentence
turns into the café, the spirit world, a loud, drunken
discussion about politics or the aversion to certain
foods, farewell, material I have plunged into it
and the spirit world splashes around my form so how
can I resist the demons who insist I seem to be so much
their semblance? The red walls of ice 
 
lasted about an hour falling from the sky my son said, “That is
weird. I have never seen that before.” It is the end of 
the pterosaurs, the end of machines, the end of marching
bands and particle accelerators, it is the end of Diet
Coke, the end of chai tea, or darjeeling and the lavender
calming aromatherapy mist (for room and body)
 
Day is already what is in the wake of the irretrievable 
and for what, Horatio? Cones, pyramids, squares, bricks of pills or
the sunset breaking harsher and, in more elegiac
tones, in crude relief like monotone
set against monotone or the beautiful silk dresses 
flowing in the sugar-scented air that you wore
in Paris with your cousins eating ice cream
along the banks of the Seine you were already crashing
straight into my history of days swelling like a bad book
thrown into dirty water and you knew it even though
it was smudged like the dream of carbon breaking into 
fossils, ideology and the smell of fat roots in the forest
 
 The relief is so transient 
Get me out of here! But I felt faint or weak
or without the will or without the hope
because beauty does this to her sufferers 
and she makes a kind of lucid Maserati of the heavens 
The mock-heroic event horizon Maybe I’m the ruthless
one, the bad character in one of those novels by your beside,
the one who lies and cheats and steals but there’s no way to say
for sure honey when you’re given so little
  of the plot and all the other
characters are probably very seedy but stay silent (at least for now)
  as if we are all in the middle of a large body
of signals a silence of aqua that has these high
pitched sounds like metallic birds perforating in rings  of cloud 
 
Think about it 
We could be sitting in a coffee shop drinking tea and holding back
our life stories Each history a long stay in the spiral staircases
of libraries and burnt gardens 
I can’t imagine why anyone would feel the desire to hurt a woman
who thinks about suicide every day
 
But hey the lines are drawn and so are the curtains 
This lake is much more than an acquaintance 
Maybe the way pain in public is so
demonstrative and  humiliating and also so
affectionate and giving turning our cells 
into mere technology so that there’s only
ever some superficial layer of the epithetical light 
 
I like the feeling of not crying
But still wanting to cry and holding back the tears
It’s like prolonging the orgasm 
Some tantric impulse to the comets 
To burn some incense because it is Saturday 
and the house is cool and calm and quiet like a plant 
 
I like the build-up the way it’s like a short story or maybe
Short stories are like the breasts when they are hard
and full of milk and the baby is never gentle what he wants 
and the sore nipple is also not gentle
with her giving 
I don’t understand how anyone could have abandoned you,
Much less your mother and for what?
To have made you this creature forever stalking  
the evil light of a pool of blood fixating on the ring of flowers 
at the bottom as if that
 ring could bring you back your mother or 
a narrative that made sense “It’s no real pleasure
in life” as one might scroll endlessly through a picture gallery of flowers:
 
anemone, autumn joy, allium and to imagine that
there are 25 other letters of these ready to be planted,
the apple blossoms or azalea, and none of this you
recognize the Virgin Mary’s desiccated, sepia-toned
eyes floating so close to you trying to find the water 
to feed the plants so that they might bloom into the
the lush forms of volition the complete face of
 compassion we must feel for our enemies which is why
 
I don’t even understand why anyone would 
abandon anyone in our cold pastoral of rain and art 
still I would hold on to you until
our ship took down the stage set and the anthropcene 
gets all shot up like a gas station the way we watched Martha,
Andy’s mom on TV “And I looked down 
and I realized it was his liver”
And Andy and I laughed at the way his mother said
this but how awful is it really, a trained nurse,
Just getting some gas and coffee and then the whole
thing descends into a wet liver on the horrible tiles
of a CONOCO station in New Orleans, so now I wonder
 
about Jason, the geologist, who kept threatening
to kill himself and no one cared
until he went to Billings for work and got black
out drink and shot a woman for no 
reason he said “Look at what you made me do!”
which is what they all say “From Florida, he had few ties
to the Billings area” “Some things
have no reason and that’s why they are so hard
to understand” “How did you get away?”
“I can’t say for sure” “It’s kind of a blur” “I endured
It” “I gave him what he wanted”
“I was very afraid” “I knew he could kill” 
“I promised that he would get something later”
because every story from
 the South has to end with some theft
and betrayal and if it’s a romance like I’m sure this one is
even though it is unthinkable to say so 
the moon will take the shape of the face of that disaster
looking back on itself in disbelief

The river moves beneath the sheet ice. 
The wind is a grand hall of records. 
In the recipe box above the refrigerator, 
the deathbed photos of four generations — 
somewhere, their hands have turned
to prime numbers. Somewhere, 
a voice that smells like a well bucket 
has arranged the vowels of my name 
like three glass pill bottles. Mother of wet rope
and cordwood, Father with your pant-cuffs
of smoke, I feel myself spinning back
to the first hour of the universe 
to rest within a singular shade of carbon. 

How about we take a ride?
Hit me up and we’ll slide 
Like a zip-liner on a cable.
Better yet, let’s cruise
Through certain Negro avenues,
All strut and swag in our sweatshop shoes:
The streets unfold in twelve-bar blues.
The night is young yet
And we are calling to collect a debt.
 
Two, four, six, eight:
See the sisters undulate.
 
Form follows Funk, so the fog rises 
Thick and chocolate as a church girl’s hallelujah hips.
Through the window let’s get lifted while she licks her lips
And rebukes the devil in the name of De Lawd. 
In the choir loft, Fats Waller’s ghost grins and leans on the steam.
The organ shivers and the Funk persists
In puddles and alleys, under streetlights and awnings
As echo and mist, until the bright splash of morning.
 
In the meantime, the tension mounts.
We are bearing witness and taking accounts.
Losses, gains. 
Choruses.
Refrains.
Indeed there will be time and temptations to resist,
Time enough for stop and frisk
And deadlines to be missed.
Time for going and staying, 
Time for rushing and delaying
And hundreds and hundreds of hesitations,
Commitments and procrastinations.
It only seems as if it’s getting late.
Linger a while, and pontificate.
 
“I have seen the best behinds
Of my generation
On BET, in heavy rotation.”
 
Shall we take our time
And revisit the Problem, the Question,
The Color Line?
The post-racial fences
To be mended?
Shall I leave my blackness unattended?
 
(“Any suspicious-looking or unattended blackness found in or near trains, planes, stations, vehicles or buildings should be immediately reported to the police.”)
 
On a whim,
Let’s explore the interim,
The middle ages
Where guts grow round,
Hairlines recede
And First World wants
Trump Third World needs.
(I used to wish upon a star
For a sweet young thing and a sporty car.
But that was before redlining and subpriming,
Layoffs and buyouts,
Pensions pinched
And mergers acquired;
That was before my Visa expired.
I have miles to go before I lunch
And time-cards to punch.)
 
And indeed will there be time
To discover who I am,
To love a woman who gives a damn?
To gesture and reflect
At the crossroads
Where fates intersect?
Who I was and might have been:
The careless youth,
The now and Zen.
What the world owes me
For the tears I’ve spilled,
The investments and the yield.
 
Indoors and out,
The Funk, like fog, continues to rise
High as the listening skies
Higher even than the cost of living.
The Funk rolls on,
Omnipotent, forgiving.
 
(Within the Funk, a field hand howls
With parched tongue,
Black spells born 
When Anansi was young.
 
Here is where the drummers drum
Enabling ring shout and kingdom come
Enabling hip hop and holy hum
The one o’clock jump and the lindy hop
The bodacious bump and the elegant bop
Here is where the horns holler
Here is where the emcees spit
Here is where the singers wail
Of a love that’s so precious and too big to fail.
Of doo-wops and teardrops and tender regret,
Brand new bags and cold, cold sweat.)
History is young yet.
We are calling to collect a debt.
 
“This call may be monitored for your protection.”
 
The mask slips, the grin fades.
The Funk exposes my charades.
I’ve been searching like Kerouac
For something magic, something black.
I have wandered wide-eyed like a drone
From deadly Dixie to the Combat Zone,
I’ve given my harness bells a shake
From Lake Forest to Forest Lake.
Stalking the ’burbs at break of dawn,
I have seen the jockeys on the lawn.
 
Two, four, six, eight:
If love is theft, then what is hate?
 
I have heard the Lady with the golden throat
And her big band matching, note-for-note.
Grab a good table, a ringside seat,
Pat your foot and nod to the beat.
On and on and on and on.
Rinse, repeat.
 
 
See the sisters come and go
While the tricksters stomp and blow
In tails and spats and pork-pie hats.
The cash register rings as the Lady sings 
Of black bards and backs scarred,
Hearts broken and lessons learned,
Funk borrowed but seldom returned.
 
All night long I hear them chant
In joints where the jukebox swings.
All night long their voices carry,
Dukes and counts and kings.
 
Stepped into history and the waves were cold.
They chilled my body but not my soul.
 
Nod your head and pat your feet.
Rinse. Repeat.

At LaToya’s Pride picnic, 
Leonard tells me he and his longtime 
love, Pete, broke up. 
He says Pete gave him the house 
in Virginia. “Great,” I say,
“that’s the least his ass could do.”
I daydream my friend and me
into his new house, sit us in the kitchen
of his three bedroom, two bath 
brick colonial outside Hungry Mother Park,
where, legend has it, the Shawnee raided
settlements with the wherewithal 
of wild children catching pigeons. 
A woman and her androgynous child
escaped, wandering the wilderness, 
stuffing their mouths with the bark
of chokecherry root. 
Such was the circumstance 
under which the woman collapsed. 
The child, who could say nothing 
except hungry mother, led help 
to the mountain where the woman lay—
swelling as wood swells in humid air.
Leonard’s mouth is moving. 
Two boys hit a shuttlecock back and forth
across an invisible net. 
A toddler struggles to pull her wagon
from a sandbox. “No,” Leonard says, 
“It’s not a place where you live. 
I got the H In V. H I—”
Before my friend could finish, 
and as if he’d been newly ordained,  
I took his hands and kissed them.

When the old man said the woodpecker was gone for good, 
I told him, no the experts found one
down in the bayou, where had he been?
 
So big that when men saw it overhead
they were said to call out for the Lord.
 
We must not think the worst of the world, I said
because the old man could be a grumbler
of the sort who say that mankind feeds on what is beautiful 
and excretes shopping malls
 
(well he has never had to buy a curler.) 
 
But now the experts have retracted their discovery
and it’s the old man who’s gone for good
and the one thing that endures it seems:
 
those sixty-something ivory-billed woodpeckers 
dead in shallow drawers at Harvard
Museum of Natural History. Study specimens 
for which you do not need a natural pose, it’s more  
this thing is dead, let’s not pretend we didn’t kill it.
 
Bird after bird—and your heart ambushed 
by their conformity when one by one 
those drawers come rolling out.
 
Suddenly they’re smaller than they were.
 
And how do you explain the parallax?
No, you cannot, so roll the drawer back in.

goldfish porn/applesauce porn/graphic pornographic traffic/
Bono porn/popcorn porn/forlorn porn/aura borealis porn/
orchid porn/grilled Portobello porn…pornography as social control, 
a way of saying publicly to every woman who walks down the street: 
avert your eyes…adorable bauble porn/discreet stinky feet porn/
spirit visitation porn…look down, bitch, because when you look up 
you’re going to see a picture of yourself being hung, 
you’re going to see your legs spread open…plastic water pistol porn/
porn extra dry with three olives/feather weight porn/
heating pad porn/blinking pink neon kink/
pigtail porn/horn of plenty porn/broken hearted porn…
pornography is not made up of old white men…nobody comes on them…
funny elbow porn/power walking porn/goiter porn/golfer porn/
restraining order porn/hearing aid porn/big house porn/
pimple blip porn/triple dip porn/blue chip porn/pink slip porn/
pornographic magic acts…constitutionally protecting porn 
as if it were free speech means that there is a new way 
in which we are legally chattel…porn born of Lesley Gore/
porn born of boredom/free range porn/Lorna Doone porn/
pornography bloopers/state trooper porn/handy fanny pack porn/
it’s-hard-to-speak-freely-with-a-cock-in-my-mouth porn/
stackable porn/knickknack porn/flag and banner porn  

What is it I belong to and find like crushed mint on my shoes, 
the stepped rocks presented like a change of heart
 
that speaks to me as if we are of the same brotherhood,
the casual insignificance of a bird passing over this field, the way the painter,
 
with a flick of the brush, made me stop to think first of my father, 
then of dying, and how then I was a small boy again,
 
afraid to make a mistake and alert all the time like the French in Indochina 
—what is it I belong to like a residual effect, a remark
 
dropped handily into the conversation to prove love still exists,
the way—as we went on—the congressman couldn’t come up
 
with an example (that satisfied us) of the soul on lend-lease,
or, in the high valley, how we liked to stay up late, reading the old books
 
Mother used to keep in the kitchen, until finally Father would come out, 
a look in his eyes of a wintering sadness, and tell us to go to bed.

Our boat needed something specific to cut through when alligators made ice from their methodic chomping, when we slowmo-drifted to the casino of silence to spend our hard earned ghoulishness. 
 
We possessed so few specifics.
 
We needed coins and slips and we needed help drawing a blank and we needed to do it here before here was sold to scuba divers and archivists.
 
Slots were hard on a body, on a door, on the ear, on a belief system.
 
A silent casino was not a good place for sleeping or rowing, so quiet all you could do was think.
 
And what to be avoided: a wrench in need of a bolt, a full drawer, masked pageant preparations, whales, rage funnels spewing bloodworms.
 
What needed to be done needed to be done and this now would be a time for a renovation, reboot, an inspirational quote, pee break, an appointment and attention to that which still needed our attention.
 
The things that we lost: a feather, an orb, parrot, cat, donkey, status, privacy, Heath Ledger, our lice.
 
Reflection brought the freeze, I looked and it all stopped, I counted, I cried, I preserved, I slept, I woke practically a reptile.
 
***
 
The butter churn dissolves.
That is your cue to crank it.
Let me repeat:
the black ring on you finger disappears
when you start producing answers.
There’s one way to reach mercy
and it involves a crumbling wall
circling a deepening pit.
I repeat, there are answers
that do not require recollection
simply repetition.
 
***
 
 
How fascinating to work in the lone, black-glass office building built in the middle of a cornfield.
 
How strange to immediately enter the conflict by way of a 19th century French gilt chandelier hanging in the lobby.
 
How terrifying to be taken hostage again by the same men who slaughtered you the last time they took you hostage.
 
How handy to use your memories from the last hostage situation to help yourself escape this one by way of the nearby elevator.
 
How curious to be stopped at the wraith floor and be invited to join the space between life and death.
 
How tempting the offer becomes once they incentivize you with your very own hand-gnawing kitten.
 
***
 
 
Check for the hat that feels like a joke threatened by an algorithm that doesn’t obey order. You don’t have to find it funny, you just have to find the one that fits your reason.
 
It’s a risk putting on a straw hat. It could catch on fire. Do you have an infestation of snakes that needs to be addressed?
 
You can store a lot of blue juice in a ten-gallon inner tube but that assumes you’re thirsty. Can you make sense of the dryness of your tongue? Is it what you can swallow?
 
Pink hats are for lizards. Do you have the scales?
 
A visor might do what you want but will it do what is required? Will it cover your crown? Will it cover what entertains the monsters?
 
A strong wind holds no shape, hold on to your botched bonnet.
 
 
***
 
To assist the fluster of
the ordered kindred
named as the extinct and blessed
we sketch a timeline
to offer emphasis 
to these layers of humanity
and suggest a point of
view to be confronted and
revised at a later 
time by future descendants
with their need to reshape
the line into a different form.
 
The rest we ignore.

Pardon my heart if it ruins your party. 
It’s a large, American heart and has had
 
a good deal to drink. It’s a pretty bad 
dancer—too much feeling, too little technique.
 
It may sing some godless hymns, about ousting 
armies of loneliness, about marching
 
victorious to wives and towns beneath 
a heart-colored dusk. Pardon my heart
 
if it closes its eyes for hours, 
whispering rapture over and over.
 
Pardon my heart if it laughs too loudly, 
or if it tells many of its stories
 
too ardently. Pardon my heart if it rests
an arm across you or your friends’ shoulders—
 
touch allows my heart to trust that it’s not
imagining your company’s loveliness.
 
Pardon my heart if you have to kick it out. 
After you’ve muzzled the music and brightened
 
the lights to tidy, my heart will ignore 
and keep doing its little two-step, aglow
 
in the middle of the room, never 
happier to have nowhere else to go.

After her
bath, as a way to apologize for all
 
my imperfections, I remind my
daughter, You know, before you were
 
born, I was not
 
a father. She takes this in
silently, moving a tiny blue elephant across
 
the carpet. If you weren’t a father, she
eventually asks, then what were you—
 
a bug? We’d been looking at pictures
of cavemen, talking
 
about evolution, about where we
came from, about all those
 
who came before—Are they us?
she asks. I
 
told her about the carbon in her
pencil, about hydrogen bonding
 
with oxygen, about bacteria with
only one thought in their tiny
 
heads—she
 
used her finger to write it all out
in the air, creating each
 
word as I spoke it. When
did want become more
 
than hunger, when
 
did need become more
than shadow? Ecclesiastes warns
 
about the making
 
of books, of which there is no end,
this chain of meaning, this
 
offering—the book we both will write
today into forever.

Hanging out with girls makes me lonely. There’s so much of
telling each other that no one is fat and that he was a dick
for saying that and she was a bitch for not listening
 
to you better. Looking at pictures 
makes me lonely, too: The time we were g-chatting 
but I was also crying, looking at pictures of Eric dancing 
with his friend’s mom at a wedding.
 
I’m probably not too shy to admit anything anymore. 
Once I said Shyness is for children! and meant it.
 
Someone asked me at a poetry reading how I got so 
comfortable talking in between poems and I said 
that once I went to see some musicians perform for a birthday, 
 
and even when they were playing beautiful Chopin, 
they offered something extra, like a little physical 
comedy routine built around the playing of the piece.
 
I said that since then I’ve wanted to give people 
who come to see poetry a little something extra, 
and that me, blabbering, is all I’ve ever had,
to give or to keep or to be with on my own. 
There’s really very little
 
art in that. You’ll never hear me say it’s noble. 
Or if it is noble, it’s only because it isn’t fun 
to show everyone how little you have
and how little you are. 
But no one has much, 
 
and no one is much,
and everyone should know that we share that.

A cock is a bloodstick. Sex for a man is sanguinary, 
though the cock can’t hold what belongs to the heart 
for long. It borrows to burrow. Eyes dilate, labia engorge, 
but the cock is a changeling. While nothing is sillier 
than a flaccid cock — rhymes with placid sock — an erection 
is a confession. It admits, an extension of mind. Touching 
it, my wife touches how I feel about her, she loves 
that I want her and I love that it speaks my feelings 
so clearly, that it shouts without changing the shape 
of the room. What a weird vocabulary to carry 
at the center of my body. There is also shyness 
and a wish to enter, hide, and wither. These qualities 
define men - a need to be large and brief, bold 
and inconsequential, to fill by an action 
that erases. And while I don’t venerate my cock — 
I’ve not named it, nor would I write it a ballad — 
neither have I run from it (though the image 
of my cock chasing me through the Rift Valley, 
makes this day, at six thirty in the morning, 
already a trophy). The simplest way to put it 
is cock=orgasm=peace. When I come, I’m not here 
or there or anywhere, words like place or soul or breath 
exist before and after, have purchase and use, 
form and weight, but during, everything in me 
that wants language and everything outside myself 
that will accept it, that will wear words 
around their shadows and inside their gravities, 
things like leaves and boats and clouds, all of that 
is gone and gone without wound. Orgasm is existence 
without consciousness of existence. There’s nothing 
and it’s a warm nothing, an embracing emptiness 
that I’d never leave and wonder if I’m inside 
every second and don’t know it. Is sex how the sun feels 
all the time?

One of them, a black-marketeer hoarding chocolate 
and mayonnaise, acquired
god knows, hero of the neighborhood party, some place 
hard to pronounce, on radio 
all that cheering and static across mountains and cities 
and wires and rivers unto ocean and airspace and star-studded orbits—
alone in my kitchen is the sound 
 
and silence of the world now.  How not to love 
his generous graft?  How not to be the small child or that 
ancient one over and over with her story about the cat, 
or the clear-eyed, bad tempered 
old guy of lament and rue and I-told-you-so
enraptured by the sudden what a score  
 
middle of winter, deep snow in this village I never heard of but 
could lie twisted in my gene pool, that wily 
spool of fortune.  At least thirty people!  A single lit house  
on a street of houses, nine bicycles this cold, three motorbikes, one 
shiny car, one rusting out near the ditch.  How not to 
invent more, to see him pull that sweet-heavy dark from his pack 
and what will make the thick black bread
soaked through, lovely mess. He holds it high as fable—oh chocolate,
 
the very best, and mayonnaise too. And who 
can’t see plainly—more cheers!—the welcome everyone of it, 
the well come, the have some, you go first, little one in the noise,
 
here.  Where outside the yard has doubled in crows if you count 
their shadows in the drifts but I will not 
and I do not for a while.

A drowned kingdom rises at daybreak
& we keep trudging on. A silhouette rides
the rope swing tied to a spruce limb,
the loudest calm in the marsh. Look
at the sinkholes, the sloped brokenness,
a twinned rainbow straddling the rocks.
We can see how brave nature is.
She drags us through teeming reeds
& turns day inside out, getting up
under blame, gazing at the horizon
as a throaty sparrow calls a raft home.
A wavering landscape is our one foothold.
Are we still moving? This is an old story
behind stories, an epic season where
a tangle of roses is moved by night soil.
The boar, Congo snake, & earthworm
eat into pigweed. The middle ground
is a flotilla of stars, a peacock carousel
& Ferris wheel spinning in the water
as vines unstitch the leach-work of salt,
thick mud sewn up like bodies fallen
into a ditch, blooming, about to erupt.
Water lily & spider fern. I see the tip
of a purple mountain, but sweetheart,
if it weren’t for your late April kisses
I would’ve turned around days ago. 

1.
 
We used our texting machines 
to look up the definition of soul
 
in the middle of class―
thumb-joints at work
 
above the stitched paper
of actual books       in which 
 
we’d been reading
poetry
               about a Prophetess
 
               one of the human cave-bound Time Machines…
 
She had travelled a long way through the four dimensions 
                to be with us.
 
From someone’s mouth to someone’s ear.
 
Someone’s hand
              to tablet, papyrus, parchment, paper, the liquid crystal light
             of our computer screens―
 
Liquid crystal light they’d really 
called it that, 
            the inventors 
 
            at Marconi Wireless.
 
“See if you can hear anything, 
             Mr. Kemp!” Marconi had cried, the day they sailed the letter S 
 
            across the sea―I loved
 
the synesthesia of that, See if you can hear, they’d coaxed some radio                waves to propel the alphabet
             through the air―
 
Was that Marconi wishing
 
he was a liquid crystal light and not a 
            break of bones
 
            that had to fear the future―
 
 
2.
 
A human-headed bird, the Egyptians said.
 
A butterfly, an innermost.
 
A web-site 
      I was afraid to enter: wewantyoursoul.com the students
      laughed and laughed―
 
      soul-adorning, soul-afflicting, soul-amazing―
 
      soul-and-body-lashings―
 
They really called it that, the ropes they wound
round oil skin
       to keep out sea and storm, our sailing men―
 
who sent the cheeriest message you could imagine
to usher in
       the Telegraphic Age: Thanks
 
        am well―
 
The soul, it was an ellipse in white, it fizzed, 
their chaplains said, with God’s 
       CPR,
 
      “breath of life”―
 
So they could travel
      through length and width and depth and time and
      man a ship―
 
      where someone
      in a small room
 
        
      would tap out a message―
 
      to a far man on a far shore, and they    
      would understand one another…
 
3.
 
He shared all roads and he braved all seas with me,
all threats of the waves and skies is what the Hero says 
 
of his dead father―but it sounded like soul to me.
 
Guide companion―Captain
      of the ship of flesh I had to ride, where “I”
 
      was a third thing in the closed grip 
      of the body’s vise―
 
Marconi, he thought he’d hear
      the agony of Christ
 
      with a sensitive dial to help him sieve. 
 
He trawled
      the frequencies―
 
      for eli lama sabachthani no song lost―
 
      no impress of tongue and teeth that made a sound, ever lost―
 
      if you had a receiver―
 
      a virgin say, in a mountain crag, or a brain-bot 
                     from the nano-future, did it 
 
                     matter which―
 
                     You’d have a house
        
                     for a god’s mouth
        
                     and it would message you
                                  your rescue…
 
 
Rescued from what is what I’m trying to mean.
 
Rescued from what you have to fear the future
          more than you used to which sounded like the soul
 
         waving a series of flags at me―
 
 
4.
We wanted arrival to be instant
because we didn’t want to be separate
          from what we loved.
 
Wireless, weightless and omniscient is how we
refined our machines―
 
We had a dream
 
that we could smash the bans
of matter and time and
         still be alive―
 
Was that the soul, wishing
 
we would invent the body
out of existence, 
        so many of us now 
 
        enthralled by doom…
 
The students peer so deep into their hand-held screens they 
        look like Diviners. 
 
Each one
       a scrying Sybil at the world’s 
 
end―
      scribbled-on leaves thrown out of their caves
 
      and into the wind―
 
The only part of the Epic
I make them read, just after
       the crew is borne ashore, but before
 
       the walk amongst the dead―
 
The part between.
 
Where there’s a body, agonized by light.
 
      And someone lost.
 
      And a query―

All movie stars are modeled on Jesus and Mary.
Guys wearing camouflage are always conspicuous.
Pigs can be excellent pets but are terrible friends.
Loud music, I find, makes me introspective.
Children love the circus, but for the wrong reasons.
Capitalism is a dance which requires new shoes.
 
Jesus and Mary often removed their shoes.
Guys wearing camouflage invoke the Virgin Mary.
Pigs watch television for the wrong reasons.
Loud music makes a boombox suddenly conspicuous.
A “good child” is one who is introspective.
Capitalism gradually depresses all your friends.
 
All movie stars have other movie stars for friends.
Guys wearing camouflage wear plain black shoes.
Pigs, after a meal of slop, grow deeply introspective.
Loud music gives one visions of Jesus and Mary.
Children at the circus have no urge to be conspicuous.
Capitalism is entertaining for the wrong reasons.
 
Jesus and Mary loved their enemies for the wrong reasons.
Guys wearing camouflage have militaristic friends.
Pigs in purple flannel underwear are conspicuous.
Loud music allowed Peter Frampton to buy new shoes.
Children pray unhesitatingly to Jesus and Mary.
Capitalism bemuses scholars and the introspective.
 
All movie stars, while sitting on the toilet, are introspective.
Guys wearing camouflage buy new guns for a reason.
Pigs will have sex next to a statue of the Virgin Mary.
Loud music, at a party, makes it difficult to speak with friends.
Children enjoy drawing with magic marker on their shoes.
Capitalism is at once subtle, brutal and conspicuous.
 
Jesus and Mary attempted to be inconspicuous.
Guys in camouflage, deep in the woods, grow introspective.
Pigs enjoy chewing on Manolo Blahnik shoes.
Loud music gradually destroys the capacity for reason.
Children invent secret languages with their friends.
Capitalism markets lovely statues of Jesus and Mary.
 
All movie stars, when they visit a circus, feel conspicuous.
Guys in camouflage and black shoes tell their friends:
“The reason I’m introspective is… I’m praying to Mary!”

Something on the water.  Something
wholesome, like spoiling corn crops
or sparking a tri-state wildfire.  Or
a bit of glamour, like stopping glass
elevators in casinos, between floors,
 
then dropping them.  I’m tired
of small catastrophe, the delicate
balance between shrugged-off accident
and tiny horror.  Fits of pique, bursts
of desperate memory, tireless, dull
 
annoyance:  How many brittle ankles
can be wrenched in holes?  How many
jugs of milk can be soured before time?
How many smashed heirlooms, rained-
out parades, singed fingertips, coins
 
dropped in grates, stained blouses
before business meetings?  How
many shiny balloons are there still
to burst?

Antonio, we should remind ourselves,
     is not real.

He is not in the body of the actor    
    or the words on the page,

and yet we return to the question:    
    Why is he sad?

There is no Antonio in the way 
    for instance

there is a homeless man
    outside the subway,

his clothes made out of
    newspapers, folded 

to ribbons and tied into bows.
    We would not 

call him sad.    
    We would call him crazy.

We avoid his eyes, 
    We avoid his stench,

but he is there.
    He is there.

There is no Antonio 
    in the way
    
that there are ten fifth graders
    placed under my tutelage,
    
and brought to a production of 
    Merchant of Venice

because the younger drama class
    always sees 

whatever the Manhattan Summer Shakespeare Group
    is putting on.

The next morning,
    writing earnestly in their journals,

they find themselves
    entirely offended.

As a Jew
    one writes

I was deeply offended
    by the behavior

in the play
    toward Shylock.

The quality of self-righteousness
    is not strained.

I think it was wrong
    writes an athletically gifted blond boy

To be mean to someone
    for his race.

Then he crosses out race
    and writes in

religion. Oh, children.
    This is an easy one.

Not one of them notice
    that Antonio is sad.

Antonio is entirely ignored
    in their journals.

He holds no interest
    for them.

Fine. We can do this.
    I ask what

Shylock is ridiculed 
    for calling out

when Jessica elopes
    and steals her father’s money.

They don’t remember,
    So I direct them in their scripts.

Finally they find it:
    my ducats and my daughter.

I ask them what Lorenzo has taken
    and as the light dawns

one girl answers, 
    His ducats and his daughters!

I say, 
    so the Christians want
    
what they ridicule Shylock 
    for wanting

and slowly, 
    they see the light.

Fifth graders of the world 
unite!

This is their first experience
    of what we used to call

reading against the grain.
    They have never 

read against the grain.
They have never

felt so smart. They have never
    Realized that a text

can contain it’s own critique.
     Fifth graders of the world, 
    
do not spend your summer
    at school camp.

The most childlike of my children
    looks like a porcelain doll

and cries at the drop of a hat.
    He cries because the other children

are mean to him and the children
    are mean to him because 

he treats them with disdain
    and is always about to cry.

As I comfort him 
    for the third time that day

I realize how much less real
    he is to me than Antonio.

At the end of six weeks
    I will deliver this boy

back to the incompetent arms
    of his socially awkward parents

and never consider him again.
    The girl who is being possessed

by puberty, whose legs are ready
    for shaving and whose armpits

are ready for deodorant,
    who hides her face in a stack

of novels that are thinly veiled
    rape fantasies for the barely

pubescent, she too is less real to me
    than Antonio. 

I try to ask about Antonio,
    but their interest

is only in Shylock. When I was
    in fifth grade,

we also read
    Merchant of Venice. 

I was the only Jew in class, 
    and the only student,

who given the choice,
    memorized “The Quality of Mercy”

rather than “I am a Jew.”
    I read the introduction

to our Bedford or Dover or
    Oxford edition

and learned about how Shakespeare
    gave Shylock a humanity

that no other Jew in Renaissance
    Drama even comes close to,

even if that humanity is not entirely
    complete. I learned a passage

that was twice as long,
    and secretly,

I learned the “I am a Jew” speech
    to see what it feels like

to say. When we read 
     the play out loud,

I read Antonio, so I felt it more 
    than the others,

his sadness. Under everything
     you can feel how

he would do anything
    for Bassanio,

And yet, he knew not why he 
    was sad.

These children all love
    Shylock. They can’t see

his racism or his cruelty,
    or rather they think

that powerlessness is panacea,
    because they are powerless

and they believe 
    that to be unable

to hurt another person
     is the same as being good.
    
My assistant tries once more
    to interest 

our children in Antonio,
    to start the conversation

that might lead to Elizabethan
    perceptions of sodomitical

subcultures as they existed
    In early modern Venice,

but without luck. 
    We wonder if our students

Notice how queer we are,    
    and that night 

we joke about creating a 1990s version 
    of Merchant of Venice

that could open with Antonio
    breaking the silence

and conclude with an ACTUP
    demonstration

in which a gender-queer Portia would insists 
     on her right to body modification surgeries,

and a Derridean Jessica
    would deconstruct

the Jewish/Christian binary,
    in addition to dredging up

recovered memories
    of satanic abuse,

at the hands of Shylock.
    We make ourselves laugh,

smug in our knowledge,
    but sad in its failure,

though even that 
     doesn’t quite

resolve the question of why
    Antonio is sad.

Do you remember the homeless man? 

He doesn’t ask me for money,
    nor does he ask anyone.

He sits on the grate, and talks to himself.
    His elaborate costume

is ineluctably real. He is
    real, but he is not

my object of study. He resides
    in himself, and he cannot 

be read with or against the grain.
     I do not talk to him.

He occupies my mind
     for as little time 

as he is in front of me.
     Poor Antonio. 

As I return to my home 
    by train

Antonio occupies my mind.
    He is nowhere at all:

not in the past, 
    not in the body

of the actor,
    not in the history

of Venice
    or England

or America.
    And still

the question returns:
     Why is Antonio sad? 

I look around
    my train,

and there is no one 
     to ask. 

Ethics are learned from who you sleep with
the first few times, and theater is sex,
almost. Being in it, I mean, and being young,
with a lot of group undressing
and silence in darkness, chaste
permissions of the cast party,
spiked punch in the recreation room.
I was always cast as Old Man                                                          
with tennis-shoe polish for white hair
and lines drawn where my lines now are,
forehead haiku, the eye’s briffits,
and parentheses around the muzzle.
My face was learning its worry
in quarter-smile and one-eyebrow raise.
I guess I miss it, achievement’s sense,
the way a show’s run ends
and everyone knows it together,
a social pain, like the death
of a popular imaginary friend.
When lights between scenes dim,
I like to see actors take props off stage
or team up with stagehands to move
the built elements of our fantasy.
I hope they keep going and take
some properties home to mix in
with private dramas. I pass theaters
the way I pass churches, but like
better this foldable theater
half-constructed on page or mind.
Sometimes it gets thrown away
among receipts, but nothing’s really lost.
I carry my own props in—red telephone,
bowl of apples—and then with me
back into the unseen.

Because the sky burned, I had to unhinge
from the window the mesh screen
to step out onto the roof where the world was
an orange freshly peeled. I held
 
to my nose my fingertips scented with spring.
Beside me fluttered the wings
of another promise I made you but didn’t keep.
I sat there for hours until my thighs
 
were raw, cut open by those rough shingles.
I didn’t know yet how to run,
to tether myself farther and farther afield.
This was before your other daughter
 
died and none of us wept, but long after
those old pumpjacks no longer
needled the horizon clean. The velvet mat stayed
unfolded, but I told you I prayed
 
anyway. The sky began to hunger for stars.
I counted each scorched one.

The rosemary bush blooming
its unabashed blue. Also dumplings
filled with steam and soup 
so my mouth fills and I bubble
over with laughter. Little things.
People kissing on bicycles.
Being able to walk up the stairs
and run back down.
Joanna’s garden after the long flight
to Tel Aviv. Not being detained
like everyone thought I would.
The man with dreadlocks
and a perfect green shirt walking home
from work. One cold beer 
before I drink it and get sick.
How peaches mold into compost in a single day:
orange to gray to darkness into dirt.
Her ankle’s taste. The skin
right under the knob, delicate
as a tomatillo’s shroud. All the animals
that talk to me. That I finally let them
talk to me. The blessing of waking
early enough to watch the fox
bathe itself. The suction of a man’s hands 
meeting another’s on the street. 
Every single person looking up 
to see them. Bros, yes. But lovely 
in the golden light with brims swung
to the back. I want shoulders like 
they have. Want my waist to taper 
to an ass built like the David’s. I admit it:
this body’s not enough for me.
Still I love it. Al B Sure blasting
out a Nissan Sentra’s windows.
Bowties. Ridiculous blues.
My mother’s seizures- specifically
that I don’t have them.
That I can answer Ross’ call
or not because we live Harmonious
and are always talking somehow. 
Tapestries with their gluttony of deer.
Fig perfume and also cypress.
Boxer briefs and packing socks
in jockey shorts. Strap ons.
Soft and hard. Welcome in her hand
and in mine as I greet the real me.
The little shop in Provincetown.
And the speckled dog that licks itself
in that fresco of the crucifixion.
Mary Oliver. I love her. I really do.
The baseball she gave me
that says, “Go Sox!” Though, I love
the Orioles. Old Bay on all my shrimp.
And justice. And cities burning
if people need to burn them to get free.
My grandmother gardening 
in the late light. Sun Ra. The first time.
Paris, even though I’ve never been
there. Natal plums. Tattoos everlasting:
Clouds. Orion’s belt. Pushing inside her
with both hands holding myself 
up. My weight. Her grabbing and saying,
“God.” “Fuck.” The neighbors.
Casablanca. Not knowing anything. 
Angels. Mashed potatoes. Good red wine.

And with Baltimore going up, on
a Monday, if I asked will it fly high like a bird 
up in the sky and you heard
Billy Preston’s voice as much as 
any sparrow in your eye it’d be 
because simile is simply cinema,
the screen upon which we watch
the language we use projected, 
a screen we stand behind 
and from around the back 
of which we can never find our way
in front, I mean without
each other, I mean, as individuals, 
like owners of property, like 
amputators of senses, like
those who think they’re protected 
by the forces that assault others, 
I mean, each other, by which I mean 
not each other but all of us, 
a screen we stand before and from 
around the front of which we 
can never find our way back, 
I mean back together, I mean, like
we never were, I mean, like 
when strangers insist upon referring 
to us as each, I mean as individuals, like 
others which we most media-ly are 
and which we most immediately are not: 
a mystery which, like will it go 
round in circles, from around the front
of which we go and from around
the back of which we come to find that we 
had already arrived where we’d begun, 
I mean, left where we’ve never been, 
that screen of the uncanny upon which, upon
arriving, we just miss the last glimpse 
of ourselves leaving, until 
Monday night when it became undeniably
clear, at least in part, at least to some, I mean, like
a song sung to friends that ain’t got 
no melody or like that dance you do ain’t 
got no steps and you the music
moving me around, I mean, it became clear, 
at least in part, for instance: when Don 
Lemon and his panel of panelists 
on that channel of channelists, begin to refer
to individuals as helicopters 
shoot footage of a neighborhood in chaos, 
that one neighborhood in chaos, 
for live TV broadcast, well, I mean, like,
it becomes absolutely clear what 
we’re supposed to think chaos
is and what we’re supposed to not think 
chaos is and even more clear than that 
that the channel of panelists are the invisible 
and indivisible individuals
and that the persons in the footage 
are being amputated from our senses, 
from the history of our capacity 
for touch, for feeling and that we’re being
and that we’re being and that we’re being
assaulted by the force of another history, 
that of a genocidal force that could be 
thought of, I think productively, 
as a force of individuation, which 
I think could be thought of, 
productively, as chaos, a productive 
and destructive chaos whereby 
we’re forced to buy, or rent if we 
can’t afford to buy, or borrow 
if we can’t afford to pay, I mean, 
right now, to watch the uncanny movie 
of our lives and convince
ourselves that our arrivals are departures, 
that our departures are arrivals, I mean, 
both of which in any case
we just missed and that that’s the reality 
and we the infringement upon that reality
which, I mean, if that’s how we watch 
our own—let that stand—
lives then that says something very sinister
about how we relate to anyone else, I mean, 
which packages the world upon, behind, 
in front of a screen of language beyond feeling 
and puts the world in a pyramid
of boxes marked individual 
which by now we can see is a screen
as much as a word and, when 
brought to a boil, when push comes
to shove and practice surges across the line 
into practical action—I mean, did anyone 
else just see the young man, or woman, hood on 
mask up standing outside the CVS at Penn. 
and North and shot by an individual 
lens hovering a thousand feet above his or her head, 
as he or she stood stock still before a small 
pile of something on fire, straight up, smoke in 
a complex of twisters and he or she standing 
arms outstretched and waving them slowly and exactly as if 
preparing to take flight underwater or as if 
conducting a symphony, as if listening, 
possibly to Marion Anderson 
singing “Ave Maria” or possibly to Phillip Bailey
singing “I’ll Write a Song for You” or, 
who knows, to The Weeknd singing over Satie’s
“Dances de Travers”—
I mean, did I see that because, for all the talk
of individuals on the panel of channelists
no one said one word about that underwater
maestro doing, as if enraptured, his or her own beautiful 
thing, so, I mean, in likeness of light in lenses like 
those and actions like these, 
just as much or more than anything else, 
and in light of chaos, as us, as a historical force, we can see, 
and not from a thousand feet above our heads, 
that the word practical has to mean just 
about anything our practice puts into the world and 
the word individual probably just means legally—let that stand—culpable.  

As a foreigner
my identity
was against it
by default
 
But later
as a mother
I was
to make sandwiches
 
I turned away
from my American child
to hide a grimace
as the knife
slid on the oily surface
extracting
a hanging grub
the mustard of
dusty, old
midcentury velvet couches
 
I nagged my husband
for separate utensils
fear
of contamination
 
Then, one day
I was stranded
starving
under a sleeping child
The sandwich still
under his chubby fingers
bitten only once
about to fall
 
I moved
the free arm
closed my eyes
as survivors on TV
brought it to my lips
and bit it
 
Sweet swirls swimming
in fat
Thick, creamy
Fat
fromage de meaux
Unpasteurized
Beautiful body of butter
 
The jelly sandwiches of the past
were the ones
meant only for children
dry and bodiless
the superficial joy
of chips
from a vending machine
 
As I prepared
to bite again
More
than in that citizenship
swearing ceremony
earlier that month
I felt
As an American 

It’s alive, it always changes, it needs tending, and the boy,
who had left several in several woods and had thought it his worst                    crime,
 
discovered that all this time he had actually been good. 
Gently, he moved in with her. First, he slept on the hay in the barn, 
 
like a frost, so as not to be asked to leave because he’d made the horse            hate him. 
Then he slept in the kitchen by the door, like one of the long,
         narrow guns
 
good people will sometimes keep. He killed rabbits and squirrels and              brought home 
the ones that hadn’t been rotting before he even shot them. She said
         a fire 
 
is a good companion, and the boy nodded. A wooden spoon or a
        sturdy wire 
is also a good companion, but neither of them thought so, and no one           should’ve
 
considered them strange, especially themselves, but they did.
One night they scarred the pine beam that had been cut and hung to               make the mantle. 
 
They wrote their names with the glowing end of the poker but then
pulled the wood down off the wall the next day. On the first polar night
 
they built a fire in the woods and fed it this part of their home. 
As they raked up pine needles and twigs, she said a fire 
 
grows best out of debris, just like a man. In no time at all, she said, 
it's ready to bring down the greatest building around.  

Snoop Dogg is born, Julian Assange is born. Already it is coming,
already the new century—though we have hardly begun 
to imagine the death of the old—is taking shape around us.
Babies are crying in nurseries, toddlers are shaking their rattles.
A tennis star is born in Germany, a footballer in Nigeria.
Downhill skiers are born, prime ministers, business tycoons,
pop stars whose images will paper the streets of Tokyo and Bangkok.
Barack Obama is ten years old. Hillary Rodham has just begun
to date her down-home Yale Law classmate, Bill Clinton.
Vladimir Putin is a student at Leningrad State University. 
Major General Idi Amin Dada seizes power in Uganda.
Century of integrated circuits & blue plastic radios,
century of self-conscious fabrication, century of human moons.
Larry Page and Sergey Brin will not be born for two more years,
information technology is a euphemism for paper and pencil.
At MIT, Ray Tomlinson decides to employ the @ sign 
in the address of the very first email, which he sends 
over the ARPANET to another computer in the same room:
“Don’t tell anyone,” he confesses to a friend, 
“but this is not what we’re supposed to be working on.”
Uma Thurman is an infant. Princess Diana is a shy girl
in boarding school; she will not survive the century.
Tupac Shakur is born but he will not survive it. 
Jim Morrison dies in a bathtub in Paris—no one here gets out alive.
The south tower of the World Trade Center is topped out 
at 1368 feet, officially the tallest building in the world. 
In Kafr el-Sheik, Mohammed Atta is three years old. 
Coco Chanel dies. Reinhold Niebuhr, Igor Stravinsky 
and Louis Armstrong die. Lance Armstrong is born.
The future is being assembled in the expanding neural webs 
of six-year-olds, in the atoms of the yet-to-be-incarnated 
beings we imagine as holographic ghosts sitting awkwardly
in the waiting room of the future. Adriano Moraes,
the Brazilian rodeo champion, is one; Wyclef Jean is two.
Agnes Martin will not resume painting for three more years.
The 20th Century is vanishing, o radiant century,
century of quarter notes & treble clefs, of chalk on black paper,
century of deliverance & self-deception, expediency & lies.
Duane Allman crashes his Harley, Edie Sedgwick o.d.’s,
Dean Acheson and Gene Vincent die on the same day.
George Seferis dies. Pablo Neruda wins the Nobel Prize
but has only eighteen months to live. Bertrand Russell,
Yukio Mishima and Jimi Hendrix were buried last year.
Ogden Nash has died; no one lives forever, but he tried.
Lin Biao is dead, his coup against the aging Mao a failure.
Deng Xiaoping has been sent to the provinces for reeducation
at the Xinjian Country Tractor Factory: he will reemerge. 
China will follow the Capitalist road; to be rich is glorious. 
Alan Shepard hits the very first golf ball on the moon.
Daisuke Enomoto, Japan’s first space tourist, is born.
George Lucas directs his first film, Wes Anderson is two
Kubrick releases A Clockwork Orange, Guillermo del Toro is seven.
Jimmy Wales attends a Montessori school in Alabama:
Wikipedia cannot be found in any glossary or reference text. 
Soon there will be no need for glossaries or reference texts.
Bird is dead, Monk is crazy, Miles has turned his back,
Elvis is lost, John Lennon no longer believes in Beatles.
As Disney World opens the Manson Family are on trial
and America’s largest underground nuclear test, Cannikin,
detonates beneath Amchitka in the Aleutian Islands. 
Behold, I am alpha and omega. The world is being destroyed, 
the world is being created anew; the century is dying, 
the century is being born. The clock is ticking.

Of words placed in their best black clothes. Of that darkness full.
Of the laugh, forged of dust that spilled its gold light into the tomb.
Of the wreath carved upon the copper vault.
Of the ivory city – bones like trumpets – blowing you away from us
      in song.
Of the city again where you will be welcomed by vultures.
Of the road between the dates, a short slash. An usher in a gold hat.
Of the pronunciation of sorrow, always, in summer. 
Of the snake who suffered the story.
Of the afterlife & its downpour of ordinary rites. 
Of rites I enact in my broken thoughts. 
Of my fever waving its anguish until the match goes out in disbelief.
Of the nine stars bleeding mercy beneath the roof of God.
Of God, God, & God.
Of the peace & suffering my people have been promised.
Of the clean, white clothes I gave the undertaker.
                               Here are the stockings, I said, not knowing
whether they would match her skin. 
Of the poems I’ve been trying to write. Die, I say. 
                               Go elsewhere for songs.
Of the food & the appetite.
Of my father’s shoulders in a black suit. 
Of downpour again.
Of the animals who charge me with horns
                               when I offer my clay ribs. 
Of her visitations.
Of the hot comb I cradled on my knees in the bathroom.
Of the brutal gospel of hair, untouched toothbrush, clothes
                                in closets with sale tags. 
Of dreams where my teeth scatter like maple leaves.
Of what I will never remember.
Of the rain that makes my howls float like empty bottles of glass.
Of the dreams where my white clothes grow flames.
Of what I will remember remembering.
Of the neon-colored nail polish on her hand
                              I held at her deathbed. 
Of what I hated to ask the night & gods.
Of the knees that remember the orange mud before the grass grew back.
Of you, Reader, looking at my face here & reading 
                               because we all want to know how to bear it.
Of the strange, caring question their voices poured like grace 
                             over my side where I was trying to leave. Get out of skin. 
Of it being over, again & again. 
Of it beginning.  They ask me was it a good death, was it 
                              a good death, was there peace for all of us. Why 
                              should I want peace instead of my mother?
Of the mothers who have always known while holding children 
                               in their wombs – why wasn’t I told? 
Now I walk into the sea with my jewel of anguish & shake those                            human flowers  
                                from my new, bald skull.

Unlike my older brother, I generally enjoyed the nineties.
A world of Netscape, chat rooms and Fruit by the Foot.
I remember them like the debossed covers of R.L. Stein.
Neon sex toys dotting our suburban malls lead us to believe
in an intimacy communicated beyond brand names
when our couch sucked back into a shady hole of hands.
September came, laden with unused Trapper Keepers.
Macarenas were danced. Ring Pops were had. Giga Pets 
and Beanie Babies, Dunk-A-roos and VHS cassettes.
The Little Golden Books by my bed told me stories.
Cedar Crest and chlorine. I remember snow days.
Watching humanoid Bob Barker on split-screen TV.
Closed armoires scented with piney Lemon Pledge.
In the woods was mesh and abandoned buckets of
porn beside inscrutable rainbow tree frog corpses.
Lisas and Jessicas and Matthews and Michaels all.
Narcotic and green, a risible lump disturbed life,
dizzying mallets hobbling us to plastic-farm noon.
Success metrics had incomparable swish. People
kept moving and threaded through one another
with slogging garage door jerkiness. And most
menacing: how happiness encroached with slow
ultimatums fatalistically stuck to stick-resistant pans.
Abundance, reversed now, feels shod. Feels pocked.
It could be no more than a rake in the trunk of a car.
I didn’t know then what a locker room was for.
Friends were screen names and infinitely away.
If I had to point a finger, if I had to queue a song
to play my life, if the finishing move was finality,
wouldn’t my sense of the nineties bring back painless
simplicity in transit? Weight Watchers and frozen
people. Linoleum not to be remembered if outlived.
Afterwards, I saw what they did to the bed furniture. 
I knew their services weren’t free. Not to “go there.”
What was taken from me is still happening. Scrubbed
out. Tossed out. I never cared for the dishes. What
they replaced me with not me. That was never me. 

Lately, I’ve been praying 
for life to surprise me
like a pitch-black living room 
primed to fracture 
into song and streamers, 
a hand on my shoulder 
yelling, Didn’t think 
we remembered, did ya? 
Lately, my counter-thoughts 
have been riddled with guilt, 
the way a stray wallet 
excites before shaming, 
though shame lasts 
and bitters the tongue.
I saw coverage yesterday
of a third beheading
while doing crunches
on an exercise ball.
The ball, I remember,
was clown-nose red,
and never before had I felt
so damaged, so lucky
and absurd. I drove home
drowning in the hum
of sports radio, grateful 
for the scores and in-depth 
analysis. Someone
had become a restricted
free-agent. Someone
had been traded and was 
finally coming home. 

There are beautiful girls out there on the beach
like baubles on the world's wrist.
I'm surprised when they let me kiss them.  (Rarely).
But I'm lucky, I tell myself all the time.  You're lucky, 
it's very important that you understand how lucky you are:                          don't help me write this letter, just step back 
and think about it for a minute.
What you call lonely, someone else would call "not-hungry,"
"not-afraid-for-my-life." 
So why are you crying, dear I? 
There's a seashell I want to pick up.  I want to stick my tongue
in its salty whorls. Yes, it hurts to want,
doesn't it.  It never stops hurting. 
And you’ll never be comfortable in Florida:
long thin land of bathing suits and alligators,
the whole state is a charm bracelet
on the wrist of a girl 
you’re not supposed to touch.  

Every time the phone rings 
I think I'm in trouble.
I'm in the stolen Honda again.
I'm out in the park scratching
my name into the picnic table with a pocket knife
while my classmates get their diplomas. 
I'm falling backwards through the fog, 
pulled into it chin over finger
over ribs over tongue, pried from the door jamb, 
dragged through the living room
and the kitchen into the boulevard of trouble.
It's my mother calling. It's the prinicpal.
It's the cops shining their heavy
flashlights through the windows of my mistakes. 
I want to say that I never run, 
that when trouble finds me I reach for the phone
like a man who wants to stare his behavior
in the face. I pull on my goggles
and climb on my army green Triumph
and accelerate into that cloud of spears and torches
on the horizon, the dust covering my lips
and filling my hair, the wind roaring over my knuckles. 

1.
 
The world has always been ending, I
said. And you said: Yes. Today, half-lost 
 
on the senderos, among its dry
brush and thorns, I hear my mother's voice
 
in the rocks—see in the rust plains and
lava bulbs and cairns stacked as markers 
 
her cells massing upon her heart, lungs,
running riot along her sternum.
 
Soon, the nights of marrow-talk, of jabs
and the Seven Last Words. Serum nights
 
with viols, the Joyful Mysteries, thumbs
on decades falling asleep. I light
 
a match with the end of another,
warm poisons and gauze for the new year.
 
 
2.
 
The world has always been ending, she
said. And I said: Yes. Today we walk
bearing hymnals and lilacs for the
gazebo green, for stairwells and chalks
 
drawn to mark the hem of a body.
We bring each place its dirge in the shape 
of teeth, slugs, a tongue pressed to concrete,
its fugue scored for sirens and windpipes,
 
pellet guns and bells. We bless the blue
of this wide winter sky above our
city, for once. Let it mean more to
us than smoke, more than blood starved of air
 
beneath skin, more than anthems hollowed
or a field for stars, dying and dead. 
 
3.
 
The world has always been ending, he
said. And you said: Yes. Today they are
burning the names of the boys they are
shooting in the street. This because we—
 
and they—know ashes mean undone leads 
and muzzles loosened, floodlights and flares,
eyes doused with milk. At the chapel for
vespers, a woman holds a globe she
 
has decked with poppies and birch-tar and 
foil; her son colors in a book of
heralds and dragons, traces his palm.
 
Now: the Magnificat. Now: I am
down on my knees sure only that the
fires will come again and again.

When I read that architect Sinan had left a message
in a bottle telling restorers how to build again the arches
        of the mosque that he knew would 
fall into decay, I thought, maybe I should do that for my poems—
 
    not because poets 400 years from now will want to write 
poems like mine the way architects 400 years from then 
        would want to build mosques like 
Sinan’s, but so I can know how to write those poems myself, starting,
 
    say, tomorrow morning, since most days I feel as though 
poem writing is something I’ve never actually done 
        before and certainly don’t know 
how to begin doing today, that is, tomorrow morning. Here’s the story: 
 
    in the early nineties, an engineer in Istanbul was trying 
to figure out how to fix the crumbling doorway 
        to Sinan’s mosque but couldn’t because 
it had been built with sixteenth-century stone masonry techniques 
 
    that no one understood, and finally he decided 
to just take out the keystone and start there, but when
        the keystone came out, so did
 a glass bottle containing a note from Sinan saying, "The lifetime 
 
    of these stones that make this arch is 400 years. After
this period, they will be decayed and you will try
        to replace them. Probably architectural
 techniques will also change and you won't be aware of our style. 
 
    That's why I wrote this letter to you,” and then Sinan
talks about the stones in detail and tells where to find 
        them in Anatolia and how to build 
the arch again. Now there’s foresight for you, not to mention 
 
    public spiritedness, amity, comity, cordiality, and
friendship toward a bunch of people you haven’t 
        even met yet. There’s an artist 
who is doing what artists should, that is, putting other people first 
 
    rather than obsessing over his desire to say what’s 
on his mind, whatever that is. I’d like to be able
        to write poems that way, 
for you should be able to walk into a poem the way you walk into
 
    the garden of a mosque and smell the flowers, listen
to birdsong and the beautiful gurgling of the fountain,
        nod to others and receive their 
smiles and nods in return. The sculptor Claes Oldenburg wrote, 
 
    "I am for the art that a kid licks after peeling away 
the wrapper. . . . I am for an art that is put on and
        taken off, like pants, which 
develops holes, like socks, which is eaten, like a piece of pie." 
 
    Me, too, Claes Oldenburg! If someone from the future 
were to ask me how to write a poem, I’d advise 
        that person to buy an ice 
cream cone and enjoy it, and if he or she drops it on the sidewalk, 
 
    why, so much the better. I’d suggest you shop for new 
underwear and take a taxi, or if you’ve taken a lot 
        of taxis lately, walk to your 
destination instead. If you take your pants off and put them on again 
 
    and really pay attention, I’d say you could learn as much
about writing poetry as you could from reading a lot
        of poems, especially bad ones. 
Why not help a kid blow her nose? Why not eat a hamburger sandwich
 
    or a slice of cake or both? Why not teach yourself how to
flap like a flag or grow holes the way socks do? I’d like 
        a baked potato, please, with a pat 
of melting butter on it, though given the choice, I wouldn’t know                    which
 
    it would be better to be, the potato or the butter, and the same
 goes for any poem that I wrote on that topic, that it
        be more like one or the other, 
as each is necessary. I wouldn’t want to begin smoking cigarettes
 
    or for you to, either, presuming you don’t do so already,
which, if you do, you should stop doing, because
        it isn’t good for you and will 
make the people who love you unhappy. But you could write a poem 
 
    that might be smoked like a cigarette or even one that
smells the way old shoes do, because smoke and foul 
        odors are as much a part 
of life as clear skies and the perfume of the tea olive, and by now                      surely 
 
    you can say, as Claes Oldenburg does, "I am for an art that
takes its form  from the lines of life, that twists and extends 
        impossibly and accumulates 
and spits and drips and is sweet and stupid  as life itself." 
 
    There you are—you’ve edged the sidewalk and put 
your tools away and made a pot of gumbo 
        and showed a kid how 
to tie a Windsor knot in a necktie. You’ve built your own mosque, 
 
    and now you’re inviting everyone in to see 
how beautiful it is; even better, you’ve left 
        a message for people
who won’t be born for four hundred years. Make jam from the figs 
 
    on the tree in your own yard, bathe the dog and the cat, too, 
if you can. Look what you’ve done. Isn’t it magnificent? 
        You’ve already written
the poem—all you have to do now is get it down on paper. 

 the boy’s face 
climbed back down the twelve-year tunnel 
 
of its becoming,  a charcoal sunflower 
swallowing itself. Who has eyes to see, 
 
or ears to hear? If you could see 
what happens fastest, unmaking
 
the human irreplaceable, a star 
falling into complete gravitational 
 
darkness from all points of itself, all this:
 
the held loved body into which entered 
milk and music,  honeying the cells of him:
 
who sang to him, stroked the nap 
of the scalp, kissed the flesh-knot
 
after the cord completed its work 
of fueling into him the long history 
 
of those whose suffering
was made more bearable 
 
by the as-yet-unknown of him,
 
playing alone in some unthinkable 
future city, a Cleveland, 
 
whatever that might be. 
Two seconds. To elapse:
 
the arc of joy in the conception bed,
the labor of hands repeated until 
 
the hands no longer required attention,
so that as the woman folded 
 
her hopes for him sank into the fabric 
of his shirts and underpants. Down 
 
they go, swirling down into the maw 
of a greater dark. Treasure box,
 
comic books, pocket knife, bell from a lost cat’s collar,
why even begin to enumerate them
 
when behind every tributary 
poured into him comes rushing backward 
 
all he hasn’t been yet. Everything 
that boy could have thought or made, 
 
sung or theorized, built on the quavering 
but continuous structure
 
that had preceded him sank into 
an absence in the shape of a boy
 
playing with a plastic gun in a city park 
in Ohio, in the middle of the afternoon. 
 
When I say two seconds, I don’t mean the time 
it took him to die. I mean the lapse between
 
the instant the cruiser braked to a halt 
on the grass, between that moment
 
and the one in which the officer fired his weapon.
The two seconds taken to assess the situation. 
 
I believe it is part of the work 
of poetry to try on at least
the moment and skin of another, 
 
for this hour I respectfully decline.
 
I refuse it. May that officer 
be visited every night of his life
by an enormity collapsing in front of him
 
into an incomprehensible bloom,
and the voice that howls out of it.
 
If this is no poem then…
 
But that voice –- erased boy, 
beloved of time, who did nothing 
to no one and became 
 
nothing because of it –- I know that voice 
is one of the things we call poetry.
It isn’t only to his killer he’s speaking.

Brighter light 
Lighter shadows
 
Cherry-blossom-afros
on the trees 
 
Ease 
       of movement
 
in silky 
butterscotch air 
 
Coats open -- 
 
elbows and bare arms 
appear 
 
Finally, the body 
untenses
           after winter
 
Bird song 
pours     la la la 
 
between the words
and buildings


It covers everything, fine powder,
the earth’s gold breath falling softly
on the dark wood dresser, blue ceramic bowls, 
picture frames on the wall. It wafts up
from canyons, carried on the wind,
on the wings of birds, in the rough fur of animals
as they rise from the ground. Sometimes it’s copper,
sometimes dark as ink. In great storms,
it even crosses the sea. Once,
when my grandmother was a girl,
a strong gale lifted red dust from Africa
and took it thousands of miles away
to the Caribbean where people swept it
from their doorsteps, kept it in small jars,
reminder of that other home.
Gandhi said, “The seeker after truth
should be humbler than the dust.”
Wherever we go, it follows.
I take a damp cloth, swipe the windowsills,
the lamp’s taut shade, run a finger
over the dining room table.
And still, it returns, settling in the gaps
between floorboards, gilding the edges
of unread books. What could be more loyal, 
more lonely, and unsung?

1.
Whatever you do
the French did first.
Whatever you say
the French said first.
Whatever you wear
the French wore first.
You see the pattern?
There is nothing in life
that the French did
not do first. Nothing.
Can you think of anything?
Wrong. The French
did it first. Say what?
The French already said that.
You saw something
original in a film once?
Then you never saw
Renoir or Cocteau.
You read something?
Zola, Baudelaire, Rimbaud,
de Beauvoir, take your pick.
Food? Don’t even go
there, wise guy.
You had a dream
after which you awoke
amazed at the veracity
of your complicated mind?
Get over yourself.
The French dreamed it
long before you.
Everything you’ve done
in the bedroom—
I’ll simply say, the French,
and waste no time
humiliating you further.
Everything you ever
encounter or experience
in this short-long life
you may thank or blame
the French for,
take your pick.
 
2.
But, for god’s sake,
pity the French, will you?
For they have no one
to praise, no one to fault.
They are doomed to
the boredom of
self-containment.
When a Frenchman
looks in the mirror
he sees no reflection,
nothing whatsoever,
for there is nothing
to reflect upon.
As the originator of all
he can only,
as Descartes said
more eloquently, be.
A Frenchwoman can
never experience
the joy of being told
she looks French,
for that is a vile
(or as the French
say, vil)  redundancy,
and holds no logic
for the French mind.
It is like kissing your
own ghost and falling
into an ethereal abyss
of self-referential absurdity,
which is, after all,
typically French.

A factory worker hides a plea for help
in your shoe and isn’t in the morning or evening news.
Which way are we playing,
whose rules? It would be nice if it wasn't possible.
 
This day is for you and I to stomp on like Americans.
Do you know what they say about us?
I’d like to live in a non-lethal economy. I dream
of an eagle on a dinner plate.
 
At the emporium, dried seahorses give us their ears.
We discuss mah jong and gentrification.
You're so not there. Colonial history is part of the difference.
Don’t do that to the memory of us.
 
You bring the impact statements home,
shred. Inside is a radio to wash cuts in.
There’s blood in our strawberries.
You’re no longer a sunset, but a 52-hertz whale.
 
Call out along the blue muscles of your throat,
greater than or equal to the distance between.
The species you like eat
sip small tea cups with pinkies raised like knives.
 
Is it necessary for psyches to be consistent?
 
The avenue is your national memory,
a garden of ghosts, of swollen bones,
wooden bullets and hairless, ribbed wounds.
We can't speak openly of this.
 
There’s an iceberg the size of Rhode Island,
and red water for penguins to circle in.
You pluck eyebrows and let them sip
the porcelain sink. Then the year bends towards fall.
 
The secretary of commerce is perched on a glacier.
Species speak, then flutter into iridescence
in his mouth. Careless razor blades.
When I try to remember their faces, they turn away.
 
The freeze blowing off the escarpment,
how many pay phones could be planted there?
Fountains of oil would be picturesque.
Whale viscera on the ice, the ice maker is broken, the treaty is broken.
 
You build your gilded house in the wake of its wake.

Coming to this country was the worst thing 
that ever happened to me, you would say.
The steamship called the San Jacinto
dragged you from Puerto Rico to New York. 
You swore in Spanish, dangling from the rails
like a nauseous acrobat, a seasick boy 
who prayed to plunge over the side 
and disappear into the green water.
 
A Nazi U-Boat trailed behind the San Jacinto 
on the voyage back to Puerto Rico.  The torpedo
splintered the deck, six thousand tons creaking
and sinking into the sea. Among the dead: 
Ramón Castillo, who shoveled the coal
into the furnace down below; Antonio Cortez,
who cleared the plates in the officer’s mess,
day-dreaming of La Parguera, the luminescent  
bay, illumination of water on a moonless night.
 
You escaped the U-Boat. Seven decades later
the torpedo catches up to you, ripping through
your heart, and you sink into a moonless sea
like the six thousand tons of the San Jacinto,
Ramón Castillo and his shovel full of coal,
Antonio Cortez and his armload of plates.
 
I kissed the ground, you would say, sitting
at the kitchen table in Brooklyn, and I tried
to imagine licking the dirt off my own lips.
Years after the San Jacinto took you away,
you would return to your island, step off
the plane, drop to your knees at the airport
and kiss the ground. Back you came to Brooklyn,
a car stalled on the highway, steam pouring 
from the hood, when all you wanted
was the sand of the beach burning your feet. 
 
Now, if your ancestors wait for you anywhere, 
they wait on the shores of the bay at La Parguera.
May you navigate through the night without 
the compass devoured by the salt of the sea.
May you rise up in the luminescent bay,
stirring the microscopic creatures in the water 
back to life so their light startles your eyes. 
May the water glow blue as a hyacinth in your hands. 

We wake as if surprised the other is still there,
each petting the sheet to be sure.
 
How have we managed our way
to this bed—beholden to heat like dawn
 
indebted to light. Though we’re not so self-
important as to think everything
 
has led to this, everything has led to this.
There’s a name for the animal
 
love makes of us—named, I think,
like rain, for the sound it makes.
 
You are the animal after whom other animals
are named. Until there’s none left to laugh,
 
days will start with the same startle
and end with caterpillars gorged on milkweed.
 
O, how we entertain the angels
with our brief animation. O,
 
how I’ll miss you when we’re dead. 

Velvet and shit: I summoned it
and come it did. The horses’ flanks 
are rank with sweat and flies and I 
remember you between my legs 
achieving for an hour or so. 
We parted on the best of terms: 
the sweet unsayable loss that’s gain 
in drag. The day hurt a little
brighter for all that sharpening. 
I have a turnstile heart; it opens
madly and shuts just so.
In morning cold, the horses’ 
breath takes on the shape of terrible 
blooms. The hoof-stamps sound less 
urgently. I’m not talking about my heart. 

In that place he was
like a god, meaning higher
 
than everything. Almost always
on a ladder he stood
 
quickly leafing through
books in search of something.
 
I used the rustling to locate 
him, my tray weighed down
 
with milk in a silver ewer,
a bowl for washing the eager
 
ink from the pads
of his fingers. I looked up
 
at him the way one might
a god, meaning reverently,
 
and with no small hope
of punishment, no matter how
 
unspoken. He looked up
from his reading, down
 
at me, and gave a nod
which meant permission
 
to return to our large desk 
at the center of the library
 
and overfill myself
 
with the milk, which was 
warm, which was kindness.

Daughters, nocturnal by nature, rise
when the sun declines
 
to shower and powder for evening shifts.
 
Likewise, the Railroad Worm--
not a worm but a juvenile or adult female
 
Phrixthris (the
With-Bristling-Hairs beetle)—
 
switches on a fiery red to attack or mate. 
 
The female then lays a cluster of eggs underground,
curls around them for a year. The male,
 
while not luminous
does possess wings for convenient conveyance—
 
not something I'd want to spot
at the blues joint where my youngest bartends. 

The orchestras kept playing. They had a gin fix.
Why in this fog I still see you I can’t say.
With your beard and high darkness around me.
In your small machine many messages
and faces that once let you in.
The ocean drowns time all the time, slowly.
Everyone had a birthday and buried something.
I was coming from one person and into another
when really what are we: some accident. 
In this show where we all have a favorite. 
What we have is a taste for that thing we can feel, 
will not say. Some of us wanted more
and in all the wrong ways too. 
There was of course an escape…
in a year, on a street, in some near distant past 
when what had us was childish and flame.
And maybe it would have been different 
and maybe it would have been this.
Do you remember my hair when I met you?
Much longer. The violins ended it well.
Outside, the city continued to tease us.
Hurricanes came, storms couldn’t please us:
it was all very fast and beautifully made.
You ask why I’m thinking of death  
but I’m thinking of you and it’s fleeting. 
We were terrible, unrelenting and everywhere then. 
All I know is I can’t stop writing about people.
So much happened. I can’t stop writing about love.

I need to feel the lash as you beat me out of me, 
the white knuckle across my cheekbone as you beat me out of me.

If I seem like I want to be insensible, I am ready to leave
this body, ready to ascend to star if you beat me out of me.

Ready for a lung collapse. I will accept any form of brutality
as payment. I will beg you to beat me. Out of me,

nothing good will grow. No dogwood. No forsythia.
I am salt in soil, poison ground. Beat me out of me

so that I may forget I ever was. Concuss me,
retrograde amnesia me. Beat me out of me.

When I was a boy, my father said that the last one to woods’ edge
would drive the devil’s automobile. He beat me out. Of me,

of my preoccupation with the devil, he could barely speak.
He locked me in a distant cabin. Please, beat me out of me

and my tendency to remember. Reality is so fucking fickle
sometimes. It will be the cudgel which beats me out of me,

then hammers me back in. Loose nail. Faulty wiring.
Nothing is right. It is why I ask you to beat me out of me,

that I may be anyone but my self-obsessed self, 
preening like a white seal. Beat me out of me

with the violence you have only just discovered
you needed. The devil steers. I am him. Beat me out of me.

Blind Professor Hatch set the class 
on edge each time he smoked.  
Waving a lit match just under
his eye, he expertly applied 
the flame to the tip.  
After a strenuous test, 
ten frat boys turned their backs 
and dropped trou, mooning 
the philosopher as he explained
Plato’s cave, that the net of shadows 
seen by the chained prisoners 
is the closest to reality they’d ever get.

SOMETHING YOU SHOULD KNOW
is that as a kid, I once worked at a pet store.
I cleaned the cages
of small animals like turtles, hamsters,
rabbits, and hermit crabs. 
I watched the hermit crab continue
to grow, molt, shed its skin and scurry across
the bottom of the aquarium to find a new shell.
Which left me afraid for the small creature,
to run around all exposed that way, to have
to live its entire life requiring something else
to feel safe. Perhaps that is when I became afraid
of needing anything beyond myself. Perhaps
that is why, even now, I can want so desperately
to show you all of my skin, but am more afraid
of meeting you, exposed, in open water.

Someone poked a finger through the construction paper sky
and now I see God’s face all the time, thick as cream,
and not just on midnight-centric holidays.
I don’t consider it a gift. 
 
Persistent bacterial infection from e.coli in the water
or repetitive stress fracture or vaccine injury.
I don’t have any plans.
I don’t see anyone on the weekends except all these strangers, all of                    whom smoke.
 
I used to write poems here. 
I used to think I saw stars.
Now I’ve seen stars, write no more poems.
Buy twenty-five dollar tickets, plus the nine dollar and twenty cent                     convenience charge,
plus the three dollar retail outlet pickup charge,
for the concert that I hope will make me cry.
Say this is one good thing about living in the city.
Mean the band coming through to play the concert, not the paying.  Not the crying.
 
I now think outer space is a real place.
That flora is real.
Somewhere else, air is what you can breathe, is what you choose.
 
The summer of the decomposing fetal rat
baited by poison at the bottom of the back stair.
The place where the girl texts whilst rollerblading in traffic.
The story of the donkey-kick break-in in the next tier:
The strangest I’ve ever seen, said the detective,
and he’d seen decapitations. 
City of decapitations, of John Wayne Gacy.
Song of John Wayne Gacy on the album that makes me cry,
but the concert in this city sold out and now the tickets are one hundred dollars.
 
Is it the authentic we’re after?, asks my friend J.
Document it. 
Up the iron, up the Vitamin D of which everyone, absolutely everyone,
is massively deficient, even the people in Southern California,
even though the best source is sunshine.
 
A bunch of homeschooling mothers here are going to see
Eat Pray Love.
Think about it.  Document it.  Don’t go, though. 
 
Call it clarity or call it foul.
A bad mood or chemical sensitivity. 
On the spectrum.
A yellow bird dipped in soot. 
Sea bird drowning in oil.
 
Weird oily residue in my mason jar of city tap water.
 
Daughter who earlier this summer picked strawberries in her own yard
says she is reading in a magazine about outdoor thing-a-ma-jigs.
Daughter says the giant American flag at the car dealership
is one good thing about Chicago.
 
Are you someone who makes art during wartime?
Are you someone who does not make art during wartime?
 
In the country they put up enough food for when the shit hits the fan.
I used to disbelieve it.  Now I’m back, and when it does,
you’ll know where to find me.
I don’t want a bull’s eye on my scalp
and that handprint from M on my shoulder.
 
How do you live with love in a place you hate?  In a place that feels
             like hate,
where all the strangers smoke on the street and the baby rat is still                      there, day after day?
How do you do it, God?
 
Thought to put something about recent flooding activity here but trying to refrain.

Where an edge should order, all is smear, blush:       
                                                                                                                                     
same cord grass, same song; 
     flash of wing, longing            
 
 
 
                                 ~~
 
 
 
 
Why are we said to fall in love, and not to be cast?
The world is without waiver; There is nowhere
else to go
 
 
 
                                     ~~
 
 
 
 
cast (v.) :           to throw something onto the seashore 
to make something (light or shadow)         appear in a place
          to introduce something    that reduces the happiness
                                                                                   of somebody                            
to generate               a sense of uncertainty      
                       
to remove or banish     something from your mind     decisively, and often  
   with difficulty             to throw somebody or something           somewhere,                                                                                                  especially                         in a brutal way
            to select the players                  to mold           
 
to drop or lose something
to add or calculate something
 
to shed or leave something, for example, a skin
 
 
 
                                    ~~
 
 
 
Here is another translation:
 
We sit watching fires the dusk
beach dwellers have set—
 
dusk at the same shore
where we first met. I thought
 
I’d only be allowed beauty like this once.
Even at dusk, something about the light
 
cast over the ocean is blinding,
a right-warm blinding, the very same way
 
we’ve always made each other happy.

At night, my husband takes it off,
puts it on the dresser beside his wallet and keys
laying down, for a moment, the accoutrements of manhood.
Sometimes, when he’s not looking, I pick it up
savor the weight, the dark face, ticked with silver
the brown, ostrich leather band with its little goosebumps
raised as the flesh is raised in pleasure.
He had wanted a watch and was pleased when I gave it to him.
And since we’ve been together ten years
it seemed like the occasion for the gift of a watch
a recognition of the intricate achievements
of marriage, its many negotiations and nameless triumphs.
But tonight, when I saw it lying there among
his crumpled receipts and scattered pennies
I thought of my brother’s wife coming home
from the coroner carrying his rings, his watch
in a clear, ziplock bag, and how we sat at the table
and emptied them into our palms,
their slight pressure all that remained of him.
How odd the way a watch keeps going
even after the heart has stopped. My grandfather
was a watchmaker and spent his life in Holland
leaning over a clean, well-lit table, a surgeon of time
attending to the inner workings: spring,
escapement, balance wheel. I can’t take it back,
the way the man I love is already disappearing
into this mechanism of metal and hide,
this accountant of hours
that holds, with such precise indifference
all the minutes of his life.

I open the kitchen window
and lean outside into the clouds,
closing my eyes
as the sun becomes liquid,
extending my arms and fingertips
to catch the wind.
 
The way the cold rolls over me,
I’m taken back to Anegada
and the crisp of the islands breath as we ran
with airplane arms away from all our responsibilities.
 
We hadn’t known why we were running
or to where.
 
We just moved with the quality of convection currents,
absorbing the light from hurricane lamps
that hung in the neighboring trees.
 
I think,
running is the closest thing to time travel
that I may ever experience in my lifetime—
somehow, I become younger than I am,
younger than I was.

I liked Hell, 
 
 
I liked to go there alone
 
 
relieved to lie in the wreckage, ruined,  physically undone.
 
 
The worst had happened.  What else could hurt me then?  
 
 
I thought it was the worst, thought nothing worse could come.
 
 
Then nothing did, and no one.

When I walked across a room I saw myself walking
 
 
As if I were someone else,
 
 
 
when I picked up a fork, when I pulled off a dress, 
 
 
as if  I were in a movie.
 
 
 
                                It’s what I thought you saw   when you looked at me. 
 
 
 
So when I looked at you  I didn’t see you
 
 
I saw the  me I thought you saw, as if I were someone else.
 
 
 
I called that outside – watching.   Well I didn’t call it anything
 
 
when it happened all the time.
 
 
 
But  one morning  after I stopped the pills –  standing in the kitchen
 
 
for one second I was inside   looking out
 
                                                                       
 
then I popped back outside.    And saw myself looking.
 
 
Would it happen again?    It did, a few days later,
 
 
 
Wendy was   pulling on her winter coat  standing by the kitchen door
 
 
And suddenly I was  inside  and I saw her
 
 
I looked out from my own eyes
 
 
and I saw     her eyes  blue gray  transparent
 
 
and inside them – Wendy herself!                                               
 
 
 
Then I was outside again.   
 
 
 
and   Wendy was saying Bye Bye, see you soon, 
 
 
as if Nothing had Happened.
 
 
 
She hadn’t noticed.   She hadn’t known that I’d Been There
 
 
For Maybe 40 Seconds,  
 
 
and that then I was Gone.
 
 
 
She hadn’t noticed that I Hadn’t Been There for months, 
 
 
years, the entire time she’d known me.  
 
 
 
I needn’t have been embarrassed to have been there for those seconds,
 
 
she had not Noticed the Difference.
 
 
 
This happened   on and off for weeks, 
 
 
 
and then I was looking at my old friend John—
 
 
suddenly I was in   and I saw him,
 
 
 
and he (and this was almost unbearable)  
 
 
he saw me see him,
 
 
 
and I saw him see me.  
 
 
He  said something like, You’re going to be ok now,
 
 
Or, It’s been difficult hasn’t it, 
 
 
 
but what he said mattered  only a little. 
 
 
We met -- in our mutual gaze --in between
 
a third place I’d not yet been.

It took three bologna sandwiches, a pickle, one slice 
of banana bread to get her ready for the families that came 
to see what happened to the relative they lost somehow, 
 
the bodies she kept chilled while they hardened, waited 
for the hearses, the morticians smiling, making bad jokes 
about the fat lady they dropped on the floor one night. 
 
The families come just after the Coca-Cola made her burp, 
opening the door to the cabinet so they can see how naked 
death is, none of the things we accumulate beside us, 
 
none of the failures, the prizes, the big houses, no thing
in itself, while whatever memories they had are somewhere
where dreams go and die. When peering eyes of parents wet, 
 
then burst into the floods of sorrow, she stares at nothing, 
the bright glow in the skylight under morning clouds, and 
when they are gone she presses the door closed, her hands
 
holding each other, her arms in a bow like a hammer, 
some nights the up and down of making light of putting 
the dead away comes up on her in a sudden rush of rage. 
 
She stands there slamming the door, clasped hand 
in clasped hand, arms connected like a bow now steel
in a broad protest against why we cannot keep the ghost. 

Read the news article about the Lifetime TV
actress who dared to bare her pregnant belly
& feel progressive, then hypocritical, then hungry.
 
Watch reruns of Roseanne & devise a tweet
about how she & Madonna are the only culture
warriors from the ’90s who matter. Forget to tweet.
 
Stand in the produce aisle at the supermarket
& stare at the kale until you feel thinner by osmosis.
Buy cookies instead. Eat them two at a time.
 
Try on clothes during your lunch break
even though you already have too many clothes,
because you are so relieved to have a body
you can clothe & you must make the most of it.
 
Make salad your primary, most incessant thought.
When is the next time I can eat salad? Can I get
a salad on the side? Let salad destroy your life.
 
Allow the world to gaze upon your janky toenail
because it is hot outside & that shit needs
to breathe. Go on, creeps. Look at it.
 
Think constantly about the time you were thin.
Think constantly about the time you were obese.
Think about control, the only feeling you can fathom.

I PUT ON MY FUR COAT
And leave a bit of ankle to show. 
I take off my shoes and make myself
comfortable. I defrost a chicken
and chew on the bone. In public, 
I smile as wide as I can and everyone
shields their eyes from my light. 
At night, I knock down nests off
telephone poles and feel no regret.
I greet spiders rising from underneath
the floorboards, one by one. Hello, 
hello. Outside, the garden roars
with ice. I want to shine as bright 
as a miner's cap in the dirt dark, 
to glimmer as if washed in fish scales. 
Instead, I become a balm and salve 
my daughter, my son, the cold mice
in the garage. Instead, I take the garbage
out at midnight. I move furniture away
from the wall to find what we hide. 
I stand in the center of every room
and ask: am I the only animal here?   

Between what I write and what I want to write, there’s a corpse. A naked body we know by heart, a mother’s tears, a lamp fading away. You look at the posters on the bathroom door, the picture where I took off my clothes for Spencer Tunick, the books that filled up the empty chimney, the swords with Celtic engravings. Then you asked if all of that belonged to a foreign world, a kind of flight. The light was shining and I played the album Ella & Louis. Dear soul of yours that will be mine someday: any beach will be glorious and you will bite the fruit while we remain silent. This is how I intended to begin the poem but your hand touched mine and there was nothing but the silence of a strange serpent encircling us.

I Come From a Long Line of Modest Achievers
 
I’m fond of recalling how my mother is fond of recalling how my great-grandfather was the very first person to walk across the Brooklyn Bridge on the second day.
 
 
Practical
 
Bought a bag of frozen peas to numb my husband’s sore testicles after his vasectomy.
 
That night I cooked pea soup. 
 
 
I Knew a Woman
 
Everything she had was better than everything the rest of us had.  Not by a lot.  But by enough.
 
 
Married Love, 1
 
When we snuggle, my left hand finds purchase on his back cyst.  My home button.
 
 
Why I’m Switching Salons
 
“We can put on a topcoat with glitter,” said the manicurist.  “We all know how you feel about glitter.”
 
 
Copulation Couplet
--for the birds and other open-minded parties--
 
Birds without penises do it like this:
press vent to vent and pass the sperm, called “the cloacal kiss.” 
 
 
“If You Were Born Catholic, You’ll Always Be Catholic”
 
My husband sits up after changing the van’s busted tire, grease on his forehead, and I think—though it’s been thirty years—it’s Ash Wednesday. 
 
 
Married Love, 2
 
There will come a day—let it be many years from now—when our kids realize no married couple ever needed to retreat at high noon behind their locked bedroom door to discuss taxes. 
 
 
No, It’s Not a Coincidence
 
In every book my husband’s written, a minor character named Colin suffers a horrible death.  This is because the boyfriend I had before I met my husband was named Colin.  In addition to being named Colin, he was Scottish, and an architect.  So it’s easy to imagine my husband’s feelings of inadequacy.  My husband cannot build a tall building of many stories.  He can only build a story, and then push Colin out of it.
 
 
Returning from Spring Break, Junior Year at Notre Dame
 
Swapped the rosary on my bedpost for Mardi Gras beads.
 
 
Still Have the Playbill
 
I peaked early, fourth grade.  I had the lead in Mary Poppins.  Mr. Banks was played by Vince Vaughn.  Yes, that Vince Vaughn, though at that point he was just a kid, just another nobody like the rest of us.  He didn’t go to Hollywood until after high school.
 
I don’t recall him as being particularly talented.   
 
 
The Sum of What I Recall, One Year Later, from the Prague Walking Tour
 
Kafka was not the unhappy person we generally assume him to be.
 
 
When They Grow Up
 
My oldest child will hate me because I wrote an entire book about her.  My middle child will hate me because I wrote hardly a word about him.  But the baby; ah, the baby.  When I write about him, I call it fiction, and I’m always sure to mention he has a big penis. 
 
 
 (Don’t Think About the) Pink Elephant
 
Sometimes at the end of yoga I’m finally relaxing into that calm where I’ve forgotten my to-do list.   That’s when the instructor says, “Don’t think about your to-do list.”  Suddenly it’s back, and it’s longer, because now it includes forgetting my to-do list. 
 
 
A Few Weeks Later, the Recorded But Not Yet Released “Dock of the Bay” Would Become History’s First Posthumous #1 Hit
 
It was storming, that December day in 1967, when the two-engine plane containing twenty-six-year-old Otis Redding and his back-up band, the Bar-Kays, took off from Cleveland.  Just a few miles short of the Madison, Wisconsin airport, the plane crashed into Lake Monona.  The crash killed Otis, his pilot, his manager, and four out of five Bar-Kays.  Only the lonely trumpeter survived. 
 
He was the one who played Taps.
 
 
Married Love, 3
 
As we lower onto the December-cold pleather seats of the minivan, we knock hands: both of us reaching to turn on the other’s seat warmer first. 

1. How It All Went Wrong
 
The Bible says
Adam brought
Trouble
Into the world
With his small
Pink slab of muscle.
 
But if God didn’t
Want it to happen,
Why did He
Give him a tongue?
 
2.
 
 “God so loved the word
He gave his only
Begotten world
That it might be
Redeemed.”
 
I think the preacher
Used to say that
In my church
When I was a kid.
 
Then again, I could
Have gotten it wrong—
Back then
I wasn’t really listening.
 
 
3.  Gospel Talk
 
“And the word
Was made
Fresh”--
 
Each one
Baked daily.
 
It’s the bread
By which we live.
 
 
4. Minor Miracles
 
Taking the empty air
Deep in our lungs,
Warming it there,
 
Extracting from it
What our blood needs,
 
Then breathing it back
Out as sound
We’ve added meaning to.
 
 
5.
 
Sometimes the world seems
So far away, so
Distant from me,
That I find myself
Using words as a lens
To observe it--
To bring it into focus
And pull it close.
 
Nor does accuracy
Always matter most:
“Doggie, doggie!”
The child cries with glee,
 
Pointing at the cat
That has just entered the room.
 
6.
 
“Watch out for the undertoad,”
Was what she heard her father
Shout above the waves—
That a word misheard could create
Such a creature
And feed her childhood fears.
 
Or how I mistyped “undertow”
As “undertown”
And found myself inhabiting
A city beneath the sea
Where everything moved slowly
And breathed chains of bubbles
That rose toward the upper world,
A tethering of pearls.
 
Something in words that’s perverse,
That wants to be beyond
What we understand and control—
Something above or below.
 
7.
 
The word “also”--
 
How it seems to know
We want more,
Need more,
That our greed
Is, in some
Sense, inexhaustible.
 
How it senses we’ll
Never get enough
Of poems and songs,
Or the body
Of the beloved.
Not to mention
 
The world--
How much we crave it.
 
The world, also.
 
8.
 
The word is exempt from 
The world’s flaws--
 
“Leaf” is complete,
Unscarred by insect
Or wind-tossed twig,
 
Yet it is an essence
That implicates the world
As a wound implies a body.
 
9.
 
Sometimes, when we’re
In the right mood,
Words are the least
Of it--
We don’t need
To speak,
Or even listen.
 
We can let our mouth
Explore
The mango’s song,
 
Or stroll across
The bridge
Of the nose
To the poem of the rose.
 
10.
 
Long “a” lounging, naked
In the leafy shade;
Then the low,
Lubricious moan of  “o.”
 
The high “e” of grief.
 
And “u”-- who
Could ever forget you?
 
“I” could never.
“Y” would I even try?
 
Vowels that rise
From our open throats…
 
Not to mention consonants,
Thick as sinew,
That our teeth bite into.
 
11.
 
Outside our bodies, things
Wait to be named,
To be saved.
 
And don’t they deserve it?
So much hidden inside
Each one,
Such a longing
To become the beloved.
 
Meanwhile, the sounds
Crowd our mouths,
Press up against
Our lips
Which
Are such
A narrow exit
For a joy so desperate.
 
12.
 
When I was young
I was always eager
To learn new words.
How many there were!
 
Now, I’m old.
I still learn new ones,
But I forget
More and more
Of those I once knew.
 
When I was young
I couldn’t have imagined
The time would come
When I’d need so few.
 
13.
 
The word “mockingbird”--
It’s poised in your mouth
 
Same as the bird itself
Pauses on the dogwood branch.
 
When the bird flies away,
The word remains.
 
Look, now it’s right there--
Singing on the page.
 
14.
 
Words, how I loved you
Then-- when I
Was young
And you led me
Out of the dark!
 
How I love you now
Even more,
As the dark approaches.
 
15.
 
I always assumed
It was words
I was after--
Those shining
Fish
The poem’s net gets.
 
But what if it was
The sea
Itself
I was trying
To haul on deck?

Kennedy as to Pendergrass is as
Harvard as to Howard is as
Roller Derby as to Soul Skate is as
E Street Band as to Commodores is as
Farm to Table as to Fish Fry is as
Victory garden as to garden plot is as
Nancy Wilson as to Nancy Wilson is as
cummings as to clifton is as
Ice fishing as to shine-the-rims is as
College as to military is as
Rush as to Kanye is as
Joshing as to sike is as
Lifetime as to BET is as
Subaru as to Cadillac is as
Foster Wallace as to Morrison is as
Crocs as to Crocs is as
Burning Man as to — is as
Sinatra as to Vandross is as
Wachowskis as to Lee is as
Yoga as to your girls is as
Portland as to Detroit is as 
Bruce as to Pryor is as
Gap Year as to —  is as
NPR as to Tyler Perry as to
Ronald as to Malcolm is as
The Gilmore Girls as to Good Times is as
Brie as to American is as
Hockey as to basketball is as
Blume as to California Cooper is as
Camping as to ———
(I draw the line at camping. Fuck that).

boxes taped up and up then tied with twine | addressed on every side | in that careful longhand taught on other continents | they looked like mail bombs | going round and round the carousel | in a regional anxiety | stinking barrel of sheep’s cheese beaded in sweat | olive oil tin wrapped in much plastic | each printed letter a rounded separate bundle | standing on its own | the sore thumbs of my parents’ immigrant luggage at the United terminal | a friend who doesn’t speak at airports | except when spoken to | word for home that could also mean journey | or never-arrived | at the baggage claim | a person waits in a t-shirt printed with English words | whose arrangement is nonsensical | and it doesn’t matter | that what matters is far | while right here at any moment—  | no one need remind anyone | tether that | suitcases duffels packages | taped and bound so emphatically they look like total crap| what matters is the words are undeniably English | anyone can tell you this | is why the shirt exists | tether that to this | anyone whose intimate particular knowledge lives | with a line drawn through it | “they were a simple people” | my mother often said | from whom she untethers | and bundles into packages | all taut with twine and sends away | at the carousel on which they circulate | printed with her surname | she could | and might refuse them | that “they were a simple—” | was the sort of thing that sparked in me a rage | which I am only now beginning to draw a line through | line I wish to repeople myself | on the other side of | with a friend | a dear friend | who | doesn’t speak at airports unless spoken to

A black woman sings azúcar!
over polyrhythmic African drums
on the Latino radio stations
blazing from my smart phone
on the above-ground subway line
in Houston. La negra tiene
tumbao, sings queen Celia Cruz bluntly
about a señorita who doesn’t sweat
the small stuff and is therefore
unstoppable
as she commands us all to dance
to the ton-ton of a conga drum.
But sugar is so soluble and
precious that all it takes is a drizzle
to end the night early
and send the band home.
You’d think stronger stuff
would come from sugarcanes
so hard to chop down that white men
once thought only the Negros
could do it. Perhaps
that’s the thing about making,
the strongest structure is that which
is inevitably torn down,
temperance making
beauty making la vida un carnaval.
This is where we find joy: a rumba despite
the high chances of rain at the Taco Milagro salsa night,
a sing-along about the sweetness of life despite
salty sweat drowning our faces
as the drum rhythm picks up
and our bodies move faster together
toward their own inevitable ends apart—
A black woman, demanding our attention
despite how we stare her down,
struts the street earthily shaking from
side to side. Gracias a Dios,
la negra nos tiene tumbao.
Gracias a Dios, camina
de lao pa lao pa lao. 

half moon parts my hair
                                we went AWOL years ago
                               a different interior location
                               we listen to owl songs now
                            another language made of many
                      does “long villain” mean cruel for hours or tall
                      almost got the             answer in their tapering voices
                                           thin then
                                           thinner
                                           a strong
                                           odor of questions
            meat aisle with grotesque in a can
cover him in glitter after sex purple and
                               gold in the rivers of it

Barbie Chang parks next to the
            soroptomist park
 
to part her heart a hippopotamus
            of a heart a famous hurt
 
fame will learn her if she lets it the
            women at school will
 
school her if she lets them they write
            letters to only each other
 
why bother to say hello how she fell
            so hard in love with
 
the women at school but she is
            allergic to them achoo
 
if they are the choo choo train she
            is the track necessary but
 
unnoticed like the seventh tract
            home on an attractive
 
street a streak of light missed in the
            sky what if Barbie
 
Chang Skyped everyone only to
            discover she is the
 
only one on the earth left the last
            leaf on the last tree there
 
are hints of fingerprints on the window
            but no more fingers just
 
women who once lingered with
            only each other
 
The doctor says hospice as if
            she is a hostess and
 
wants Barbie Chang to try the
            crawfish there are
 
no longer many crawl spaces left
            for Barbie Chang’s
 
mother who no longer can take
            her own showers she
 
once was shy around Barbie Chang
            but now her lungs
 
hurt burnt crust lost in their hardness
            Barbie Chang always
 
thought her mother was heartless
            not lungless but now
 
she knows the lungs were wrong
            little rungs pair of
 
eyes that don’t get along and
            their endless scarring
 
into honeycombs there’s nothing
            scarier than something
 
that won’t stop fooling you
            that it’s beautiful
 
 
 
Scarring of the heart always wins
            when we cry our hearts
 
always whine stupid heart and its
            weak alert system overly
 
impatient sense of self narcissist
            stubborn in its endless
 
beating in need of assisted living
            supposed to be
 
the center of everything the center
            of attention but
 
not even centered Barbie Chang
            has no intention of
 
letting the heart win because it’s the
            lungs that need her
 
help her mother’s lungs sound like
            Velcro they crackle like
 
its New Year’s Eve this year Barbie
            Chang has bleached
 
clean the past but no matter how many
            times she cuts and pastes
 
a new childhood over her old one
            the neighborhood still
 
hates her hair color she hates her own
            hair color that has a metal
 
odor in the sun that shows all her grays
            that aren’t that many
 
there’s medicine for everything now but
            the owl still hunts at night
 
her mother is not alright and the owl
            is always right in the
 
middle of her flight she rests on her
            head when someone
 
else is sick it’s as if there are always
            noises in the empty attic
 
and Barbie Chang is always frantic hates
            the status quo wants
 
something to happen cannot lie she
            needs someone to die
 
 
 
Barbie Chang shakes the hand of
            another Smith a former
 
beauty queen who still wins friends
            at the local school sets
 
the rules for who is cool and who
            is not the one and
 
only Smith is taken aback that a
            Chang would be so
 
strange and arrange her own
            handshake without
 
being asked first Smith and Chang
            both gave birth but
 
the Smith would never again say
            hello to a Chang even
 
one named Barbie unless she was
            the one performing her
 
surgery no matter how likely the
            Barbie was to change
 
her time zones instantly clone herself
            to find a new home she
 
didn’t yet know that suburban
            homes were filled with
 
people who wanted to be alone
            to dial certain phones
 
 
The truth is some days Barbie Chang
            wants to hang up her
 
Asian boots and root for the Circle
            she wakes up not proud
 
to be what she is in a sea of water
            who gets to decide
 
which section of water eats the ship
            its always the white
 
water that devours there are towers of
            people working in
           
America in America the towers extend
            to Costa Rica and back
 
Barbie Chang can’t figure out how to
            open the door of the
           
tower someone keeps lowering her
            down to the roof she
 
doesn’t want to appear rude so she
            stays on the roof of
 
Paul Muldoon’s building she wonders
            if she is standing on Paul
 
Muldoon’s head how she wishes to be
            doomed like Paul
 
Muldoon to win the Guggenheim like
            Paul Muldoon to write
 
rejection letters sending them out the
            New Yorker windows in
 
winter the letters take the snow down
            like elevators 
 
All this magic against death
        All of it
        To live I don’t want it
To live the light in August that’s it
the way leaves live dead tint themselves for fall
       The yellow ribbed frog is extinct as of 12/1/2013
He was an amphibian creeping like the Bible
You’re something incandescent or comely
but I can’t dissect your eyes like an electric rabbit named Paul Revere
         I will die with a glass heart in my hand
        I will die with a glass heart in my hand
You need to repeat after me
This is Mississippi
          the moon is dusted terrible
 
You learned how to spell me in school terrible
      To die like light in august please let me
      You need to mark every place Faulkner was racist
and re-write the novel as an erasure
If you’re good man, you’ll rewrite the moon
and then we will fall for each other backwards
     which is our birthright
Which is the soft land and her animals
    when nature mellows like a porous fruit
 
As you become
a character enclosed in my grammar, you
      become object I’m ashamed
      The yellow frogs are gone did you see them parting?
Things grow long and unrecognizable
Love is recognized as an anarchic structure
of scribbles, vines, buttresses, spires
            conspiracy theories weak as gas station coffee
 
You see six nuns in south Alabama moving
towards the gas station named Brittney
like a prehistoric herd in the mauve twilight
They go down the War on Terror
      Memorial Highway in their big bus vroom vroom
They are not right not of our century
They are the cryptic language of the kill
       They are not who they pretend to be
One is pregnant under her habit
       One thinks she ought not to do what? Touch that
One buys a Diet Dr. Pepper and Twizzlers
 
They go down the highway, a sparkling acid trip
           They are psychedelic and crazed as lions crave energy,
            their eyes revolving like enervated shadows
 in the painted murals of their thinking
         They are snorkeling in the waters of death
They are not the gentle motion of waves
 
But rather the black deaths of rivers and crosses
  Burdened with the low down poisonous creatures
        They are the black death
of orgiastic chimneys, soot
          and the frail air that surrounds it
as the flesh surrounds the heart
     and is also the heart
 
They go down the highway on god on the run
       I want you to say this, Mississippi   6 miles
        I want you to love terror, Alabama   10 miles
I want you to be on the interior
         of this spiked gothic, Mississippi    15 miles
I want you to be on the run, Alabama     27 miles
 
I want you to listen in and tell me
        you love me, Mississippi      85 miles
I will squeeze it out of you like a glass heart
 thrown into parts of the earth
        you don’t want to see     132 miles
I will die with a glass heart in my hand
as if it’s a diamond encrusted scepter I know it
      I am the queen of this disaster
 I can feel it deep inside me
 
 
This is a torch
This is a door
This is a tree
This a gun
This is a nun
This is a pregnant nun
This is none
            This is the baby inside the nun
This here is Baby None
                        Say hello to None Hi None
This ain’t Baby None
                        Say bye to Baby None Bye None
Inside the War on Terror Memorial
            Highway
                        is Family None driving to nothin’
None of it I’ve said before
Nothing has gone down
this highway except deer and a glass heart
It is desolate here
 
This is a place of weeping things
        where the world has wept and wept and no one has come
              to wipe the tears
No Father None No Mother None
No Baby None Comes No Sister
None Comes No Brother None Comes
No One like None
 
It’s that kind of place
You’ve never seen it before
It is blind to everything
halfway between extinguished and extinct
            where the yellow frogs do not rain or come
   
 
It is not good
When you came there you cried
     for centuries on end because you felt yourself
            turn into a tarnished antique like a scepter
from another century
                        and this was no good
                         
Never mind, the gas station or the girl who barfed
                        in the van of Christmas tinsel
or the nuns who have dissolved
 into the South Alabama mist
No one sees them except us and that
            Is why we love each other
 
This is my life
I don’t want it I do
        These are the frogs I don’t want them I do
These are the nuns I don’t want them
 
I do no more I do
I do know more      I know I do
I do no more       harm I know I do
I do to you    please say I do

Careful, now,
the gun still
in my hands—
who among us
wouldn’t open
fire for smaller
a wound?
My hands reek
of gunpowder,
a carbine. Who
has not perceived
that parenting
is to savage
the beast
that threatens
our offspring?
Bear with me.
Consider the wicked—
where to begin?
Men with guns?
Men clutching money?
Men who kill
with large hands
and then briskly
wave with the same?
Men who would
hold a woman
down and ply
their bodies
against hers
against her will.
Who oversaw men
pouring fluid
into the jaws
of other men
who grew as round
as toads and—
distended beyond
recognition—died?
Listen: I am tired.
We could end
famine. We could care
for our elders,
our poor. We could
end war.
             Sometimes,
I’m reduced to flame.
A purified fuel.
The lost flesh.
The innocence.
Who’s to blame
when something
wrenches open
inside, reeking
of kerosene
and burning
beyond control? 

I
 
My country untangles its horns
and licks its own agave.
 
II
 
We might meet at a table with fresh grapes, with the top of my head                overflowing.
We speak of quiet things and these things quiet me all the long
         silver way.  
We walk in our own gardens which could be a shared garden.
 
III
 
To be in love and to accept so little of the world.
I knew that someone might govern the mailroom moon.
 
IV
 
A teacher once told me to beware
of the first person.
The little girl voice.
 
V
 
Maybe I have many novels, maybe I have many arms.
I had determined that I should have many arms.  
My hair would be sea-green and I would write my myth
in squid ink. It would be inscrutable and mine only
and therefore irrefutable.
 
VI
 
I drink cacao with my country.
 
VII
 
We are enterprising
in our horsehair embroidered costumes.
 
VIII
 
I said, what about the MacArthur Memorial
in Virginia, the MacArthur Suite in Manila?
She said that this was under reconstruction.
She was pissed at me for some reason.
 
IX
 
I made no effort to control my American accent.
I knew that it would humiliate her. Or, perhaps that is my fantasy.
 
X
 
The many legs, the fathom legs.  My country in many countries
in my dialects and flower flecked vocabularies named for a Spanish king who never visited.
 
XI
 
Did King Philip II of Spain visit the Philippines, the country conquered by his country and named after him during his lifetime?
 
XII
 
Answer
 
Yes.
 
And he said that this is a very GOOD country for me to live at.
 
Some tourists said that they wanted to return to the Philippines to have a vacation again; while others wanted to live here!
 
It depends if you like tropical places. Plus, there's a huge mall in the Philippines and lots of Pretty Beaches.

The whole story was slipshod,
from working the docks of Ancona
to chasing Chet Baker around the country –
desolate, emaciated, playing all smears
and blurs, shooting up once
in the cathedral of San Ciriaco. It wasn’t music
I was after, it was a mood, black ink:
there was a balcony
where they held him over the edge, shaking
the change out of him, finally dropping him
a story or two. And where was I then,
the biography of no interest
beyond raising up massive wooden boxes
or cargo, coffins shipped from
one place to another. Our connection:
How do I get what’s coming to me?
The Roman arches, the view of the sea
so blue you could almost forgive the leaden
afternoons after work, with no one to do
in the bars: I had no art to speak of. He at least
was beautiful once, sweet-voiced, boyish –
everybody wanted him. His story was stupid,
a romance with squalor, but I wanted to steal it.
Attend to me someone: you who lent him a trumpet.
I had before me that one perfect night
in Recanati, his last, perfect as I remember it.
His “I Thought about You” completely parenthetical,
on pitch, full of ideas he got from Miles,
but it shook us enough to send me back to the States.
When the set was over he smiled, toothless, at all six of us.
I mean we didn’t want to die then, being human.

She has the Kansas City of my open window
She has the halogen of my bent blinds
And her hair is in my hair
She has the fresh breeze of my borrowed flower sheets
She has the freestyle of my squeaky metal bed coils
She has the sonic boom of another’s blood beneath me
She has Any way you want it that’s the way you need it outside her                           window in the summer dark
And her hair is in my hair
She has the breaking point of my hard plastic pink flipflops
She has the hypnosis of my shuffle to the kitchen to make coffee
She has the conversation of my black caterpillars in their fur coats, curling uncurling by the door   
            last winter, hello, hello.
She has the song and dance of my rage turned against the self
And her hair is in my hair
She has the touch and go of my fear of death by emotional starvation
She has Bachman Turner Overdrive playing Takin’ care of business                        outside her window
& a man who says: We’re gonna mix it up we’re gonna find a sixth person we’re gonna get trashed
And her hair is in my hair
She has the Santa Ana of my sense of basic flaw and unlovabilty
She has the atavism of my narcotism
And her hair is in my hair
She has the jet lag of my pocketbook
She has the sonogram of my happiest childhood memories
She has the frailty of my recollection
She has the ultra-red ultra-violet ultra-sonic ultra-short ultra-mundane ultra-montane ululating 
            ultimatum of my solitude
And her hair is in my hair
She has the totter of my Plymouth Rock
She has the touch of my waffle iron
She has the undersong of my sufficiency
She has the pockmark of my housecleaning
And her hair is in my hair
She has the howl of my duplicate
The soot of my headwork
The welt of my bra
The hatchback of my stupor
The suitcase of my figments
The breath of my parolee
The proof of my throttle
And her hair is in my hair

In the purplish clutch between evening & more
evening, boys smoked cigarettes down to their minty
ends & talked about ass like mad hams & hips
 
like pow, mouths curling with avid adornment & vivid
hands shaping the air—palms down to palms up
in half circles of perplexity. The C shape the tobacco
 
still glowing between fingers makes is the closest
any one of these boys will get a girl’s hip today.
Which is why these boys, in thin tanks & hopeless
 
shirts, cut conversations easily from Watch how I get
at her to Knuckle up, fool, throwing shoulders & fists
at each other like minor superheroes with no villains
 
to fight. No capes in bare knuckles. No saving the block
either because every swing breaks something.
 

That the moon causes tides
seems too witchy to be science. 
The sea purging sheet iron, 
jeans, a jewel-eyed 
alabaster goat. Is that
why I'm here? Everyone 
needs kudos, from newborns 
to saviors. Nora, nearly three, 
draws sunlight in golden bars, 
not unlike an Impressionist painter. 
I like to think of light this way, 
dispensed in attache cases
to illuminate as needed. 
The famous poet said write 
by the light of your wounds. 
A drunk flies over his bicycle handlebars, 
crumples by the side of the road. 
Performed pain is still pain. 
Some people born before the Model T
lived to see man walk on the moon.
To be strapped like that
to the masthead of history
would make me frantic. At parties
(certain collapse at the door, 
my unbearable desire
to lick and be licked) I'd shout
I'm frantic, and you? Like a fire, 
hungry and resisting containment, 
I'd pound at the windows, my 
mouth full of hors d'oeuvres. 
Outside -- sweeping plains 
of green flora and service stations.
Odd, for an apocalypse
to announce itself with such bounty. 
I hear crickets chirp and think 
of my weaker heart, the tiny one 
sewn behind the one that beats (unhumble
birth, error of the blood). It lives there, 
made entirely of watery pink light, 
flapping at dawn like a baby's cheek. 
It doesn't take much, to love a saint 
like me. On a gravel road, 
the soft tissues of my eye detect
a snake curling around a tree
branch. Because I am here
each of these things has a name. 
 
1
 
The night before their youngest child is born, a man and woman watch Oliver Twist (1948), name their only son Oliver. The family rejoices and for several years indulge their newest member, even though they are industrious refugees who previously celebrated nothing, even though they also have two daughters.
 
The eldest daughter resembles her brother until she wakes up one morning from a dream in which he was a tyrant. Soon after, her hips widen, one lone hair grows in her armpit. Sometimes the daughter feels like a son and sometimes the son feels like a shadow—like hosiery, alienable—he says to his first grade teacher: “You can’t draw inside the body. So why try to draw what’s inside the body at all?”
 
2
 
 If one has no brother, then one used to have a brother. There is, you see, no shortage of gain and loss.
 
Let’s admit without embellishment what we do with each other. When the daughter begins to walk, it is apparent that she ambles pigeon-toed. A doctor tells her alarmed parents that no surgery is needed, just some rollerskating. Each day after work, the father helps his daughter stay upright on her skates.
 
If you have a father, then you also have a son.
 
A child has difficulty weaning from nursing bottle to glass of milk. Concise in her expression of impatience, the mother pours a gallon of milk over the girl’s head.
 
A tiger came across a donkey and having never seen a donkey before, mistook it for a god.
 
After everyone has gone to bed, an eldest child hoists her younger brother over her shoulders, then a sheet over his shoulders, and they sway as one into the middle sister’s room.
 
Who is weak and who is weaker and what does relativity have to do with it?
 
3
 
Let me tell you a story about refugees. A mother and her dead son sit in the back seat of his car. It’s intact, in their garage, and he is buckled in; she brushes the hair behind his ear. This is the old country and this is the new country and the air in the car is the checkpoint between them.
 
Let me tell you a story about seat belts. While driving her children to the local pool, a mother enumerates to her children their failures. There was a mother, she says, who put her children in a car, sewing their seat belts so they couldn’t unbuckle them, who drove them off a seaside cliff.
 
A boy on a unicycle goes round and round a lighthouse, dodging tourists, ridicule, and awe. He doesn’t go up, he doesn’t fall down.
 
Son, says the mother, meaning child not her husband. Son, says the father, whose name is Son. Sister, says the son, lying in a coffin. To hell with family, says the rest of the family.
 
4
 
A brother is a brother when he has at least one sibling. The brother believes he is not a brother but one in name only.
 
When the brother meets a couple his parents’ age, he takes the time to tell them he’s an only child and an orphan. The three of them agree that one must not be without family, that there must be at least two in a family, that three is even better. They embrace and the couple encourages the brother, the brother waiting for the other shoe to drop. Whose shoe? His or the couple’s?
 
Five pairs of shoes dangle from the pole of a traffic light. Over time, birds make a nest in each hollow, each separate space.
 
Put yourself in someone else’s bird nest.
 
5
 
“Your hat is Mexican ... ?” asks a sailor in Côte d’Azur. “No, it’s Moroccan.” “Are you from Japan?” asks a Moroccan shopkeeper in Marseille. “No, I’m American.”
 
Is belonging and fulfillment possible without family? No. Is it possible with family? No.
 
You cannot connect if you keep answering no. You cannot keep your brother alive if you keep your mouth shut. You cannot keep your brother alive.
 
At camp, some counselors take the kids on an excursion into the woods, leading them in a game of hide-and-seek. One boy, a deaf child who was also going blind, hid so well that they couldn’t find him and he didn’t find his way back. He had done everything right—
 
Nabokov says, “The lost glove is happy.”
 
Is the lost brother happy?
 
6
 
A man lies in an open grave after a body is taken out of it. This practice is said to lengthen life expectancy. The brother imagines his bed is a nest in which his body is removed.
 
There’s a story about a man galloping by another man who asks, “Where are you going?” “Ask my hearse,” says the man.
 
“I was never lost in the jungle,” says a father, “just looking for a way out.”

This life & no other. The flesh so innocent it walks along
The road, believing it, & ceases to be ours.
 
We’re fate carrying a blown-out bicycle tire in one hand,
 
Flesh that has stepped out of its flesh,
Always ahead of ourselves, leaving the body behind us on the road.
 
                        *
 
Zampanò, what happens next? The clown is dead.
You still break chains across your chest though your heart’s not in it,
Your audience is just two kids, & already there is
 
Snow in little crusted ridges, snow glazing cart tracks & furrows
Where you rest. And then what happens?
 
One day you get an earache. One day you can’t breathe.
You notice the old nurse wears a girdle as she bends over you,
 
You remember the smell of Spanish rice from childhood,
An orphanage with scuffed linoleum on its floors.
 
You sit up suddenly, without knowing you have.
Your eyes are wide. You are stepping out of the flesh,
Because it now belongs to Zampanò, the Great.
 
Zampanò, I can’t do all the talking for you. I can’t go with you
Anymore. What happens next?
 
                        *
 
“Always what happens next, & then what happens after that.
It’s like you think we’re in a book for children. What happens next?
What does it look like is going to happen? It’s a carnival.
 
It happens on the outskirts of a city made of light & distance.
And well, it’s just my own opinion, but…I think
It’s a pretty poor excuse for a carnival, torn tents, everything
 
Worn out. But I guess it has to go on anyhow. And I guess
 
Death will blow his little fucking trumpet.”

To learn which side you’re on
you pick someone to follow
through the city streets
then see how far you’ll go.
If you enter the foyer, oy vey,
then you are on our side.
If you go into the boudoir,
that far, you are on the side
of the enemy. If you board
the plane, you might find
yourself a red name on a
black list. If you feel only
a terror of the domestic
but not a terroir foreign,
they have a remedy for that,
but it can only be prescribed
if you were wed in a way
their instruments can detect
and if you have never suffered
from a similar terror before.
They administrate analogy but
we only want you to show us,
through a stashpile of choices
and the small acts you perform
each day, which side you are on.
Till the earth. Kill the earth.
Swallow scoops of wet dirt.
Which side are you on?

There are 24 synonyms for the word envy.
And although one of them is hatred and one of them is lusting
 
no one envies me.
 
If I could just make it to morning without selling myself
 
one day I might have some land
beyond the ficus pot
 
whose heart leaves leak their poison
inside this slummy garage
 
where I sleep daytimes
in a city I’m sure I’ve mentioned before.
 
I am furious for answers
inside the book of words I stole from a stranger’s back pocket.
 
You see, through the years when everyone is dying
I remain clean.
 
That's why I believe there could be a God.
 
There are 5 synonyms for the word redemption.
and 46 for fear.
 
One of them is chickenheartedness
and another is awe.
 
Only my body is for sale.

He would laugh a laugh almost of dis-
belief, sometimes, during the months
he was leaving me, before anyone knew, there was a
lightness in his laugh, a reprieve.  I asked him
to go with me to someone to help us
do this with less horror and shock,
he could not -- and it was irrevocable, still,
my vision of him as a kind man, of his
body as the body of a gentleman,
gentryman who would always keep
his word to another gentryman,
I could not dare to know he was not
extra good, magic good,
I could not afford in my moral purse
to know this man -- whose story, then, was joy
and breakthrough at last.  I did not so much
swallow it as promulgate
and prorogate, conceive and gestate,
I’d always wanted to be married to someone extra-
special, and so I was, because
I said I was, so it was someone extra-
special tearing the home, room
from room, in quiet non-unsmilingness.
And then in the months that followed his departure
I dreamed by the window, I drifted, a diver
beside the empty pool she had seen
as full.  And I went a little crazy, and started
multiplying -- say twice a week, and
once or twice a day in August,
for thirty-two years, and each time
five, or seven, or what, makes how many
hundred thousand orgasms with this
gentleman I did not know, who,
maybe, knew me better than I knew
myself, knew my greed and my
arithmetic.  And at last a workaday
god of love came, and put
her palm on my forehead, and said, Go
lie down, I’ll do your bathrooms tonight
along of mine, you poor spoiled creature.

Are you happy? Tell me what you’re thinking. You blink when you speak. That’s your tell. Everyone has a tell. Sitting in the red chair. In the corner of the family room which is not really a family room but a basement. The king sits in his basement throne. Red as a mouth. The whole room is a sham. It smells of the bleach I used to get mold spots off the wall. Behind the red chair. The wall looks as if I’ve taken an eraser to it. Tiny pencil points of mold remain. You’ve taken up smoking. You smell like an ashtray. That’s your tell. I can tell. I’m losing weight. I can’t eat. Hard time sleeping. Are you happy? I ask the obvious questions. That’s my tell. I’m not happy. That’s an understatement. We’ve only scrubbed the surface of my unhappiness. I’m sitting across from you sitting in the red chair, thinking how did we get here? Tell me how we got here. We walked down the stairs to the basement. Stop lying. It makes us look like fools. I don’t want to be foolish. That’s my tell. What about this new life of yours. Are you still with her? Tell me more about this authentic life you want to lead. I’m going to fumigate that red chair. Or burn it. If you were to die tomorrow, I’d show up at your funeral wearing a red Microfiber dress. You’re blinking again. What’s left to say? I can see it in your pencil point eyes. King of the Basement. Tell me again what it means to live an authentic life.

She charges her ankle bracelet // from the kitchen chair
            & Sunflowers in the white wallpaper [begin to wilt].
 
I wilt with them // before my sister // & her probation
            Officer [who comes over to the house unannounced].
 
Just as we are // preparing dinner // & what are we supposed to
            Do now. Cook for him?! Invite him to eat with us??
 
 
 
I am hacking the heads [from broccoli stems] & pretending
            His body is spread across the cutting board. [Ugh].
 
This officer keeps talking nonsense & nudging his eyes around
            The apartment. Looking for—drugs, alcohol
 
Alchemy. My sister waits for him to leave & then begins to rant.
            Ramble about // her childhood // & how she used to be
 
[Before house arrest]. The confines of these plastered walls
            & Her monitored route to work // where
 
Every corner has a cop [coddling a liquor store]. Protecting their
            Notion of freedom. // My neighborhood eats fear.
 
 
                       
Mothers are getting // handcuffed & harassed. Homes are being
            Crushed [like cigarette butts]. Everyone I know
 
Hates the racist police & wants a revolution. // But we seldom
            Aim the gun... Have you heard // how the bullets
 
Sing their anthem // throughout the body?? // It sounds like
            God shutting the door— Bang. Bang.
 
 
                       
When it’s dinnertime in heaven [& your officer’s knocking]
            Ignore him sister— let the door bruise.
 
[Let the bears devour our enemies]. We have no obligation
            To open // ourselves // for those who do us harm.

Before I changed my mother
for the first time
she asked me to call the pharmacy
thinking the woman
always dressed in the store’s dark
blue could come spare us.
I said: Ma we knew this was coming.
Then call Kim, she says,
but her friend Kim is wearing
an apron and walking circles
in a restaurant with a coffee pot
and won’t be able to help
with the necessaries.
Kim is all of us—
living with our own concerns,
conquered by adulthood,
love playing the part
of a winter coat lost
in the immensity. Kim
and the woman who puts
the pills in the bottle,
and all my old high-school
friends working, unable to stay
late around the bonfire. The nurses
had schedules and uniforms.
My mother’s bed was in the center
of the living room. Her morphine,
a viscous blue liquid I dropped
on her tongue. In the evenings,
Billie Holiday eased herself
out of the speakers and then sat
her voice down quietly
in the lamplight. I wanted
the nurses, regardless
of gender or age, to hold me
in the dark, to lie with me
on a bed of forgetfulness.
Many of them said:
It’s okay. She did it for you,
now you can return the favor.
It’s the same. But one nurse said:
It is not the same.

This road has surely paid for itself by now,
but let’s toss some more bullets in the bucket.
 
Clipped bodies pile up, obscuring the plazas
where we toss our spent bullets in the bucket.
 
Roll down the window. Eye our distant monuments
to war. In the foreground, let new killings blur.
 
Did Eisenhower foresee—paving roads for our heavy
armor’s movement—this interstate exchange of fire?
 
This news again breaks against our windshields
and we’ll toss still-warm bullets in the bucket.
 
The slugs sink over the blood-brimming lip,
burying names that line the bottom of the bucket.

In the nursing home in Havana I can’t help but think
            of my mother who would be 91
as I take each old woman’s hand and say “Hola,”
            or “buenes tardes,” and I notice one lady
who is sitting off to the side with a look that says,
            “No one is going to say hello to me,”
so I walk over and take her hand, and she sits up
            and kisses me on the cheek, a hard peck
just like the kamikaze kisses of my mother,
            and through my tears I hear her say,
“You’re weak like your daddy,” and I am weak,
            because I still miss her so much
after five years, and I kiss the woman’s cheek
            and I want to take her home with me
but we don’t even speak the same language,
            which you could have said about me
and my own mother, and all these women in Havana
            have raised better daughters than I was,
and I feel like the creatures in Roberto Fabelo’s
            drawings, a woman with wings, yes,
but with the head of a bird, and a couple of nights
            before we saw the Buena Vista
Social Club, and the emcee said at the start
            of the evening, “Here we are killing
sadness,” and the music did take the sting
            out of the night, and I'm thinking of this
when we go to the cemetery and see the tomb
            of Amelia Goyri, who died in child birth
and was buried with her son between her legs,
            whose husband came every day
with flowers, and two years later when his own
            father died, and the tomb was opened,
he begged to have his wife’s coffin unsealed
            so he could see his beloved once again,
and when they pulled back the lid the child
            was in his mother’s arms. A miracle?
Who knows, but hundreds of plaques surround
            the tomb in gratitude for miraculous
births, restored eyesight, dissolved cancers,
            and the man who takes care of the site
says he has seen men step out of wheelchairs
            and women throw away crutches,
and on top of the tomb a marble woman
            is holding a child, and a living woman
with bright red hair shuffles up to the statue,
            touches the baby’s bottom, and backs
away from the tomb praying for her own
            miracle, and I say a prayer
for my mother whose hard kisses were so sweet
            and ask her to let me tell her story
as I know it, and when I stand near her grave
            in December on an island in the Pacific
I will thank her again for the hard kiss she sent
            special delivery through the little grandma
in the rest home in Havana, Cuba, another island
            in the middle of a great sea.

Too rowdy for the hallowed
galleries      Too
      taciturn
for the slaughters    
      Too toothsome
for daughters   Too
      couth    to dig
what’s hip   Too blissful
      to moan with the crows Nose
too wide   too flat
      too peasant Too punch-
drunk Too much muscle
      in the jaw   Too pauper Too
pansy for gangsters Not gook
      enough                    Not book-
ish enough for the bland man
      standing at
the gate   Check Too     lummox 
      to scuffle Too       late Too slow
for stoners    Too swift
      for varsity
track Too  slacker Too
      slant-eyed        Too brave
to bounce Too wistful
      Too bird-like
(Too many birds
      to begin with!)   Check Too
fobbish       Too fleeting
      First
I’m this     then
      suddenly I’m that   Too
many windows
      to see into Too many skulls
to bust   Too bright
      for my own good Too fugitive     
Too  gruesome Too green Not        
      enough     crooning         off -
key         out of            
      time Clocked Check
the pocket Too
      solemn Too here Too
there Too queer
      In this era     every world I enter
checks a passport      And
      every room   is a world    Every crime
       a virtue              Every hunger
      sin Too corny Too            thick-lipped
and wicked-dicked
      Too horny
Too funky
      in the armpits and
ass-crack Check! Too prayerful
      Even kneeling
too potty-
      mouthed Too much
      hops for the scrubs
Not enough bunnies
      for the big-boy
courts Not lion but
      monkey Too dark
Too pissed
Too joyful Too
      prone to exuberance
and fits of mad
      dancing Too
b-boy Not Boogie-Down
      enough which is
to say too Jersey Not
      Philly enough      which is to say
too much New York Too
      Knickerbocker
Too giant Too thick
      in the cock Too
rooster Too rueful Too rich
      for the poor house
too poor for the White
      house Too wild
Too stylin Too
      much decibels
for the downstairs
      neighbor Too quick
with the tongue Not enough 
      laughing Too fast
with the hands Not
      thief enough Not genius
enough Too dim-
      witted Too
wrathful Catholic
      Too cautious Too taut-
o-logical Not
      begotten enough Not
sorry   Not on my knees
once more      Too doggish
Too fishy Too much
      water Not enough
meat Too tough
      Too easy to ravage 
Too savage Too loose
      in the hips Too smooth
Too      mutable Too Abel 
      Too Cain Too groovy
to be so goddamned
      grave Too tune-less
for conservatory Too con-
      servative Too
straight Too twisted
      Too hammered
Too screwed
      Too lifted Too bruja
      Too blessed          Too blasphemed
on the verge of a third millennium
where everyone        I profess                                
      to love is inclined to the same Amen
Hallelujah Yes                    
      I find I        have agreed I find it all
      so        agreeable     
 
                 I begin to feel some kind of way
      I feel      a way       
      This is what dissent is:   to feel
away                  from myself    
to travel a distance by feeling
to make some   ground by feeling And then:                              
      whoso loves us      maps us out
      which is to say:    Love
is a feeling      away
      Love is a dissent
(a vexation         as in the Latin
vectus       which suggests    a carriage
      a vehicle)
      for Love is a repertoire
of migrations                         And whomever you love
is an argument      an agony
a version of you                      
and I      a version of my Beloved               
One self      multiplies and one expands
      and another         contracts into pity
into its exquisite miseries and shame
           the self     the size of a fly
      or just      one of its thousands of eyes Too
      small Not
even molecular
      and sometimes
I have migrated
far away enough from myself
      I’m alone
And even loneliness hasn’t killed me
Even solitude
      has kept me Even my apartness:
a gestation for a miracle       by which
      I must simply mean        a kind of looking
                 Not worship          Not muttering
in disbelief     but this week-old sheet of ice and snow
on a bright roof     beginning to melt in March
      gathering into fine streams
that split         and join again toward
      a gutter’s ragged edge
where             this first liquid bead hangs
scintillating    at the brink
              dilating like one utterly gleaming  eye
through which you can see the vast
      empty destination           of a psalm
then dozens of such small glassy droplets follow
      They pause          at their limit
      then fall         
one      by one            in cascading angles 
      all these glistening
hesitations now that collect finally
      in a small          shallow pool        
clear to last summer’s muck   below my ledge      Spring
is coming       you
      idiot    You could sip
from all those eyes    Too
      many Too    thirsty
And never too            old
      for damnation The cup
from which you drink
      is bitter (Right
I’m talking
      to myself again) Too gro-
tesque Too tramp    for sweetness Too
      slapstick All the boats
      washed
into the streets
      by tropic floods     
All the ribs of every
      hand-hewn hull crushed Too
frail Too beggar
      for touch  Today
there are only three
of me    to go around            Too
      archipelagic         atoll
Austronesian Too
      coastal           Too
ghastly    In advance
      of dying    alert Too
dagger Too keen      
      Too slick Too
trickster
      with my several
hundred ears —      
      Too idle  Check!
Too chill Too
      bovine     Come
kiss me    Check! Two
      good hooves one
good knee      Check
      beneath flow      
Check under-
      ground     This is what
water sounds like
      at the end
of winter
      at the edge
of a city to which
      I’ve been admitted
on condition
      of my loyalty
to several
      hierarchies
of flags      Check
      Sorrow          Check yourself
for sorrow      No noose
      today     The rope’s
for climbing
      Not too high
now        Too brave
      Too nimble Too
agile for perpetual
      mourning       I once
set fire 
      to a whole piano
in my mother’s yard
      Mother dead        Check
Too woeful Too manly
Too handsome for ransom
Too boastful    Too dark
      to spark a J or light
a candle Too devout
      Too distracted
by the little spines
      of a fish       I’ve done
some killing
      Someone has done
some killing
      on my behalf
I’ve done some
      living Too
much living
      In this country
the dream
      is the living
And for some
      the living
is too much

The radio clicks on—it’s poor swollen America,
Up already and busy selling the exhausting obligation
Of happiness while intermittently debating whether or not
A man who kills fifty people in five minutes
With an automatic weapon he has bought for the purpose
Is mentally ill. Or a terrorist. Or if terrorists
Are mentally ill. Because if killing large numbers of people
With sophisticated weapons is a sign of sickness—
You might want to begin with fire, our early ancestors
Drawn to the warmth of it—from lightning,
Must have been, the great booming flashes of it
From the sky, the tree shriveled and sizzling,
Must have been, an awful power, the odor
Of ozone a god’s breath; or grass fires,
The wind whipping them, the animals stampeding,
Furious, driving hard on their haunches from the terror
Of it, so that to fashion some campfire of burning wood,
Old logs, must have felt like feeding on the crumbs
Of the god’s power and they would tell the story
Of Prometheus the thief, and the eagle that feasted
On his liver, told it around a campfire, must have been,
And then—centuries, millennia—some tribe
Of meticulous gatherers, some medicine woman,
Or craftsman of metal discovered some sands that,
Tossed into the fire, burned blue or flared green,
So simple the children could do it, must have been,
Or some soft stone rubbed to a powder that tossed
Into the fire gave off a white phosphorescent glow.
The word for chemistry from a Greek—some say Arabic—
Stem associated with metal work. But it was in China
Two thousand years ago that fireworks were invented—
Fire and mineral in a confined space to produce power—
They knew already about the power of fire and water
And the power of steam: 100 BC, Julius Caesar’s day.
In Alexandria, a Greek mathematician produced
A steam-powered turbine engine. Contain, explode.
“The earliest depiction of a gunpowder weapon
Is the illustration of a fire-lance on a mid-12th-century
Silk banner from Dunhuang.” Silk and the silk road.
First Arab guns in the early fourteenth century. The English
Used cannons and a siege gun at Calais in 1346.
Cerigna, 1503: the first battle won by the power of rifles
When Spanish “arquebusiers” cut down Swiss pikemen
And French cavalry in a battle in southern Italy.
(Explosions of blood and smoke, lead balls tearing open
The flesh of horses and young men, peasants mostly,
Farm boys recruited to the armies of their feudal overlords.)
How did guns come to North America? 2014,
A headline: DIVERS DISCOVER THE SANTA MARIA
One of the ship’s Lombard cannons may have been stolen
By salvage pirates off the Haitian reef where it had sunk.
And Cortes took Mexico with 600 men, 17 horses, 12 cannons.
And LaSalle, 1679, constructed a seven-cannon barque,
Le Griffon, and fired his cannons upon first entering the continent’s
Interior. The sky darkened by the terror of the birds.
In the dream time, they are still rising, swarming,
Darkening the sky, the chorus of their cries sharpening
As the echo of that first astounding explosion shimmers
On the waters, the crew blinking at the wind of their wings.
Springfield Arsenal, 1777. Rock Island Arsenal, 1862.
The original Henry rifle: a sixteen shot .44 caliber rimfire
Lever-action, breech-loading rifle patented—it was an age
Of tinkerers—by one Benjamin Tyler Henry in 1860,
Just in time for the Civil War. Confederate casualties
In battle: about 95,000. Union casualties in battle:
About 110,000. Contain, explode. They were throwing
Sand into the fire, a blue flare, an incandescent green.
The Maxim machine gun, 1914, 400-600 small caliber rounds
Per minute. The deaths in combat, all sides, 1914-1918
Was 8,042,189. Someone was counting. Must have been.
They could send things whistling into the air by boiling water.
The children around the fire must have shrieked with delight
1920: Iraq, the peoples of that place were “restive,”
Under British rule and the young Winston Churchill
Invented the new policy of “aerial policing,” which amounted,
Sources say, to bombing civilians and then pacifying them
With ground troops. Which led to the tactic of terrorizing civilian
Populations in World War II. Total casualties in that war,
Worldwide: soldiers, 21 million; civilians, 27 million.
They were throwing sand into the fire. The ancestor who stole
Lightning from the sky had his guts eaten by an eagle.
Spread-eagled on a rock, the great bird feasting.
They are wondering if he is a terrorist or mentally ill.
London, Dresden. Berlin. Hiroshima, Nagasaki.
The casualties difficult to estimate. Hiroshima:
66,000 dead, 70,000 injured. In a minute. Nagasaki:
39,000 dead, 25,000 injured . There were more people killed,
100,000, in more terrifying fashion in the firebombing
Of Tokyo. Two arms races after the ashes settled.
The other industrial countries couldn’t get there
Fast enough. Contain, burn. One scramble was
For the rocket that delivers the explosion that burns humans
By the tens of thousands and poisons the earth in the process.
They were wondering if the terrorist was crazy. If he was
A terrorist, maybe he was just unhappy. The other
Challenge afterwards was how to construct machine guns
A man or a boy could carry: lightweight, compact, easy to assemble.
First a Russian sergeant, a Kalashnikov, clever with guns
Built one on a German model. Now the heavy machine gun,
The weapon of European imperialism through which
A few men trained in gunnery could slaughter native armies
In Africa and India and the mountains of Afghanistan,
Became “a portable weapon a child can operate.”
The equalizer. So the undergunned Vietnamese insurgents
Fought off the greatest army in the world. So the Afghans
Fought off the Soviet army using Kalashnikovs the CIA
Provided to them. They were throwing powders in the fire
And dancing. Children’s armies in Africa toting AK-47s
That fire thirty rounds a minute. A round is a bullet.
An estimated 500 million firearms on the earth.
100 million of them are Kalashnikov-style semi-automatics.
They were dancing in Orlando, in a club. Spring night.
Gay Pride. The relation of the total casualties to the history
Of the weapon that sent exploded metal into their bodies—
30 rounds a minute, or 40, is a beautifully made instrument,
And in America you can buy it anywhere—and into the history
Of the shaming culture that produced the idea of Gay Pride—
They were mostly young men, they were dancing in a club,
A spring night. The radio clicks on. Green fire. Blue fire.
The immense flocks of terrified birds still rising
In wave after wave above the waters in the dream time.
Crying out sharply. As the French ship breasted the vast interior
Of the new land. America. A radio clicks on. The Arabs,
A commentator is saying, require a heavy hand. Dancing.

In the beginning, the ending was beautiful.
Early spring everywhere, the trees furred
pink and white, lawns the sharp green
that meant new. The sky so blue it looked
manufactured. Robins. We’d heard
the cherry blossoms wouldn’t blossom
this year, but what was one epic blooming
when even the desert was an explosion
of verbena? When bobcats slinked through
primroses. When coyotes slept deep in orange
poppies. One New Year’s Day we woke
to daffodils, wisteria, onion grass wafting
through the open windows. Near the end,
we were eyeletted. We were cottoned.
We were sundressed and barefoot. At least
it’s starting gentle, we said. An absurd comfort,
we knew, a placebo. But we were built like that.
Built to say at least. Built to reach for the heat
of skin on skin even when we were already hot,
built to love the purpling desert in the twilight,
built to marvel over the pink bursting dogwoods,
to hold tight to every pleasure even as we
rocked together toward the graying, even as
we held each other, warmth to warmth,
and said sorry, I’m sorry, I’m so sorry while petals
sifted softly to the ground all around us.

BECAUSE I COME FROM A LACK OF KNOWLEDGE
of the value of life that in the city under this blank page wilts
without a word, without honor, in the conflict of the rose
the red of it in my hand blackening to crust, because
 
I am afraid I will never outrun
 
this ignorance glittering like a mouth, hatchet as the sky I have dragged from border to border, its language pointing
 
like a conspiracy, a faucet I am too depressed to get
up and screw shut, to make skin interpret the cold dark floors
where the mouths are strewn, their collective weight unraveled
           to private eternities
 
at the end of the employment contract
at the melodies of the earthquake, because
 
I am a good performer of value I have never seen meted out
 
in justice to complete the charts, to poison the rivers and round out the bones in the plumbing system, I am so afraid I will keep stumbling
on the white of the rose in the forehead of my friend
who is warm now inside the precarious wood and stitched up tear                     ducts,
 
afraid the seams of my clothes will murmur like every woman
whose red and black blossomed in my hands, who like me was winter that stopped fogging the door of the center one day, except that I am
 
alive
 
below the night whose face is the back of God, what Moses
accepted in lieu of the promised land the way we accepted
insurance money for the house after cancer made roses
 
of my father, who offered and offered his bonebread
in the hush of the telephone and hair that carpeted my wedding day
in this Hollywood country of pines, of lines of chitin marching
 
toward the legalized edges of our lives, where surfaces to which waste           clings are
 
stacked and the core of the apple and spines of rosemary are
 
left, alive
and what is language for if not to depress the tongue, to see                                  behind it
 
the developments glowing green with effort, as in
please do not throw us into the fire,
do not make us lick our babies in the shit-infected waters,
do not cut away
 
the hoods of pleasure and hope from our eyes, I know
something of development because I held my son
inside me for longer than a mother’s time, held
him like a rag over my eyes in the middle of the Christ powered bridge            and crows whipping
 
through the prayers of the marked down,
the discounted,
the inventories ready to tip from the shoulders of the harbor,
 
so many I have desired without value because how may I assist
sounds like
 
how may I exist
 
so I that might woo the doctor when my lungs overflow with the                         melting of the iron livers
of capital and the mountains I dreamed in my youth,
of galloping lights and the shredded roses of sunrise, a job
I can snap and bend to with a smile, under
the blond of the searchlight,
because my fate is to be autonomous unlike
 
the chitinous bodies I do not think twice about wiping away
with a paper towel, sometimes the reds of my fingers,
which as they kill
 
remind me of pews cracking with human salt, the gathering of it when              value runs out,
 
so that when a man lay on top of my throat with his whole factory,
fingernails pressing into the soft under my eyes, I did not think
it strange
or particularly wrong
 
or that I might miss this life by the sea of fathers who disappear before  they can be forgiven, and how I was not
terrorized by whatever the mouth had dragged up from the trenches                    then, the seaweed
 
jazzing its insides and the horse flesh purpling its gums, the trains crossing its dark cunt and the unwashed men inside
holding their hands out from their chests, reciting speeches composed under awnings of ice for half a burger,
 
a one-way ticket to the north side,
 
though a cigarette would be best,
would be best of all so I smoke
in an age when breathing is self-administered medicine,
proof of revolutionary
 
care for oneself,
I am not fooled,
 
I have seen breath refuse to leave the body and turn the body
to marble, I have seen I can do this
leave a man shaking his infant at the sun, that that mouth which is
 
really a poem cannot save anyone’s life, especially
 
your own if you are honest,
and if I am honest,
another poet is grist for the locusts and the whole world is a whole world, the subjects of my love are
 
desiccated, repudiated, expectorated into the jars in which their petals harden into fragrance that are made to spill
again and again along the unlabeled
 
shelves of my blood, waking
 
metal whose sadness produced this alimony of rust, this sunlight
that strikes my knuckles like a ruler as though it were
my mother, who never and always
 
meant to say, live
 
live
 
until you have paid the price.

birthright is a jester sans serif and comic
its gesturing arms track marks traveling
like a shuddering train covered in snow
arteries shooting up spits of smoke
         a man is an utterance of his father
never one but two             having a son
is the same as breaking into a house
that you own          thus, I implore you to
bite the robbing hand    leave the clock’s
second arm stuck       press control + shift
on the piano’s back       dark painted nails
dug into ivory skin          a baby grand
in a boarded up jazz club   holding down
the fort of a body off key     hold me down
come winter when the salt starts talking white
on the pavement’s black matter      clean cut
issues burning the tires’ indented heads
grooves of wounds worn and now balding
        have the trees been recording us all along
the leaves on audio playback      the memory
of their sound sewn onto wind gone ‘til Spring
  the engine in the cloud won’t let it go
needing proof of what happened     a cassette tape
come unwound  our three year old on the floor
with a grin    streams of black ink all around him
us in stitches at the mess of our first mixtape
“Dead Man Walking” on repeat in the living room
I have flown a kite once in my life (with my Dad)
but critics tend to whine about what they don’t get  
bkspace       this poem is not about programming
computers or apples         this poem is about horses
hens balking outside Robert Frost’s barn door        
a pint of Hennessy still resting on his bedside table
Perchance is a rapper based just outside of Derry
a suburb of Chicago           the EP “Conversate”
is chopped and screwed Emerson with six tracks
comprised of one hit and the rest mostly filler
a soundtrack long enough to last the duration of
Christmas dinner      up to the point at which
your Grandfather (coming ‘round for the second
time)                     pushes back from the table
his chair a metaphor for a mouth on all fours

1.
Mother tells me a bird is trying to kill her. I tighten. Memory her ticking eye, opening and closing. Snap on a dress, shell of her breath swallowing the phone. (Pitch.) The bird sings, kills her softly, minutely.
 
Now my mother is trilling loudly, high with starling’s call.
 
2.
Only at night do I know her solitude, halo of infomercials, her cramping cool and yellow leg, and somewhere outside, her husband, the unstruck bell of morning birds.
 
3.
I try to ask her where she is.
 
Your father took the car when I had an accident; I never drove again. The only place I can’t hear it is the downstairs bathroom; I’ve been here for a week. House of her body, animal in grief. I carry my mother on my shoulder, cage her voice against my cheek, walk her near-confessions through my home—una stanza all’altra—her single room closing in. Outside my window: Juárez burns. Her ticking eye must be fluttering already, eye’s lid of feathers bobbing to shadow, and it’s killing me: I can’t sleep: and when I wake, it’s at the window. Her tiles creased with bleach.
 
I hide my love for birds, and streets.
 
4.
Nest of my mother’s hands:
 
shifting and slipping to signs, to an unstruck slap, and once, the vortex
of a hundred beetles.
 
5.
I wake to sense a brushing on my neck.
 
6.
Middle nights she braced her stomach around my knees, whispering, shh, it’s me, it’s Mama, so I wouldn’t kick—knew to name her weight so I’d understand it wasn’t my father’s growing shape. Falling
 
     wakes: shift
 
     from the cool center of water, rippling, to the point at which ice
 
cracks. He came home from work unbuckled, snaked his belt to chill the air, his teeth opaque. Mother helped him hold her children onto the bed.
 
After, she entered
 
     our room, clicking like starling, her hands viscous with Vicks, our          welts rising, eyelashes glazing cotton. Moonlight hummed, her                throat
 
     vibrating. The medical smell of my mother’s wrists.
 
7.
Susan Wood asks if grief were a bird, and my microwave dings.
 
     Seven men fall to their knees, past the wall, across the border.
 
     My mouth clot with iron.
 
Starlings are aggressive; they have been seen evicting bluebirds, kibitzing with blackbirds, are fierce protectors of their young. Shakespeare’s Hotspur imagined this creature mimicking Mortimer, Mortimer!, beak whistling a man’s name to keep his anger still in motion, so anglophile near-ornithologists unfold 100 starlings across the ocean into Central Park—into the late 19th century, the sky splattered with calling and leaving.
 
Father comes too late at the doorknob, my mother’s ear hinging to hear his direction.
 
8.
I buy her a plastic owl on Amazon.com.
 
                                             It’s solar-powered, neck pivots, eyes glow.
 
The adult in me no longer wants to love. Like this. But I remember the
prayer of her armpit on my shoulder, her breasts crescent on my nascent own, the smell of carpet and carrying her cramped and dragging legs. Mortimer!—, my mother—
 
                                             her voice on the phone sobbing my name
keeps my anger still in motion, and I click for priority ship.
 
9.
I come home from work and my husband’s crying. The sky louvered
with smoke. He holds one of our chickens, cave of her throat slipped from the dog’s mouth. Her eye. Glossy as moon.
 
     Her feathers rise and fall.
 
          El Diario: Marcan siete asesinatos el fin de semana, and
 
     I curl my palm around her neck.
 
10.
The next day her voice is high. She’s stroking the carved plastic crown
from the box.
 
Gifted. Gratitude. (We’re all so grateful to be alive.)
 
     I tell her to spear the fake owl next to the weeping willow, let its               head quiver with each rotation. I clink ice inside my glass, cradle my      mother hot room to room.
 
11.
Tile edges her sobbing.
 
She wants to know where my father is.
 
(Accordion: my knuckles.) I remember the floor, fibers floating the hallway, the uneven pitch of her whines, my father’s crackling breath.
 
But the bird continues to sing. I’m sorry, I say, I’m sorry.
 
Memories of waking:
 
     Clouds creamy with snow.
 
     Startling black flight from the magnolia—
 
     Talcum powder winged from my mother’s hands. And the sound of a
     piano hinge, the unplayed key.
 
Before my mother hobbles, she counts, necessary ritual to leave a room: each light switch whipping on and off, 13 times. She’s resigned herself from stairs. Grief, and in Arkansas, a dead dark sea of birds.
 
12.
We mark the edge of one of many circles. I try to tell my husband about my mother’s starling. He grips my hand, clamps in my sweat. I no longer want to listen. We’re on the backyard swing. We rock to the dying light. From an open window a phone rings, crying its bird-like cymbals. My mother’s hair zeroes the sky above us, our pores tingling. His other hand traces the hard vertebrae of my nape.
 
13.
What I want is for her roving eye to keep still.
 
Instead I mimic her voice, my throat heaving with trill.

I LOVE THOSE WHO CAN WALK SLOW OVER GLASS AND STILL HOLD
all their blood. I want to lick their smooth arches.
My lover says he could do it if he wanted to,
 
It's all about weight displacement. He ruins
every illusion by staring at his own hands. I ruin
 
every illusion by threading it to hunger. When
Eric the Great was twelve, he ran away to earn
 
money for his family. He returned to his mother,
his pockets filled with coins, and said, Shake me,
 
I'm magic. So often our bodies betray us, just look
at our feet, how they point to what we desire.
 
Sometimes I don't look until I'm headed out
the door. I've got so much to do. Overgrown
 
boy. Tight smile. My father was always arriving
late, confirming his face in every window's reflection.
 
The wind that finds its way into this city
is the cruelest, the kind that searches for our
 
soft spots. Pulsing tender skulls. My mother
called to say, Go on and eat. I can't be late when
 
everything I reach for moves further back. The lake,
folding its skin. I only know that a mirror is silver
 
because I've seen one scuffed. All my spoons
are weak-necked, but I was wrong when I said
 
the most desperate noise was either silverware
clattering in a fast-pulled drawer, or a swing sets'
 
sharp chirp. Sometimes it's hard to know the built
from the grown. Sometimes it's our fault. The serinette
 
was created to teach canaries how to sing correctly.
And when my lover tells me I'm correct to love him,
 
I know the noise isn't metal at all. It's not the rattle
of coins, but the scrape of fingers picking them up.
 
As an adult, Eric the Great changed his name to Houdini
to honor Jean Robert-Houdin, who would open his palms
 
to the audience and say, Nothing here now—neither anything,
nor anybody, before pulling his wife from the ether.

Tell them not to go
to the banks alone.
 
Tell them where
they can drink
 
without watching
over shoulders.
 
Tell them drowning
is third on your list
 
of concerns.
First is lie down,
 
second,  come here.
Even the water
 
I was baptized in
isn’t safe.
 
I knew God
was a man
 
because he put              
a baby in Mary
 
without her
permission.

your murderers were the last
   to touch you in this world
    torpid song on repeat
     pulled down the
      rocky slope
        I hold the shirt you left behind
        the bottom was
        visible before the descent
        hours days months later
        your shirt is gone
        no I am wearing it
        covered in cuts
        layers of dust on my skin
        still confident in gravity
        still sliding down when
          up now feels
            too far
            away
 
 
 
a spider’s web is
made of digested
fly brains wings hairs
legs tears pheromones
flies attracting flies after death
   dissolving us into the endeavor of love
    hold me to your song it is delicious
     death attracting flies like life
      hear you one more time
       in middle of night
        tooth it open
        love all unloved
      parts without pause
   Dear Ghost flickering with
   flames that no longer hurt
   deflated lungs expanding
   YOU SAY They Can Only
      Burn A Faggot Once
 
 
           the spirit of
      your flowers is
my favorite shelter
we were in love is
               the main
                     thing
faintest green light in
tree pulls me forward
   whenever life is
   beautiful makes
   me think of you
   carry color of the
   forest to be with
   you to belong to
   this world with
   you to have what
   we have and that is it
       yes the present
       is between the
      past and future
      but is too radical
         to be called
         the middle
 
                               every
                              single
                            human
                         ambition
                  cultivated by
                  fear of death
               it is not failure
          but age you smell
I am often disgusted with
life here without you
          despondence
   growing sinister
the kind of fear when you
                don’t care if you
      scrape the car while
  leaving the parking lot
  before the police arrive
    today we give love the
       same abandonment
 
 
Dear Earth it is okay to not
roll the stone back uphill
we rent memory storage in the world you
left behind but Elizabeth still channels
the grandmothers for free
little wonder in this
dell of broken treaties
daisies bend under
our slightest breath
you did not answer
          after you died
                  it is when
                   I learned
                          to be
                       lonely
              everywhere
              between dreaming and crying
                     until it calcified
                            and fell
                                 off

Watch the squirrel clean its face
until its hands are your hands,
until the chemical energy of sunlight
is gentle as a kiss
on your cheek, don’t stop until
the senators inside you
go home to their creamed corn and televisions,
their partners and dogs, until
the two-way mirrors   
and oyster knives you hang from your optic nerves
like laundry
are taken by the wind, let it
uncurl your eyelashes,
let it carry you
in its pocket like a mint. It’s all true—
the weird sex thing, the yellow pills, how I climbed
myself like a tree. Basically anything
can hold itself hostage.
The question isn’t Why? but So?
Still, there are ways
of touching without bulldozing,
ways of washing a body
without making the person inside it
feel like a plate.
You don’t have to sympathize
with the teeth of chainsaws
if you don’t want to.
Where you go
when you enter a wormhole
is not important.

Until I was five I could only fall asleep holding my mother’s earlobe.  A single crocus can melt a snow bank.  On my desk I keep the jawbone of a deer. When I rub its three bleached teeth, it tells me secrets.  How many hes and shes must one wade through to find a you?  Funerals hum when they begin with a honeymoon story.  Every portmanteau should house a stash of love letters jealously guarded but never re-read.  Once on a high school tennis trip one of the Zabriskie sisters fell asleep on my shoulder.  After she woke, I apologized for days, never mentioning the wet spot she left on my shirt.  In the yearbook I can find her quick as saliva.  I need a new pillow, my niece announced, I don’t like the dreams inside my old one.  Some birthmarks migrate, some merely move.  When my friend’s fiancée dumped him, he headed for the hills—with pictures of her, with matches, with enough voodoo devotion to rub her ashes on his forehead like a warrior entering battle.  The parrot sari of courtship and passion, the white sari of mourning.  When my mother turned ninety, she said, My mind is like crumbly cheese.  She had lost the names of grandkids and presidents, but remembered to open her mouth for spice cake.  Grass, if you haven’t rolled in it for months, is green fire.  Warm rain: copacetic calm.  In Florence, where there is so much kissing in the streets, ciao means either hello or goodbye, depending which way you point your lips.

Faithless as the day
         is to the hour, I am
                moving into a new
 
body every second. Take. Bleat.
          Do this in severance of me
                 from me, in reverence of you as you
 
swoon me, cocoon me in untimely
         & iterant devotions. Body. Blood.
                           Man who thinks His flesh
 
transforms
        guilt into grace, without a trace of
                           lust for this never-lasting
 
life. Nictitating
       eyes that just won’t quit
                         strobing my face
 
back into my face. Lashes
       stroking the space between
                us, what will close, but not
 
like an image of promise encircling
          skin encircling bone, but will last only
                                              until last is another
 
sound that cannot be made
           sense of. I do
                    not worship the covenants
 
birth brought us into. This
         and this and bliss have
                no affection for each other,
 
even the rules of self
              love cannot fill them
                      with desire. What weds
 
be to be to will have
              been seems nothing
                       more than the double
 
death of forget-
              fulness and faith. Breath
                         being the only rhythm
 
still lacing loss
        to its opposite, I can say I have broken
                       no promise, no bread that is not bread.

The kind of awake that feels like exhaustion.
Sadness untended by tears.
The way the car engine doesn’t want to turn over,
so I’m always afraid I don’t get to leave.
 
She said, “yeah I fucked her but I always pull out.”
Said, “I go to Dreams with a suitcase.”
Wondered, “Has a side jawn ever opened you up?”
So I was always quoting her.
 
It’s the concrete weight of the place,
the overwhelming absurd guilt of it,
the hyper resilient laughter and love within it,
that demands more layers of meaning
 
than we’re taught to.
Like how I pretend I’m alone
when I don’t want to be alone.
How the days are shorter now,
and one good night
doesn’t promise another.
 
She reasoned, “Trust ourselves? That’s how we got here.”
 
Or how, every time I drive away,
I see the business sign offering
Confined Space Rescue
and wonder how many people call.
 
They’re just a few blocks from the jails,
an interpretation away from religion.

Aryans, Betty Crocker, Bettye Lavette,
Blowfish, briar bushes, Bubbas, Buckras,
Archie Bunkers, bullhorns, bullwhips, bullets,
All cancers kill me, car crashes, cavemen, chakras,
Crackers, discord, dissonance, doves, Elvis,
Ghosts, the grim reaper herself, a heart attack
While making love, hangmen, Hillbillies exist,
Lillies, Martha Stewarts, Mayflower maniacs,
Money grubbers, Gwen Brooks’ “The Mother,”
(My mother’s bipolar as bacon), pancakes kill me,
Phonies, dead roaches, big roaches & smaller
Roaches, the sheepish, snakes, all seven seas,
Snow avalanches, swansongs, sciatica, Killer
Wasps, yee-haws, you, now & then, disease.

Probably, ghosts are allergic to us. Our uproarious
Breathing & ruckus. Our eruptions, our disregard
For dust. Small worlds unwhirl in the corners of our homes
After death. Our warriors, weirdos, antiheros, our sirs,
Sires, our sighers, sidewinders & whiners, winos,
And wonders become dust. I know a few of the dead.
I remember my sister’s last hoorah.  I remember
The horror of her head on a pillow. For a long time
The numbers were balanced. The number alive equal
To the number in graves. After a very long time
The bones become dust again & the dust
After a long time becomes dirt & the dirt becomes soil
And the soil becomes grain again. This bitter earth is a song
Clogging the mouth before it is swallowed or spat out.

I pour a pinch of serious poison for you James
Earl Ray Dylann Roof I pour a punch of piss for you
George Zimmerman John Wilkes Booth Robert
Chambliss Thomas Edwin Blanton Jr Bobby Frank
Cherry Herman Frank Cash Jim Crow your name
Is a gate opening upon another gate I pour a punch
Of perils I pour a bunch of punches all over you
I pour unmerciful panic into your river I damn you
With the opposite of prayer Byron De La Beckwith
Roy Bryant  J.W. Milan Edgar Ray Killen Assassins
Love trumps power or blood to trump power
Beauty trumps power or blood to trump power
Justice trumps power or blood to trump power
The names alive are like the names in the graves

The earth of my nigga eyes are assassinated.
The deep well of my nigga throat is assassinated.
The tender bells of my nigga testicles are gone.
You assassinate the sound of our bullshit & blissfulness.
The bones managing the body’s business are cloaked
Until you assassinate my nigga flesh. The skin is replaced
By a cloak of fire. Sometimes it is river or rainwater
That cloaks the bones. Sometimes we lie on the roadside
In bushels of knotted roots, flowers & thorns until our body
Is found. You assassinate the smell of my breath, which is like
Smoke, milk, twilight, itself. You assassinate my tongue
Which is like the head of a turtle wearing my skull for a shell.
You assassinate my lovely legs & the muscular hook of my cock.
Still, I speak for the dead. You cannot assassinate my ghosts.

America, you just wanted change is all, a return
To the kind of awe experienced after beholding a reign
Of gold. A leader whose metallic narcissism is a reflection
Of your own. You share a fantasy with Trinidad
James, who said “Gold all in my chain, gold all in my ring,
Gold all in my watch” & if you know what I’m talking
About, your gold is the yellow of “Lemonade” by Gucci
Mane: “Yellow rims, yellow big booty, yellow bones,
Yellow Lambs, yellow MP's, yellow watch.” Like no  
Culture before us, we relate the way the descendants
Of the raped relate to the descendants of their rapists.
May your restlessness come at last to rest, constituents
Of Midas, I wish you the opposite of what Neruda said
Of lemons, may all the gold you touch burn, rot & rust.

I remember my sister’s last hoorah. She joined the black
People I've grown tired of losing. They were going upstairs
Together, all the dead from parts Of Florida, Ferguson,
Brooklyn, Charleston, Cleveland, Chicago, Baltimore,
Everywhere. Someone is prey in all of our encounters.
I am someone with a good memory & better imagination.
I know the names alive are like the names in graves.
Probably all of our encounters are existential Jambalaya.
Probably blindness has a chewed heart in its belly.
Probably, ghosts are allergic to the blindness you’ve hitched
Your wagon to. Because we are made of earth, don’t you
And I share a loss, sweet Assassin, aren’t you & I haunted,
Sweetness, Sweetness, Sweetness? Poor, tattered Heart,
Old, poisoned Heart, I’ve almost grown tired of talking to you.

Rilke ends his sonnet, “Archaic Torso Of Apollo” saying
“You must change your life.” James Wright ends “Lying
In A Hammock At William Duffy's Farm In Pine Island,
Minnesota” saying “I have wasted my life.” Ruth Stone ends
“A Moment” Saying “You do not want to repeat my life.”
A minute seed with a giant soul kicking inside it at the end
And beginning of life. After the opening scene where
A car bomb destroys the black detective’s family, there are
Several scenes of our hero at the edge of life. A shootout
In an African American Folk Museum, a shootout
In the middle of an interstate rest stop parking lot, a shootout
In a barn endangering the farm life. The life
That burns a hole through life, that leaves a scar for life,
That makes you weep for another life. Define life.

Goddamn, so this is what it means to have a leader
You despise, the racists said when the president
Was black and I’ll be damned if I ain’t saying it too.
Is this a mandate for whiteness, virility, sovereignty,
Stupidity, an idiot’s threats & gangsta narcissisms threading
Every shabby sentence his trumpet constructs? You
Are not allowed to say shit about Mexicans when you
Ain't actually got any Mexican friends— I bet you’ve never
Been invited to a family dinner. You ain’t allowed to deride
Women when you’ve never wept in front of a woman
That wasn't your mother. America’s struggle with itself
Has always had black people at the heart of it. You can’t
Grasp your own hustle, your blackness, you can’t grasp
Your own pussy, your black pussy dies for touch.

When I am nowhere near a ledge or knife covered
In a corridor of fever colored carpet or catching rain
Bead upon the morning headlights hungering some crash
To crack & blacken me before a train full of women
With nose rings & thigh boots, the curved ass of a mother
With her toddler & the rain still following the hills
And shoulders of parts of Maryland & New Jersey,
And the oncoming trains passing inches from head-on
Headlong into Newark where I almost escaped this path,
Before remembering the thrill coloring even today’s
Melancholy delay asleep, awake, the wild haired woman
Smiling on the stairs before fading, a song in the ear
Like the broken phone booth I passed in the Village
Beside a puddle of what could have been crushed tomatoes

On some level, I'm always full of Girl Scout cookies
In the Land of a failed landlord with a people of color
Complex. On some level every action is an affirmation
Of personality. In the near empty subway car
I watched a brother dance on the ceiling, spin
On the subway pole like a stripper, twirl like an inverted
Ballarina on the parallel bars. I had no money
To give him. I was going to the party as Will Smith
In the first half of the Hancock movie: aloof, gifted,
Fucked up. I saw the shadows of planes gallop
Over buildings. I saw five white girls side by side
On a park bench, almost synchronized taking selfies
Of themselves taking selfies together in the land
Of a failed landlord with a people of color complex.

The difference between stay woke & don’t sleep
Was lost. The difference between knowing & thinking.
You can teach the heart to love its sadness. Yes, you can.
In the land of a failed landlord with a people of color
Complex. The difference between cursive, tantrum,
Trauma. Assault & pepper spray. When it was learned
The first man was actually born a woman with a clit
So swollen with longing it hung from her like an udder
Waiting to be drained, no one mentioned what was at
The beginning of longing. Which is loneliness.
Which will not be snuffed by power, which will not be
Quenched by sex. No one mentioned the implications:
To be a man is to possess a woman’s consciousness,
To be a woman is to possess a woman’s consciousness.

It was discovered the best way to combat
Sadness was to make your sadness a door.
Or make it an envelope of wireless chatter
Or wires pulled from the radio tape recorder
Your mother bought you for Christmas in 1984.
If you think a hammer is the only way to hammer
A nail, you ain’t thought of the nail correctly.
My problem was I’d decided to make myself
A poem.  It made me sweat in private selfishly.
It made me bleed, bleep & weep for health.
As a poem I could show my children the man
I dreamed I was, my mother & fathers, my half
Brothers, the lovers I lost. Just morning, as a poem,
I asked myself if I was going to weep today.

Nearly nine and still the sun’s not slunk
into its nightly digs. The burnt meat smell
of mid-week cookouts and wet grass
hangs in the air like loose familiar summer
garb. Standing by the magnolia tree, I think
if I were to live as long as she did, I’d have
eleven more years. And if I were to live as long
as him, I’d have forty-nine. As long as him,
I’d be dead already. As long as her, this
would be my final year. There’s a strange
contentment to this countdown, a nodding
to this time, where I get to stand under
the waxy leaves of the ancient genus, a tree
that appeared before even the bees, and
watch as fireflies land on the tough tepals
until each broad flower glows like a torch-lit
mausoleum. They call the beetle’s conspicuous
bioluminescence “a cold light,” but why then,
do I still feel so much fire?

A sweating flowerbed where my fantasies are thinning.
I’m a light sleeper, too many asters, taxonomies of sound.
 
I’d come in blue wide leg Jncos like I was meant to be.
Curious, maladaptive, suffused with unrationalized hope.
 
I’d listen and be with my people. No one is concerned with
honoring success because the concept of success is gone.
 
In the 90’s I knew a scene kid who dreamed about it on 
the regular. He had a reputation for coming to rave parties 
 
barefoot so she could be close to the rotating basslines
her body swan diving into the mothership of a 4/4 beat. 
 
Morning in the trip-hop lounge he told me how it was 
gonna go down in the end. We’d stumble blinking into 
 
day and the music would keep going without turntables,
drum machines, mixers. Overnight we would take power
 
as a stabilizing force of abundant sustainable possibility.
Heartbeat of the earth, muzzled by business as usual,
 
restored to their original health. It wouldn’t be like that
weird Dr. Bronner cult gazing at you taking a shower
 
where we’d be all-one, it’s cruel monotheistic trash,
beats got their own raw logic, nothing is standard,
 
but we would all be able to hear it. The start of an
old connection. An ability to bear music upholding
 
life on this planet. Dead from the last heart attack
of this world, I’m a black girl dozing with first shift
 
commuters on the route 15 bus and on weekends
a fire opal hard at worship in the temple of house.
 
It’s like when an opera singer bangs a high note
and a champagne flute breaks, they explained,
 
except it would be us crashing and breaking 
beating in real time. The elders have a saying
 
the beat goes on: my fracturing livelihoods
resurrected by the rhythms of the night.

How many of you have seen a hawk? 
One hand raised. Who's gone 
to Disney World? No hands raised. 
How many of you own a dog? Four hands. 
Has anyone ever made a snowman? Two hands. 
Ever seen the Big Dipper?  
On my grandma's farm, one kid said, 
his hand up, fingers wiggling.  
Who knows someone who was shot  
and killed? Every hand went up. Faster  
than thought. More certain than rain.  
If you know someone else 
who was killed, raise your other hand.  
Had you happened by just then,  
you'd wonder why so many kids  
were signaling touchdown, both arms  
thrown high, or why that class  
was pretending to be on a roller coaster, 
arms tossed at the sun  
as they dropped over the edge  
of their fake demise, 
and smile. An actual smile  
or just a bit of joy  
you'd carry on your face  
down the hall,  
to wherever you were going,  
making the mood  
of the next room you entered  
a little better,  
even if you didn't know it.  
I think the pleasure  
has to do with their hands  
being so little  
yet wanting to hold as much  
as anyone has ever wanted to hold.  
Hands are good at that. Holding.  
Hands are good at almost everything  
we ask them to do. 

In the ocean, the starfish are pulling 
                            off their own arms,
killing themselves, their bodies, spilling, 
                           attacking themselves to escape
what I imagine is the pain of a world 
                           that no longer makes sense,
as on the beach a half world away, 
                           I watch large tankers
dredge sand to increase the likelihood 
                           that land values will increase 
this year. I am a big fan of land values 
                           increasing. I have a family house
we can’t afford, the storms 
                           raised maintenance costs,
and insurance for the floods, 
                           the house that was
my electrician grandfather’s gift to us 
                           will likely sell and with it will go this island
where I’ve watched the beaches 
                           grow and shrink my whole life. 
I’m thinking now that the starfish
                           are displaced from their arms
not by what the storms brought 
                           but by what brought the storms.
At home, neighborhood boys 
                          die from a lack of contact,
wrestle on the sidewalks
                          in front of Mister Bill’s house.
He works early in the morning
                          and returns by end of school, so 
on hot spring days this is where
                         parents know their boys will be safe. 
A starfish with short hair, and one 
                         throwing a football, and one yelling,
and a starfish whose name I’ve forgotten
                        with a chipped tooth, and a starfish who 
grabs my hand as I pass, as I return 
                        around the corner on my walk from work,
grabs and asks if I would take him 
                        to the park to see the yellow school busses 
that he always wants to see.       
                       He holds my hand 
as we walk across the street
                       toward my door—can you imagine? 
Why is it so hard to show affection
                       to this boy? Others on the ground 
pull at limbs the way starfish do, 
                      escaping what brought the storm.
This one just looks up at me, his small
                      hand in mine as we walk toward my door,
and I tell him no, again, and again. 

it's true I’ve worn your nightgown in fact I am wearing your nightgown
lonely as I am these days it is almost like wearing you which I used to do so often and with such zeal 
                                           as I recall my parents would hot glue my dolls’
clothes to my dolls so full I was even then of curiosity and yes lust 
                                                                                                           did you
have something like this       urgent and wet as a lung?         I never wanted you more
than when we wept into each other’s T-shirts through an entire rodeo the gloom cancering up from the bulls to the clowns to us      
                                                                            who would even want
to inherit this kingdom now the lessness of it the acres of herbicide better we stick to our little apartments fasting until we can bear
to eat                                 
                                                                     before you left
you said miserable boy you call that an outpouring of grief? then soft as a smoke ring
blown through a smoke ring you sliced my ear off and sighed hard into the pink flesh underneath           
                           it’s horrifying to think of yourself as a sum of your parts
an obelisk of bone built around a bag of acid or some penetrable ritual of fluids
and air      
                   O President Earth, I will not vote for you again!    
                                                                                                       it’s so humid here
even my books are starting to mold I think they want to become 
fish if I had a staircase there would be a giant squid hiding
underneath it        
his tentacles would be long enough to shred the whole world to smithereens

seed-lined ark 
 
mother papaya
 
whale belly
 
my little Jonah 
 
dear passenger
 
like an airplane 
 
I carry you
 
to be a woman 
 
is to be a wall
 
with a hole
 
to be a human
 
a hole with walls
 
even the rain 
 
tastes red to you
 
the strawberries
 
are over but the sun
 
keeps shedding
 
my blood doubles
 
to keep you 
 
aloft

The virus of
want and debt
eventually sought
glue and boards.
It was a kind of
time when nothing
was forgotten.
And when pushed
into water, they
did not scream
or struggle but
simply shuddered
and shut down.
They were
never alone.
There was so much
salt at the shores
that the walls
rose to the skies.
We were only
allowed to watch
videos of other
animals, the sexless
bodies tending their
young before trotting
to their deaths
off-screen. I hardly
knew about the bare
breasts of primates.
Instead my flesh
pounded until I was
a glossy black pool.
Fathomless, without
skin the air could
lift me.
We don’t give offense.
            We take it.
So how 
do we take it.
Necessarily wrest it.
Is the program faulty.
The input. Types
of meaningless input:
He didn’t mean to do it.
        He didn’t intend to make you feel bad. 
    He would never try to harm you.
 Eventually we
carry the smaller 
automatons into our
privacies, companions
to our jut and recoil
in the dark.
When finished we
walk naked to
our small audience
and press POWER.
Our skins glow
like desert rocks
from the startup lights.

Somewhere in America, scientists
have invented a method for measuring pain,
running their fingers over the bleach-
burned hands of abandoned housewives. 
The standard unit of sorrow
they call a dol, as in dolorous, or Dolores,
the name of a young girl skilled
at spilling tears down the buttons
of her cornflower-blue cardigan.
The new machines make us unable
to feign heartache or holy prostration,
but arguments are settled
by those whose dolorimeters run cold.
Some wear the devices against their arms
as a kind of complaint—
this has changed the way we breathe
at 4 a.m. into sweat-soaked pillows
beside our breathless bedfellows.
In some cases sufferers have been sainted,
known for their ability to hold
their own torn organs in their hands
like blood oranges, the way they tie
barbed wire around their wrists
like penitents hauling wooden crosses
through windless deserts.
It is said if you embrace these men
you will be seared by sudden knowledge,
you will carry the blood clot
of a red poppy in your coat pocket;
when you kiss your lover,
the one leaving a trail of torn letters
in the wake of her battered luggage,
you will turn and say thank you,
thank you, and shake
bitter tears from the silver censers
found everywhere these days,
in this strange, fabled country
we can’t seem to leave.

Put my hands over 
the cage of bones
above your heart. 
 
I don't remember 
exactly what I said. 
You started to weep.
 
I know I said
God sees you
or I see you. 
 
I said something 
in your past
wants to be touched, 
 
healed. It was then
I knew I wanted 
to marry you. 
 
What is God to us now? 
We stopped going 
to church. In bed
 
our hands still 
find each other
to send up
 
prayers like we 
did that first night -- 
when I touched
 
the aching thing
inside the dip
of your chest. 

What if the angels,
with their conch-shaped trumpets,
their dainty bows and arrows,
don’t really give a shit about us?
What if they gather in heavenly circles
at the mouth of the clouds
to stare down on field mice,
on ferrets, on millipedes?
We think angels take human shape
because our ancestors painted them that way,
but those were the same ancestors
who toiled through the Dark Ages,
who took a long damn time to discern
that the heart wasn’t the seat of intelligence.
I’d say they suffered at times
from a lack of imagination.
Sure, they fashioned rocks into the tips of spears,
sure, they managed some empires,
and sure, they figured out
which knotweeds would dye the wool,
which berries would pigment the oils.
Make, if you want, a case for human ingenuity,
but I vote against us
when it comes to knowledge of the Divine.
In Chronicles, God sends an angel
to slaughter the Assyrian army.
In Numbers, he opens chasms
to swallow up the defiant,
he burns with holy fire those gathered in worship,
he sets a plague on fourteen thousand.
Imagine writing those words, thinking,
“Yes, this is the God who loves me.”
I don’t think He much cares about us.
I think the next tornado, the next tsunami,
the next antibiotic-resistant strain
will be whimsy and afterthought.
I think he’s the God of Rats,
the God of Ticks, surrounded
in heaven by legions of slim-thoraxed angels
flapping swallowtail wings, spitting venom
into each others’ many-prismed eyes.
I think He’s created the virus in his own image,
and He loves the virus enough
to create an endlessly adaptable food source for it
that also serves as means of conveyance.

The Washington Post says that green burials are
on the rise, as baby boomers plan for their future
 
their graves marked with sprouting mushrooms
little kneecaps crawling up from the dirt’s skin
 
like Michael Brown decomposing into the concrete
ending as natural product of the environment.
 
Elephants are now being born without tusks    
their genetics having studied the black market
 
DNA a spiral ladder carefully carved
from wooden teeth of Founding Fathers.
 
Never let a chromosome speak for you, they will
only tell a myth—an ode to the survival of the fittest.
 
Peppered moths are used to teach natural selection
their changes in color an instance of evolution.
 
Birds unable to see dark moths on soot covered trees.
The number of blacks always rising with industry.
 
Life is the process of erosion, an inevitable wearing down
of the enamel.  The gums posing the threat of disease.
 
On most websites they suggest biodegrading
choosing a coffin made from pine or wicker.
 
The man in the paper said, I want to be part of a tree,
be part of a flower—go back to being part of the Earth.
 
I imagined my Mother then, her short-cropped hair
like freshly cut grass, immune to the pains of mowing.
 
The Natural Burial Guide for Turning Yourself into a
Forest sits waiting in my Amazon shopping cart.
 
Pink salmon have now evolved to migrate earlier
I am familiar with this type of Middle Passage
 
a loved one watching you move on without a trace
the living inheriting an ocean of time
 
the sun rewiring the water-damaged insides
cells desiring to go back from where they came
 
\\ certain strands of
your kind now extinct.

There is a devil buried 
Deep in each man & I have
 
Named mine Happy Fun
Go Go. It looks at me,
 
Just stares & a knitting
Buzz maps my skin.
 
Always, without speaking
To me a single slashing
 
Word, I know what I must
Do—Top hat, shower of botflies,
 
Serve the pale pink beef & fail
To understand the rules—only
 
Hear the calligraphy of leaches
Oilspilling his eyes. Between

Orders, I gum vulture bones
Until they crack, split wide
 
Like beseeching hands. The spongy
Prize of marrow. Buttery sweet
 
Blood. I taste as much as I can
In this kingdom of dead pets 
 
In the park’s tall grass, their raggy
Wrappings chamberworked,
 
Hived, homed, by mason
Bees. I savor each wondrous
 
Sting, each splinter. Pumpkin ash,
Catalpa—the elephant heart
 
Plums like hundreds of dark
Fists—limbs bowing dirtward.
 
Here, the credo is a coffin-deep
Mouth. A guttery song that quarrels
 
Up from the buckling, potholed
Street. For the sugar drippings,
 
The once upon a time, I wring
Fragility from day’s last light.
 
Inside me: it’s no good anymore.
Inside me: that been & gone, bog-

Clutched breath that choked me
Each time I popped the slick 
 
Dentures from grandma’s stroke-
Still maw. To keep it between
 
The moon, the version of me
Bottomed out in my deep & this me
 
Right here, each midnight I take 
The blasting radio up on
 
The roof. After sinking into
The bodyheat of the shingles,
 
I press into me the hi-fi
Plastic & dials Clutch it, until
 
My hollows lace electric—hum
The endless murmur of strangers
 
& suddenly I am holding within
Me everything of the world:
 
Sun-bleached lawn flamingos,
A summer’s worth of peach pits
 
Rattling in a jam jar. But before
I know it, a purple line crazes
 
The horizon—slowly up painting
The boulevard into the day’s full
 
Wallop. The budding magnolias
Go blue & orange & fever-
 
White & then a day arrives with
Choked gasping, a fade to black.
 
Gloved hands that flourish
 
Like a magician’s, fold back a white
 
Sheet precisely to the bloodless
Inch of skin below my Adam’s apple,
 
The grub-like pallor that I will glow
With after the black box in my guts
 
Finally says it’s time to kneel,
Wrangle a whipping shoelace in 
 
The careening path of a garbage
Truck, the instant the metronomic
 
Ticking of the bomb in me stills. 
The silence loiters, leadens until
 
Sudden howls shatter me forever
Into sleep. Already, I can feel
 
That rabid heat coming. A riot
Of mayflies in the streetlight’s
 
Salmon haze. All of that will
Show in its own good time.
 
The wind gusts tiny thuds
From the rustdown screen
 
Door. Each second that wells
Around me I am climbing out
 
Of a bed after a long & terrible
Illness, I am leaning in to kiss
 
A car wreck, the monster. In me,
It croons—a throating half-
 
Way between pain & beautiful
Song. All of it is unbearable
 
But this always is overtime.
A chain of paper swans coils
 
Out for miles, up the rivering
Scree of the mountain & into
 
The invisible distance. I refuse
To stop wanting more joy
 
Than I have been allotted. I will make
Brilliant even a fleabite of blood.

In our avenues, election posters show various hairstyles
of famous dictators—
and I, at 53
having given up a thought of a child, I— (turn to my neighbors and                            shout, come here!
Come here!
Marvelous cretins!
 
She just pooped on the park bench, marvelous cretins!
Parenthood
costs us a little dignity)
 
thank God.
 
Wind sweeps bread from market stalls, shopkeepers spill insults
and wind already has a bike between its legs—
 
But when with a laundry basket out in the streets I walk 
 
the wind is helpless
with the desire to touch these tiny bonnets & hats.

We stumbled through the strafing night to any harbor we thought safe
and we found one on some corner in the West Village called Marie’s                      Crisis
and in it scores of men huddled around a grand piano and sang songs
together. At some point, a woman who looks like Helen Terry,
the big back up singer from Culture Club emerges from the kitchen
to sing a number for the boys.
 
The crowd fell silent and she started belting it out and immediately
I wanted to know wait what is the Crisis? And immediately after why
is a song called a “number?” I know Pythagoras believed that music
resonated between planets and that the notes of the scale could be
calculated, that those notes themselves were not even singular
but had a dominant tone with seventeen other harmonic tones underneath.
 
Or am I making all this up? Why do you care?
Why haven’t you taken your pants off yet?
Marie was singing Janis Joplin and I imagined that I could actually feel
the porosity of the table under my fingers. There’s a cute skinny blond
at the bar. He’s wearing a short-sleeved plaid shirt which I think
I can get on board with but ironed jeans with boat shoes, not so much.
 
Still I’m trying to figure out exactly what to say to him but my field is
physics not chemistry. I open with “I wrote my dissertation
on the agitation that occurs in world-sheets during a red shift event.”
Not my strongest effort. He responds with, “In Indian dance, the face
is actually an instrument of the body and so its expressions
are part of the choreography.”
 
Marie looks like she’s about to burst out laughing. I know the look,
it’s called “show-tune” face. Look ridiculously happy while belting out
whatever song at hand at the top of your lungs. No one cares, she’s                       singing Sinatra.
I met a kid in Brooklyn once who said he was Frank’s son: he grew up
with his mom in suburban Jersey and Frank never acknowledged him
but used to come around and have dinner with them every once in a                     while.
 
It was the night my friend Ava taught me how to take tequila shots
and I had had seven and ended the night chatting up Danny
in between his stints dancing on the bar.
I found I didn’t really have anything to say to him except
that I believed him, that I thought Frank really was his father,
that he looked just like him.
 
As soon as I’d said it “These Boots Are Made for Walking”
came on the radio and I thought it pretty likely that was a sign
but I didn’t say anything and I don’t know what Danny was thinking
because he didn’t say anything either. Marie is singing a bluesy,
folksy version of “I Saw the Sign” and it makes me remember
my friend Araki who used to be my lover and then only my friend
 
but maybe isn’t even that anymore because I haven’t heard from him
in eight months and I have no idea what he is doing, because
all he ever posts on Facebook are links to news stories about public                      health.
Marie’s voice is scratchy and smoky and whiskey-soaked.
It’s not even what you’d call pretty or good but she is singing
for everything she’s worth. The bar is cute but small and a little shabby,
 
and the blond wants to know if I’ll sing a duet with him
when Marie is done and that makes me think either I better
marry him or make a run for it while I’ve still got some lead time.
I can’t sing but I have developed an equation that can calculate exactly
how long it is going to take for you to take off your pants.
Don’t say physics doesn’t have any practical applications.
 
Then someone tells me that’s not even Marie, it’s Maggie the night                      manager.
It’s been a week since that club in Florida got shot up & my parents 
haven’t called. Maggie is singing the Boy George part  of “Church of the Poison Mind” and I’m three sheets to the wind anyhow so I’m going to climb up on top of that piano and do the Helen Terry part. Maggie’s voice is straining and it’s not even
her crisis. She’s the biggest star in the room, girl needs back-up.

Where’s it gone? God of my childhood,
with your attendant monstrosities
have a little warmth on me, bent and frozen.
Hastily now and again it seems You can hear
 
even the farmyard rats
gnaw at cobs and whatever fresh dead’s around.
Though it’s confusing to see the golden
seaport alongside of that—
 
well, such is the human eye that doesn’t get to choose
unless it trains, and I wasn’t given the gift of exercise.
I will not say You’ve given me a terrified silence,
nor absence, nor presence, nor the sun gone red and down,
 
whose going You can’t protect.
Let me, dusky godsend, never believe You protect.

MIKE BROWN IS A TYPE OF CHRIST
By which I mean, mostly, that we gaze upon the boy
& all of our fallen return to us, their wounds unhealed
& howling. I want to say something about indeterminacy
here. Decomposition as a kind of writing.
How a body never vanishes really,
merely sketches the landscape anew underground,
foxgloves & marigolds jutting like scimitars
from the field’s flesh, precious weapons
of those thought to be rot already, soil’s song,
long gone past the grave. For who says
the dead don’t think, don’t shake
the weight of marrow & slip, quiet as fire, back
into whatever partition binds this life
to its grand, black Epilogue? Last night,
I imagined every officer’s gun
gathered & stuffed in a bombproof box
by the side of the highway; wondered
what they might choose to craft
with their hands, their eyes, both given
so long to the work of chasing
what can’t be contained. I dreamt
un-killable multitudes assembled in the wake
of a slain friend, the name
his mother once cast
like a cloak over him
the small & common blade
beneath their tongues

In Czech there is a word
for getting around paying          to flash
a signal, this, prozvonit, is what
my mother and father did when
I was young and he was away first
in the Navy
and later for work,       him calling home
on the land line,
which was then the only line,   and hanging up.
It meant
he was safe.
It meant, I love you.
It meant, The world is not holding us
apart at all but is just between the dots
we are
on the great grid.         In the hospital I buzzed
my brother on the nights I slept home until
the nurses said, Males can not stay; only
the daughter. In the night,
I huddled next to her listening
to the tides of her breath. Lost
in a pool and drowning, a winged
thing, unable to dry and lift
itself, my mammal hands
crude against her delicacy,
crushing. Sometimes I
wake in the night. Mother
are you there? Are you there?
I’m ready to learn another
language, a new syntax
if only you will speak
to me in which I can
hear;             how selfish this desire
to apprehend.

We slept with the doors open one more night.
And now when I try it alone it does not feel the same.
Something about time when it’s right there in front of you
disguised as a person. A person disguised as a voice
at the end of its reach. A photo booth strip.
You’re more material to me than a house
and I haven’t felt much of the weather living inside.
Rain on a mouth. Fingers in dirt.
I wish I had the mind of an orchid or sky.
A childhood beach when it’s cold yet not late in the year.
I am leaving you there with the shirts and the shoes thrown about,
waiting to be retrieved by the people who’ve given them use
and aren’t done slapping their bodies against the sea.
Nothing has come to impress me. We leave.
Thrown in the blue of the wet afternoon
where no one can stay without being bled;
we, who are so full of blood.
I am watching you make all the lights.
The Madonna swings across the dashboard,
her face does not change.
And whether it’s the mountains of New Mexico
or the streets in this city of lack,
we are driving in the easy silence
of people who do not yet know
what they’ll take from each other.
This is the shortest part of the drive,
the part that won’t photograph well but seems real.
Soon we’ll be stopping at a gas station and a pool
and a diner where no one will eat.
No matter the places I’ve taken my clothes off
I always keep one thing on. One.
One of us. Asking for more than what’s ours.

This did not happen
 
 
 
although I have memories of it:
a doctor unwrapping a tutu
so I knew I was in a hospital
but one unlike any other
practicing strange medicine
but this strangeness has been effective
 
 
A hospital for dancers?
 
 
 
 
I was in, pink,
sequined
 
I had been in a street,
an alley and
 
I was left there, tutu shredded,
I couldn't dance
 
anymore.
 
No animals other than myself, so the animal
in me
 
emerged
 
 
 
but tried to hurt no one
 
else.

I would have waited alone a thousand
years for the coming of angels, 
blinding bright as the spring sun to arrive,
 
to abandon this world for another. 
Stunned by their flashing lights aflame
 
across the bow of their space craft—landing
 
lights for that world. Herds of animals:
horses, humans, and fish fixed.
The angels approached.
 
Come angels! Come beasts!
Men and women cried out
to each other; the angels cried; 
 
some were lost between their earthly life
 
and paradise and what is paradise, anyway? 
Few imagined being bound to this world;
 
blue halo of emerald mountains;
extraordinary, ordinary—they rose,
a crucifixion yardarm flying away.

One
 
If the stanza’s a room then in the doorway I spoke soft with baby
     like a poet
early mornings as if the baby swirled within I syllabled pattern
and paper and put I tapped my breath to womb as pulse and pace
     teach first
yet the baby was gone by the time they checked truth is
a scopic rod pried it showed nothing my head turned to left
away from the black screen white radial lines tissue he scraped
I roll over even now my head to the left
the direction of beginnings black mark of the first letter: left, I still ask
When did I?
Where did I?               
                                                                                                                                    Lose
baby.
 
 
Two
 
The night I bled was a long loop a circle night sub-earthly
    black and red
hands outstretched to the dark I felt my way to the sink and toilet
did it happen          then           I told him
Babe I’m bleeding we cried in the middle of the stanza
hugged as my legs shook glass tore our throats we stood
that second time unlike the first we knew what bleeding meant
     at the mercy
with a limited clinic closed on Sundays I explored the internet
a baby’s not a fetus at eight weeks it’s an embryo webbed hands
     eyelid folds
still I say baby soft like a poet two even syllables  as.in. ti.ny. bo.dy.
     or I.was.
evenly bent in two perhaps it’s just spotting I self-soothed         then  
curled to the mattress my eyes splintered tree limbs red tips night                 window
each hour pulled downward salt waves the long ebb ocean currents
sea dregs to my bed sheets the shores my lashes I could not open
my mouth to complain in the night what more could be said
until the hard morning finally to shove this body into jeans my breath
each bump along the highway a maze of mirrors motherhood
       the hospital
at the sign-in window the procedural lady with a computer queried
what’s my home phone cell phone and where did I work what’s
       my address
I’m bleeding I need help now I said then    her clicking fingers the                    damned phone
in the clinical room that cold stanza I lay on a padded table clean
       white paper
my legs red wet the nurse did look at me and she looked like me
        I watched her
how she held my arm empathetic us two women mouthless us two
knowing better than to say _________    was just us women a moment   
quiet as snow     at the mercy     us avalanched empty
 
 
Three
 
Sad a baby can X long before bleeding begins often
the uterus does its cleaning through blood  a methodical machine
washes itself new baby gone the mother         left
yet how do I wash clean one year later              from a dream—
a nightscape there I lined my lips red in a cloudy mirror
in a train station bathroom of all places filthy
more stained and stinking wretched by the second it was next to me
a baby wrapped in blankets on a moldy sink counter its silence
I assumed the baby dead but my conscience said hold him
I unwrapped to find the baby breathing as my horror as his diaper rash
open sores half-way up baby’s back and a deformed nose
a loose flab of nose flesh down his fragile face
I will care for the baby I thought his nose can be fixed           then
appeared the baby’s older brother standing at the sink’s edge curious
and another much older brother dark haired at the door
in a train station bathroom I held a forgotten baby          left
in a bathroom where no one possibly feels washed
surrounded by three boys
needing a mother I was
their mother in a dream wherein they visited
me in a stanza where we could be nearest each other        breathing
the filth they found me in      or I would rescue them from—
which in this world is it.
 
It is hard         not to be impatient
at our slowness and how much
            breath             we require sometimes more
than a lung’s space     when I was sick
            I looked most like myself      
it’s surprising             you’d think the manatee would
clot      the canal is admitting boats almost
            indiscriminately the slow slur
of bilge water pulled into a frenzied
smoothness     what you have seen mysteriously
            rise and redouble        and fold under
your own hands has come to take
            your place       cover it well
and let stay tranquil

erase the railroad that brought the trains here. erase the trains & their antique machinery. erase the saloons & the syphilis. erase the families that settled this stretch of desert & called it uninhabited. erase the conquered families, cities, & civilizations. erase the conquerors & erase their horses. erase the documentary exploring the history of this region on my computer. erase my computer & all the lives it lets me visit but not die in. erase the website where i can follow the satellite’s many eyed lens into my family’s gray yard & see only pixels. erase the amateur video of the couple fucking in another tab & especially erase the moment where one whispers something unintelligible into the other’s dark ear & the body shudders. erase the video still open of eric garner being choked to death less i, in my whiteness, forget. erase the mention of the black man murdered by police in the last line for its utility & the privileged detachment of its witness. erase my body sitting at this table erasing through accumulation. erase the many diseases of its mind, its obsession with pleasure & more pleasure each addiction replaced by another addiction, a door opening into a hospital of doors. erase it fugues & hubris & melancholia. erase its dysthymia & mania & chronic insomnia. in the beginning there was a word tortured into birthing new words. & here we sit at the prow of a great ship cutting through text so thick it resembles black water. here is the curtain opening its throat to reveal a pair of scissors: the railroad syphilis. the horse computers. the satellite fucking the other’s dark ear. the video hospital. the mind tortured into curtains. curtain.

I begin with love, hoping to end there.
I don’t want to leave a messy corpse.
 
       I don’t want to leave a messy corpse
       Full of medicines that turn in the sun.
 
Some of my medicines turn in the sun.
Some of us don’t need hell to be good.
 
       Those who need least, need hell to be good.
       What are the symptoms of your sickness?
 
Here is one symptom of my sickness:
Men who love me are men who miss me.
 
       Men who leave me are men who miss me
       In the dream where I am an island.
 
In the dream where I am an island,
I grow green with hope.  I’d like to end there.

It had only given you one meaning it gave it early too you in your crib with that man sitting in a folding chair with Budweiser and a book reading the book out loud so even if you didn’t understand there was the sound the girl in the woods the doll in the river a betrayal an animal whose friendship would be everything whom the girl would have to behead and that would be okay because heads are not everything you knew by language how to keep your keepers happy how to be happy yourself alone told stories wrote stories read the books of women who filled their lungs with water and with gas and with cocks who let themselves fade in a room in the rooms of their own who were their own meaning or at least whose words were words which when placed in order kept your cells regenerating the man with his Budweiser said you were his immortality he said you were him you didn’t say so but you knew he’d die and when he did your books would bury him again your books would build an empire your empire would keep your lungs clear of the water the gas the cocks well maybe would invite the archetypes the brother the sister maybe you would weave yourselves together in a tapestry on the wall in the cabin in the kingdom in the pink and pale landscape of a place you made a warm and rippled place of narrative and serotonin the man can’t get there the law can’t get there the readers the friends with their intentions are incapable of ever getting close which means you’re safe you take the archetypes in your palms in your cunt and fill yourself blind because blind is the best way to know a thing you are married to the archetypes you are married to your brother to the way your body reclines naked in this place you haven’t bothered much with food you’re svelte you’re a machine made solely for the plucking up of words and placing back in order with the quantum mess of things you thrive in uncertainty you marry the words to the photons to the mystic’s lack of self you marry everything but other human beings because other human beings are mirrors are dim are other than are utterly unknowable you marry the sand instead the way it is nothing and also is the history of the world you write down a story about the sand you sell it to Chicago to New York you sell it for a room to be alone to dress yourself in the white fur in the white of the beginning of the end of archetypes you will live on a mountain in the rain of an exceptional altitude you barely breathe don’t need to barely move you are only a manifestation are holed up in this thing to maybe make another book or two to breathe again more slowly lull into a glimpse of something greater

1.
my father’s flesh is baby girl pink
pushed back to reveal his tibia
bone like a white hot wall
in his brown body
 
when you open the body
internal forms stay put
 
my father steady, still standing
in a tank and shorts at midday in the parking lot
 
no anger in the shift
as my mother pulls the car into reverse
 
 
2.
a beating may be
my mother driving our subcompact into my father repeatedly
driving us away from the cutting at the end of his fists
 
this is how
my father sets his body to be healed: scattering
gravel under the wheels, clouds of dust like mean
kisses at his feet
 
 
3.
I like being inside a machine
big enough to kill
when it doesn’t
 
idling at a light, I feel
as if against the steel
as if the car is devoid of the cushions and plastic parts
that are supposed to console you
 
Lake Erie is five minutes away
my mother’s bruises bob up
as the Lake rocks and holds
 
I see my mother breathing
I see the metal bridges
of the frames on her face 
she is a taut cord
holds her hands
out, stretched toward me
turning at the wrists, saying no
 
 
4.
I want to say I’m telling
you about the last beating
it isn’t
 
I try not to hold anything
against the mother
who lets her own hand
fly up to her face
then bites the fingers of that hand
 
what protects me: not the cage
of bones, what the rocks did
not hit, the glass of the windshield
that did not break
 
at the Lake, I throw rocks
at the water, so many open mouths
the deep immediately forgets
 
 
5.
when we get home I come to
appreciate the absolute
darkness of a new hole in the wall
 
my mother washing my face, and then hers
in the bathroom, before getting dinner ready
it is not so much about the lie
or the pain, but my father’s
charisma when he tells me the wound in question
really emerged seven years before
 
Da Nang inexplicably breaking
out of his body afresh
 
6.                                                                                                                                 
as a girl, I stood on my father’s back
kneading death’s terrible field
in my white lace socks
 
I threw my arms out
to keep balance on the sacrum
and the lumbar bones
pressed my foot into the blade
at the shoulder
 
I want a father who can be torn
so I can visit the consequence
of my body against him
 
 
7.
on the back of my neck
my lover kisses me, as she’s driven
I want to call this a drive, not a wreck
 
restraint not unlike the moment
when I’m going after her lips
and my lover says you want that, can’t have it
when I push up against the hands
she’s planted on each shoulder
when the length of her body pins me down
 
tell me about the stone, she says
which is what she calls that bone-
handle at my sternum
a stone is a feeling of articulation
in the hand, when she cradles this rise
in my chest
 
 
8.
years later, my father is dead
so tonight, my mother is the stone
that comes back
 
she is asleep, in the bright
cold light of the surgical theatre
 
on the heart-lung machine
there is no beat to betray her          
 
the machine is large, it can be trusted                                                                
it whirs like a baby
 
in the lobby, when I hold my own body
every line is expressive
waiting for the mother to emerge
as I sit, my legs an off-
beat metronome
running down
 
 
9.
manubrium
 
stones drop
into the water and keep
moving, undertow
 
ma
tell me about the stone
am I the fist
the rattle, or the steel
of your body now
tell me the waste narrative, make a sound
 
tell me about the white of the bone I saw
under my father’s skin, this moment
when my teeth broke
into view and anyone could hear
the white noise
 
 
10.
we back up
and I drive
at the end of the elasticity of my father
at the no-point when the car is inside his body
as far as love will take it
 
then I do it again

Moon river, swollen river, river of starhole
and bright, harness river, lichen river,
river we velvet with our filth.
River of butter and river of witches, river
cracked open careful like egg, or burst
apart, unleashing its violet load.
River mouths, river beds, every back
forty creek, every crick, made of
trickles, made of synth, river of sound
as vibration, river where we all get free.
River that curve down a backbone,
river through which I particle heat,
feathery and wet, lemony and loud,
river that still smell skin, browned
around a neck, softened with sweat,
river you wear tight on your hips,
given in private, or out in the open.
River I dream about.
River from the inside.
River where we shouts the feeling.
Septum river, bundle river, river of mercy,
sometimes edging so far into night
the moon goes             (…)       dark.
Yes, all night river, burnt sugar river.
We pull the river into our bellies, we
go out walking. We river in darkness
as entire paw prints of color and light.
Everything rivers in motion. River
of holy, river of freaks, river where
my fur belong to me. Softer than
it seem river. Honey and Vaseline river.
Brown river, black river, off the map river.
I will be there, printing textures of rock
on the skin of me, belly down, face down, 
my god, it is good to be home.

We keep waiting to wake up & know what we’re doing;
         we’ve learned to be grateful
               for any colored shard of glass
 
not shaped like a bullet.
 
                                  We are driving in a blizzard (not a metaphor,
        we could die, I have a lot of responsibility
               here) & our daughter
 
is telling us a ghost story, we’re listening
                             for any clues to the riddle
            that is her mind at 15—her life
 
has ceased to revolve
           around us. There are so many
                                                 bullets, we’ve learned
       not to take these small moments for granted.
 
                                       In this story, the father
           of the children of her Sims character
                                    came to visit, refused to leave.
     She built a tiny room, lured him in, deleted the door.
 
Thirty game-days later, he died.
        The story takes a long time to tell,
 
                          our son keeps interrupting
                                        to sing “We Got the Beat”
                                                      & talk about his plans
          for his new airsoft gun with the biodegradable ammo.
 
Everything is so dangerous (there
          are no metaphors), it’s our fault
                                               for giving him what he wanted,
 
 
this world, its shattered edges. He has 2,000 pellets,
                        a freshly charged battery,
             a friend to shoot at. What more
 
                       could a boy want? She likes
                                 having the ghost around,
             she says, better now than when he was alive,
 
& this sounds like a mostly okay ending,
             probably all we can ask.

It was good getting drunk in the undulant city.
Whiskey lopping off the day’s fear.
 
Dawn came with an element of Xanax.
Dusk came and I dumbed myself down.
 
Where there were brides, grooms--
bored boysoldiers with iphones and guns.
 
I’m a soft target, you’re a soft target,
and the city has a hundred hundred thousand softs.
 
The pervious skin, the softness of the face,
the wrist inners, the hips, the lips, the tongue,
 
the global body,
its infinite permute softnesses.
 
~
 
Soft targets, soft readers, drinkers,
pedestrians in rain--
 
In the failing light we walked out
and now we share a room with it
 
(would you like to read to me in the soft,
would you like to enter me in the soft,
 
would you like a lunch of me in the soft,
in its long delirium?)
 
The good news is we have each other.
The bad news is: Kalashnikov assault rifles,
 
a submachine gun, pistols, ammunition,
and four boxes packed with thousands of small steel balls.
 
 
~
 
O you who want to slaughter us, we’ll be dead soon
enough what’s the rush.
 
And this our only world.
As you can see it has a problem.
 
As you can see the citizens are hanging heavy.
The citizens’ minds are out.
 
Eros, eros, in Paris we stayed all night
in a seraphic cocktail haze
 
despite the blacked out theater,
the shuttered panes.
 
Tonight we’re the most tender of soft targets,
reclining by the river pulpy with alcohol and all a-sloth.
 
Monsieur can we get a few more?
There are unmistakable signs of trouble,
 
but we have days and days still.
Let’s be giddy, maybe. Time lights a little fire.
 
We are animal hungry down to our delicate bones.
O beautiful habits of living, let me dwell on you awhile.
 
…
 
 
 
& after that, even the whirring of your head goes quiet. Even your breath. No sound. Someone in workshop says something like, in Italian, stanza means room. Don’t roll your eyes. Here you are in the room. Here you are with things, but no names for things.
 
 
 
…
 
 
 
You’ve been in this city for weeks now & no one knows your name. No one except the man at the bus stop with his tallboy. His paper bag. When he asks, you tell him you work at the university, you teach. He was a cop, ‘til someone died & he found the bottle. Or, the drink came first & then the falling off this umber world. In this moment, you’re a man to him. Some kind of boy genius philosopher, who knows? There is something neither one of you can say. You’re circling like animals, like prey.
 
 
 
…
 
 
 
The truth is, most black folk look at you & see a woman. White people look at you & see a reckless boy. Either way, there you are in the room with your body.
 
 
 
…
 
 
 
Everywhere, the bus names a kind of underworld. The man lives there, but you are just a passenger. He clears a space, says sit. You can’t sit. He looks at you with so much gratitude you think you’ll die.
 
 
 
…
 
 
 
You have to understand that there are many rooms. Each of them operates by other laws. Here, once you name a thing, you can’t take it back. It has its own life now, one that moves along without concern for you. At first, you go around talking to the trees & for just a moment they turn to face you.
 
 
 
 
…
 
 
 
By the time the bus arrives the light has gone & the man is holding out his hand. You take it, not expecting to be thrown against him. Against him, you are years ago, a frantic girl alone. The man is on his knees. You are a boy holding up his brother. The man is on his knees.  Either way, there you are in the room with your body. Your one, wet face.
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                        [ O
 
                                                               god of the loophole
 
                                                                      god of the veil
 
                                                                    god of the break
 
                                                                           the fugitive
 
                                                                  in endless flight ]
 
 
 
 
 
Somewhere, there’s a room where things go to lose their names. A rose becomes [  ]. A daughter becomes [  ]. Her son [  ].
 
 
…
 
 
Unlocking your apartment, you realize you never caught his name. He just looked at you & saw a door. He can’t walk back through but there you were. An image racing on the other side.
 
How I feel right now? Sharp pain/How I felt yesterday? Pain not as sharp but dull just as maddening to extract/How can I tell if I can’t see the wound? I am an academic. I study race, Jim Crow got wings and pseudopods I know its flapping in my belly, I know its squirming/How do I cope? I don’t, I wait for something that looks like a tongue blooming and I water it/How do you say that another way? I look for fire in the eyes of hurt and pray it becomes a superpower/How can you control the flame? That’s the point, I am looking for a loss of control/Do you think that will numb your pain?/ Do you think that will solve the problem? When has solving the problem been a solution. Like racism isn’t an equation there is no equilibrium. I can’t give racism back all it has given me/What has it given you? A gun mouth, a hair trigger, a bed of trippy nerves I sometimes call my body, blood for air, gills that only work one death at a time. Water as place to sit still and bury/Is that all? No, just all I can carry. There are tomes; microaggressions so plentiful you could lose yourself in the harvest if you open us up/Who is us? A wave peaking/Who is you? You is interrogative, You leaves riches of prescribed skin and digs up risk/What is there to lose? Height, Weight, Dimension, all that has bloated a phenotype/What is there to gain? Blood, thickness of vein, more people fit in You.

I didn’t have a wedding. I know, I know,
I know.
 
I up and missed my singular
chance to drift from house
of worship to dance hall and then,
in the late hours, to a diner,
where I’m photographed eating
spicy fries in my fan-back gown,
endearing myself to all
by desecrating my formalwear.
 
If you want to be really
reckoned with, you have to show
you love something high and
also you love something low.
 
You have to know that,
in 1910, having taken stock
of the city’s statue glut,
the Municipal Council of Paris
issued a ten-year ban on busts.
And you also must be ready
to name your top three popcorn
comedies in which two moneyed
lovers hump in the rain.
 
LA doesn’t have its own water,
so you’re looking at
the Colorado River or maybe
Eastern Sierra snowmelt
driving down on the studio lot,
drenching the mock streets
of Prague or the Bowery,
soaking the great mock West.
 
One day we’ll be so stung
with drought, we’ll watch and say
would it have killed us
to have these assholes kiss on
a cloudless day? That day is now.

Better say first,
the gargoyle requested,
 
I doubt he’ll appear.
 
A fragrant character at most,
he’s so metal, and hard to woo,
 
and God knows I’m terrible
at therapy—
 
the pushy box of tissues,
 
and kindly on-the-clock
neutrality. It’s exhausting,
 
how the whole’s designed to scrub
our greasy pan of sorrows to
a gleam in which we’ve actually paid
 
to see ourselves. Caveat emptor?
 
O, verily.
To talk and talk like this is what
the age calls progress—
 
that peculiar human rage for moving
forward, like tourists walking off
of cliffs while taking selfies.
 
But since I’ve come to talk,
 
and urged to use my similes:
it’s apt to say I feel
most like a Fenian Incursion—
 
the third botched skirmish,
specifically. God bless the Irish,
 
(those poets), for thinking they
could hotwire Canada, then sell it
to the British.
 
Though, this makes perfect sense  
 
to me, another unsurprising
outcome of an ill considered plot,
 
conjured awkward in a haystack
near a town namesaked for that
rebellion’s leader, one John O’Neill—
 
a man with such a gift for losing,
he finally thought he’d really rather
not die trying,
 
(and proving, therapeutically,
it’s best to recognize your limits).
 
Charged with speaking honestly,
 
I’ll confide I think it late for
custom-order hindsight, or rigged
 
stories spat into our mouths when we
were only infants by the one hostile
fairy not invited to the party.
 
What patterns there might be
emerged Cassandra-style,
 
with inner portents left
for me to sort, then artfully
ignore for half a century. Maybe that’s
 
the weight we grown ups mule, being
un-translated books the book club
never votes to read: its measure
 
heavy as the Easter Island glyphs of
Rongorongo, a mystery bitten into
wood by ancient shark’s teeth.
 
Maybe it’s enough to recognize
 
ourselves unsolvable, half trash,
half glitter bomb, dropped along
the trench by dying stars.
 
The French say, Who can say?
 
And since they basically invented
what we know of dread, and food,
 
and love, this seems a likely place
to make like Ginger Rogers
 
forever waltzing backward down
the stairs, partnered with a man
who never liked her;
 
that feathered, practiced creature,
bleeding in her heels,
 
her steps not what I’d call the act
of any faith, but more a process
 
of elimination. Until she finds
the bottom, searching for her mark,
 
spinning toward the promised spots of light.

when contemplating the word devotion
and its scalloped edges, the seaside-at-sunset-
pink it often wears to provoke
 
those who would walk alongside it,
I always imagined myself in the approach,
one of those starched-collar suitors
 
armed with stiff bouquets of formal roses,
knee desperate to bend, litany of my faults
loaded on the tongue already,
 
the elegant catapult of my mouth
hungry to launch the volley
of unworthiness, which happens to be the name
 
of my favorite chapel in the church of language,
where I try to worship frequently,
though sometimes my fervor
 
lapses into a practice based on utility,
i.e. I only come around when I need something,
which makes me feel guilty, sure,
 
and therefore unworthy, so I guess
it all works out, in a way, it’s restrictive
but comfortable, at least
 
and when I think of devotion I always see
myself in the suit, whispering intensely
into the ear of the thing that doesn’t need me
 
I never imagine that I could be the one
upon which the pink silk hangs, the one
who steps gracefully through the long day
 
receiving compliments and entreaties
I can never find the edge in the air that will reveal
the door into the feeling of being praiseworthy,
 
so I keep humbling myself, though my knees
are bloody, though my tongue is blunt
and tired of moving through the same positions
 
that make up the reasons why you shouldn’t
love me, why my dress isn’t pink, why
I’m a false idol
 
I’m a false idol
I’m testing myself
I’ve broken all the mirrors in the house

But do it anyway—        be made, all
out of love—     taken, bestowed, lived
through, by means of, without
 
beauty we don't want
to waste            & the world says it
wants, but trashes, sees as glut,
 
usable in a finite manner             We like
talk of human     forevers as holes in us
unfilled, we're raggedy apartments
 
Who to blame
deluxe in schism—runaways & orchids
tattooed on wrists or thighs      As dull men scoff
           
we still say        keep fighting,
& love me again—   don't the pines die, too
& exactly          with our names

So long to the papaya       kingdoms
                 Of olden mothers,
 
                        The shepherdess igniting
Peels of bergamot.
 
         Grief of chalk
              Scribbles the form of an
                                                    Archangel.
 
                Consider     a pillow of mortars,
How the rubble of hair
 
Weighs dense together
             With the pedestrian heft
 
             Of never coming back.
 
Home is a sleeping whale.
 
               Consider an armor
Of feathers, not to buffer          the body from shelling,
 
         But to be hoisted
As a skyless meteor fleeing for
 
                            An elsewhere chance
                                                          to land.
 
You will come back
To rescue your footsteps.
 
                  Towels spread on a road
As if forming:            timeline
                                       of cotton against
 
                                                  A pillared topography.
 
But this, the clap of hands in crisis
         Shoveling out evacuees.
 
                               Empty your opera
                                       In the howling of the sea.

Sky meets everything makes horizon liable
 
for flight then plummets of grace     Surrounded by people   feeling nah
 
there’s chatter I can’t make out    half-listening to
 
the dead      The voices are calling & it’s rare when
 
I am even half-ready          Rain bangs
 
against forest to get attention back     Let’s not
 
ask about presence & breathe absence in deep
 
There are no trees where we live but
 
today we’re somewhere else           Amphibians talk
 
syllable by syllable in the pitch of dark     The sounds fuck
 
w/ the inner ear until composed into
 
communiqués for worse or for better          Wherever
 
we are let’s find a coastline to skirt alone      Some things
 
need to be said along a fluid border    
 
I stood still so long to protect
 
existing ground but now the distance travelled
 
from your voice to mine is
 
a space that cannot be ordered       Not like it’s smooth
 
Me not interpreting your oppressor
 
language in the way that you can’t process mine      Tripped up w/
 
straight ahead statements betrayed by
 
loaded syntax    there are so few clean springs
 
left when the best ideas have run dark red w/ slaughter
 
Heavy sure but forgetting to lift
 
is a recipe for ghosts
 
There are already too many to talk to       It’s hard
 
not to step on shadows from birds up there &
 
now I find I drink so much
 
since amethyst is gone        So much loss but I like the way
 
you smile when you catch me ringing death knells
 
It took another city’s festival to make me at home enough to show
 
heartbreak     Of course it is a place that isn’t a stranger to storms
 
 
This rising sign spells danger in glue & glitter     Chart’s
 
been sent & god is it messy     togetherness brief   the forgetting     
 
takes so long          Let us keep going even if
 
these shoes aren’t conducive to lightness
 
There are those who were thrown off
 
boats out there    others sealed under the ground
 
They are not the deaths that do haunting
 
I’ve named love the way I would
 
a housebroke pet so it would only answer to me     I knew
 
better but in the end it was me who gave up
 
& simply obeyed the commands                    That happened
 
So not the type to care about idealized pasts but
 
what if some woman was the father of your country    What if
 
someone else was the mother of mine     What if
 
we didn’t need this at all  & it was always just there       It was
 
Thankfully the crash of horrors
 
is interspersed w/ extended downtime
 
Once it cracked sweet by our friend who wished a sports riot
 
would turn into general strike             That didn’t happen
 
Back to the bells   you like the way it
 
makes me smile when you scream Out Demons Out
 
at the on-ramp for a bridge to an island
 
Now it is time for a swim            Reptiles in water don’t struggle to
 
get each other     Leatherbacks touch     Loggerheads
 
meet in the sea     Wherever we are
 
will remain unnamed     by refusing attempts to own
 
Crushes     comrades     gossip confidants       float on
 
where the sky starts      All we can really say is something like toward

When I said, to my mother, What was a good
thing about me as a child?, my mother’s
face seemed to unfurl from the center,
hibiscus in fast motion, the anthers
and flounces springing out with joy.  Oh you were
enchanting, she breathed.  What do you mean --
crazy?  No sense of reality?
No-no, she laughed, with many little notes --
half a scale, plus grace notes -- I don’t
know how to say it, you were just. . .
enchanting.  Possessed?, I asked.  Brain-damaged?
No, she smiled.  There was something about you --
the way you looked at things.  I thought I got it:
that stunned look on my face, in photos,
that dumbstruck look, gaze of someone
who doesn’t understand anything.
But a week later, I thought it had been a look
of wonder, it was bemused pleasure.
And days later, I see it -- that light
on my mother’s face -- she loved me.  And today
I hear her, she did not say enchanted.
The woman in whose thrall I was
was in my thrall.  I came into being
within her silks and masses, and after we are
gone would she caper here, my first
love, would she do me the honor of continued ensorcelling?

Once, long ago,
though it could have been
yesterday, I spotted a box
bobbing (it was swaying)
in a nearby inlet. I threw a line
into the waters and fished it out
with a green green net.
Even sodden, wilting, it rattled
when I shook it. It seemed
important that it be opened,
which is to say I couldn’t open it;
it unfolded as if by itself.
I wanted to hold it
by my side, between my feet,
in the middle of the boat
(the boat was rocking),
but dropped it out of fear.
I was afraid to peer
inside, and yet I peered
inside. And in it, at the bottom
of it—I don’t remember
what was in it, but remember
it smelled of piss, fermented sugar,
and that the wind, when it swept
into it, whined and pulled
like an animal insane at the end
of his chain, which is to say
that what was in it now
seems beside the point,
but that it was there
or allowed itself
to be seen, or that it wasn’t
for me but was mine,
however briefly. I’d give it
to anyone who lives
to fight for the living.
But who can be sure who
the living are anymore.

I have heard of places where
dogs leave their homes one by one
in the morning and meet up in the streets.
They lie together in the park, freckled
 
bellies warming in the sun, then leave
for the butcher’s, for alley-scraps
of ham, chorizo, a bit of blood
sausage they needn’t even beg for.
 
The butcher carves with village dogs
in mind. They come daily for the salt
of cured meats. I wonder if they lap
the savory sea air, too, the way
 
the silver-bearded black Lab
of my childhood licked the halo
of cigarette smoke from around
my mother, as if to help us see her.
 
I have heard of places where
dogs roam free—no dogcatchers,
no meddling neighbors. I hesitate
to call their ritual togetherness family,
 
but what is family? At sundown
the dogs come home one by one.
Inside, they click across the tiles.
No one even needs to call them.

I CLIMBED OUT OF THE PAINTING CALLED PARADISE
and padded barefoot across the cold marble floor of the museum. Outside, down the slate stairway, the ferry to the mainland awaited me.
 
Awaited all escapees. “Fee!” the Ferrymaster bellowed, but all I had to oﬀer him was my last apple, a Golden Delicious. He grabbed it
 
and took a bite with his horse teeth. He was so transparent I could
see the bite as it traveled down his esophagus and came to rest
 
in the cemetery of his stomach. “Shoes!” he yelled. It turns out
he had a cardboard box full of shoes just for this occasion.
 
Most escapees were shoeless. I chose a red pair, but they pinched,
so ended up with some worn sandals, the kind that White Jesus
 
wears in depictions of him walking his lonely road. Once they were
on my feet, the ferry began to glide toward the mainland like a drop
 
of cream down a small mirror. There was no turning back;
the museum was already lost in memory, which looks like fog.
 
The Ferrymaster used a long stick, pushed it into the silt at the bottom of the harbor to guide us along. “That ain’t silt,” he said, mindreading.
 
“That’s escapees who jumped ship.” And I looked into the glassy water and saw their bodies down there, layers of girls still radiant
 
with the green-gold light of Paradise, wearing borrowed shoes.
When we reached the mainland, nothing looked familiar, though
 
it’s said we were all born here. The Ferrymaster lowered the rusty gangplank with a bang. I knew it was rust; the word was nestled
 
in a cubbyhole in my brain, but I’d never seen it before. “Git!”
he shouted. “And leave the shoes!” He talked always with exclamation
 
points, which I’d never seen before. They hung over his head
like the droppings of scavenger birds. “What’s this place called?” I cried
 
as he pulled away from the pier, but he only grinned like a skull
grins, without humor. My feet were boiling on the asphalt. I needed shoes,
 
and coins to buy them with. Shoes and a pile of gold. There were people, hundreds of them, crisscrossing each other’s paths like ants or bees,
 
carrying tall cups and printed papers and paying me no mind.
Only one, with hair the color of a blood orange, stopped
 
for a moment, and stared. “Hey, beautiful,” he said, which told me
I was real. “Where do I go?” I asked. There were buildings
 
made of angles that bent sunlight, and roads curving back
on themselves like snakes and crossing each other like crucifixes.
 
“Home to mommy!” the man said, and he laughed and showed
the gold in his teeth. He was right; I had a mommy. A mother
 
and a sister. Mother with purple rivers of veins in her hands.
Sister with pale lavender ones at her temples. My mother’s hair,
 
white like a cloud of apple blossoms. I could picture her arranging peaches in a bowl, and I remembered our house, small and gray,
 
and beside it a cemetery on a hillside, and I remembered Death,
and how the body is laid inside a box with a pillow for its head
 
and its hands crossed over its chest, and then the lid is closed
forever and the box is lowered into a vault in the ground,
 
and the vault receives its lid, and earth is loaded on top of it
and tamped down to keep the body from escaping. I remembered
 
it all: my yellow room, my little crib with decals of butterflies
and a black-and-white dog and a gold cat on the headboard,
 
how I’d compose stories about them in my head before I could
speak, and the yellow bird we kept in a cage, and the bog
 
behind the house, the brown velvet cattails and how they exploded into sheep’s wool in late summer, and the milkweeds, their mysterious
 
seam like the smile of Mona Lisa with milk on her lips, how they opened and their seeds were carried on the wind like ships
 
made of feathers, and Father, wearing a back brace, who would
not be getting well and who could no longer work or play or lift me
 
into his arms, and I went running toward it, all of it. I wanted my mother, and this is why I left Paradise.

DEAREST THANATOS,
Not, I’ll not kiss your lionlimb, not lap back the rattle in my ribs
        like a lone pill going to powder
 
in an orange plastic bottle. Not, no not sing anymore of the wretch
        and wrestle. No more ministers
 
to drive words through my wrists and leave me for the patient circles
        of scavengers. No. You didn’t kill me.
 
Not because, some days—yes—I wished for it but chose a different
       courage. I stopped asking the mirror
 
for a dream and opening it like a door. I wished to welcome back
      feeling, that whole mansion of trembling
 
rooms, wished to break every window, let the light storm through.
      On my knees I wished for tempest,
 
for rack and screw. I asked for churchless pleasures to disturb my                    numb comfort, wanted lick and wallow,
 
wished to swallow the laugh out of my child’s mouth, and—my God—
          wished for even the shame of an apple.
 
Now my wishes are down to two: Staying alive. And wanting to.

Black people place faith in a good many things, from bone marrow
meteorology to “somebody’s pregnant” fish dreams, but best believe
the U.S. government ain’t one of these, so when I tell you that we,
the black delegation, never thought this day would come I mean to say
we assumed the assassins would’ve made their moves back in June,
as if it were Bobby Kennedy all over again, but it’s November now
and here we are voting in droves for a black man who’s married to
a black woman and I’ll just reiterate none of us saw that coming,
on both counts. I’d be lying if I said I wasn’t a little salty at having
the prospect of first pass by me by at least seventeen years per rules
of constitutional eligibility, but the tears that have made their way
from eyes to mouth taste more like sugared water to me. I shook
this man’s hand in Washington a few years back and realized then
there would always be a Negro more magical than me somewhere,
and that was a humbling thought; I came home from a summer
program at Georgetown U. and told my dad that, yes, I was sure
he’d be president someday, that the shine wasn’t a camera trick
and it looked like he kept his hair brushed and cut low like he had
good awareness of the gaze on us. And that was two years after
the red states and blue states speech at the convention, which was
months after he came through our church during the early stages
of that senate race when he became the black dude running against
a less black but darker-skinned black dude, the Democratic candidate
and ergo who we felt more comfortable rolling the dice on because
that’s just how America is set up post-Nixon’s Southern strategy;
and speaking of ’68, again, Jesse Jackson is on national television
crying on a cool night in the middle of Grant Park, which hasn’t
popped off like this since the Chicago Bulls held their championship
rallies there during the dynasty of the ’90s, the decade I came into
existence, literally born into an expectation of greatness. It pushed me
this far, to an elite education and an election night spent in company
with the kind of women you wed if you want a political career that
endures, but I excuse myself gentlemanly, step to the side and call
the house my tuition bill forwards to. I talk to Dad: tease him about
his early Edwards support because he thought Barack would never get
a fair race for obvious reasons. Hang up. Dial the number again. Wait
for Mom to answer and we speak
                                                                                before I go dance in the streets
                                                                       as if something amazing happened.

It matters where you are born. In a barn
means you are the holy star. Meteor child.
 
Jesus was the first bomb. Where are you from
is a question I field too much. Once
 
I said Vietnam and the white man said I fought there.
I loved the country. I love their people.
 
That’s the day I started to lie
about my birth. In the stable
 
the horses kicked me from their wombs.
It was exactly like finding a baby
 
in a haystack. It was snowing
in Michigan when the priest exorcised
 
me from my mother, said: there is good
in you yet before placing a prayer
 
for the ground. Blessed America,
there is good in you yet. The moon
 
doesn’t have to bury any children because the earth
carries so many bodies in the soil. In a casket
 
people are sometimes born. I have told my origin
story over and over. My parents fought, too.
 
In Vietnam. They dodged Jesus, who’d
extended his hand. And so I was born
 
in a lunar mansion—a configuration of the moon
where my face changes in accordance with the light.

Do I look alive
enough out there?
 
Crushed velvet
signaling my intent
 
to be devoured, undone,
et cetera, whatever else
 
shows veritable effort
I want useless splendor,
 
to be as carried off
w/ rapture
 
as the woman who kissed
a Klimt hanging in a gallery,
 
later said It was a gesture of love...
I did not think it out carefully
 
I want the class wars to start
but everyone's so tired
 
All these neologisms
​for disruption & innovation
 
& still, not a soul I know
confuses precarity w/ play
 
Eros, I've looked
for you all over
 
Our totalitarian state
​glitched out my libido
  
& I give over whole afternoons
to huffing lavender,
 
hitting up ghoulish senators,
browser history littered
 
w/ herbal elixirs &
​all the things I should know
 
how to do by now. All around
me, women grip the buoys
 
of their autonomy to stay
afloat until personhood washes up
 
on the shores of no nation
I stockpile intimacies almost
 
too ephemeral to clock:
strangers act so kind
 
whenever I wear
this ridiculous pom-pom hat
 
& old friends use my name's diminutive
& some lovers leave
 
a glass of lemon water by the bed,
my body carved w/ red filigree
 
Desire doesn't aspire
to anything other than itself--
 
I don't miss so-&-so,
just being seen in that way,
 
just having an unholy place
to rest, set all this down

I wish I were as talented
at anything as he is
 
at pulling Derrida into
a conversation, any
 
conversation, no matter
what we’re discussing:
 
Derrida. Even once
when he was telling me
 
why he didn’t have
the assignment, even then
 
after a long and aerobic
journey we arrived
 
at Derrida, his white
hair and elegant European
 
ideas, and it felt good—
I admit it felt good to finally
 
arrive there—ah bonjour
Monsieur Derrida!—
 
because at least I knew
then where I was, even
 
if it wasn’t where
I wanted to be. To pretend,
 
Derrida said, I actually
do the thing: I have therefore
 
only pretended to pretend.
I pretend sometimes. Other
 
times all I do is pretend.
I’ve created gods this way
 
and on occasion I’ve tied
those gods together
 
like they do bed sheets
in a movie, and I’ve escaped
 
the high tower of myself
this way, I’ve made it
 
to solid ground this way,
landed on the earth.
 
And each time I’ve been sure
I’ve actually done the thing,
 
but then I look up
and the gods are gone.

what day drinking’s like, like the sensation
of swimming without goggles in cold
water chlorine burn holding hands, what
listening through a stethoscope is like, oh
glowing second trimester—la luna é più bella—
what startling awaking in the middle-
of-day to the middle-of-nowhere is like
what looking up at Mt. Rushmore is like
what touching an enemy’s face is like
 
what it was like to play a flute that was 
carved from an ulna found in a bird  
that formed part of an omen in flight (whose
entrails spoke further darker messages) 
in the extravagant petaling of night

She bought
an African gold weight—half
the size of her thumb (typically
various sexual poses—this one,
doggie style), and pointed out
that the woman
was being raped.  How can you tell?
Because his little hand (perfectly
formed, each finger
small as a letter
in a book) is
over her mouth.

 I spend so much time looking
              at scars in the mirror I sometimes forget about
my scabs—recent, tender. The other
                         morning,
 
when the sun made the third-floor
classroom feel like spring
            had broken like a stick cracked over
 
a knee, a student scratched her leg until a scab
from some impossible
 
mosquito
bite ruptured, a darksome blood-burn
 
sinking
like a spring down into her brie-
white socks where it pinked, spreading. Sometimes I think
          about those lace-
cuffed anklets my grandmother made me
 
wear with black Mary Janes each Easter—
 
the way they made me feel
             like Hermes when a breeze
      caught them and fluttered
 
at my heels. My body has always been pagan
          in its rituals—all blood
and the goat’s heads
 
of its dreams. I once had to sage
a new house in which I move
 
my superstitions from room to room
 
         like a broom, dusting
 
up my blessings. I’ve learned to leave
          all my doors
 
unlocked when I’m not home. I’ve learned
          to leave all my doors
 
          open to the possibility.

(I’m not) I don’t want my whole
life grieving, no gleaming, nothing
fallen, (I’m not) that city. But what’s
Atlantis without the water, Pompeii
(I’m not) save those bodies, startled,
huddling. I’m not ruined. (But) Isn’t
this what’s inherent (I can’t), the living
and not knowing. (I’m not) Then
some nights I’m frozen. I couldn’t figure
out how to bring anyone (I won’t)
with me, (I) and I can’t convince
the people around me to return. (But)
Return to what, to whom? Any MLK,
(I’m not) there’s your share of disaster.
One west coast stretching out another.
This tree I started, it’s just a few
states, or branches, into the Atlantic,
which is another form of blackness. 

How wrong it was to look at those hearts incised
in maples and birches with a loving
arrow between them, especially when the tree
grew larger and the hearts expanded
the way they do and love took over the tree
and we said, “Here’s another” and our own hearts
broke in two with envy and regret
but what we didn’t know then was they were emblems,
signs, of something deeper and more discordant
for they—the lovers—had turned to sacrifice
and torn the other’s heart out from its moorings
and held the wet organ in their own hands,
loose and disconnected from the strings,
the hearts of lovers deeply separated
from what were once such arrows of desire,
and some were painted red on buried stones
planted in the ground like broken teeth.

Look at the homie,
   even when in a gang
              he came home to crack Nietzsche, Beyond
 
             Good and Evil, Will
to Power. Believing everybody dies at twenty-four,
not seeing a future in pump-faking, even then.
 
 You ever try to read philosophy high?
Gone to the hole and hoped for the foul,
                          wished only to finish.
 
After rolling joints in two Zig-Zags,
after an hour of starching pants,
he transferred trollies and buses.
 
                                           He’s going places.                        
Look at homie, trying to fix himself. Thinks,
out of repetition comes variation.
        
                        It takes a lot of effort
to look
                       like you’re not trying.
It should be an air ball
                      to go to college
 
             at twenty-one, the father of two, just
                                          to play basketball. When
 
most folks say they want to change the world
                                      they mean their own.

Let me be pure/let me be holeless
 
The safest girls are those who stay quiet
 
Saints would stitch their lips shut with black wire
 
I always said that one day I would be holy
 
I always said that one day I would be a swan
 
Mute and nothing but tar and lovely feathers
 
We used to mix vinegar with salt water
 
Gargle it to look for cuts inside our throats
 
I used to swab my own throat until I choked on the cotton
 
Once I coughed for so long my lungs fell out
 
Once I forgot how to speak
 
Once I became all stone
 
Once I was something not girl
 
Once I was a bird
 

Listen, she says.
 
I’m listening, I answer
and kiss her chin.
 
Obviously, you’re not, she says.
 
I kiss her nose and both of her eyes.
I can do more than one thing at a time,
I tell her. Trust me.
I kiss her cheeks.
 
You’ve heard of planting lotuses in a fire, she says.
You’ve heard of sifting gold from sand.
 
You know
perfumed flesh, in anklets, and spirit, unadorned,
take turns at lead and follow,
one in action and repose.
 
I kiss her neck and behind her ear.
 
But there are things you need reminded of, she says.
So remind me, Love, I say.
 
There are stories we tell ourselves, she says.
There are stories we tell others.
Then there’s the sum
of our hours
death will render legible.
 
I unfasten the top button of her blouse
and nibble her throat with more kisses.
 
Go on, I say, I’m listening.
You better be, she says,
You’ll be tested.
 
 
I undo her second,
her third, fourth, and last buttons quickly,
and then lean in
to kiss her collarbone.
 
She says, The world
is a story that keeps beginning.
In it, you have lived severally disguised:
bright ash, dark ash, mirror, moon;
a child waking in the night to hear the thunder;
a traveler stopping to ask the way home.
And there’s still
the butterfly’s night sea-journey to consider.
 
She says,
There are dreams we dream alone.
There are dreams we dream with others.
Then there’s the lilac’s secret
life of fire, of God
accomplished in the realm
of change and desire.
 
Pushing my hand away from her breast,
she keeps talking.
 
Alone, you dream in several colors: Blue,
wishing, and following the river.
 
In company, you dream in several others:
The time you don’t have.
The time left over.
And the time it takes.
 
Your lamp has a triple wick:
remembering, questioning, and sheltering
made of your heart’s and mind’s agreement.
With it, you navigate the two seas: Day
with everything inside it;
night and all that’s missing.
 
Meanwhile, I encounter difficulty
with her skirt knot, her fingers
confounding my progress,
as she goes on reviewing the doubtful points.
 
There are words we say in the dark.
There are words we speak in the light.
And sometimes they’re the same words.
 
From where I’ve been sitting beside her,
I drop to one knee before her.
 
There’s the word we give
to another.
There’s the word we keep
with ourselves.
And sometimes they’re the same word.
 
I slip one hand inside her blouse
and find her naked waist.
My other hand cradles her bare foot
from which her sandal has fallen.
 
A word has many lives.
Quarry, the word is game, unpronounceable.
Pursuant, the word is judge, pronouncing sentence.
Affliction, the word is a thorn, chastising.
 
I nudge her blouse open with my nose
and kiss her breastbone.
 
The initiating word
embarks, fixed between sighted wings, and
said, says, saying, none are the bird,
each just moments of the flying.
 
Doubling back, the word is infinite.
We circle ourselves,
the fruit rots in time,
and we’re just passengers of our voices,
a bird in one ear crying, Two!
There are two worlds!
A bird in the other ear urging, Through!
Be through with this world and that world!
 
Her blouse lapses around her shoulders,
and I bend lower
to kiss her navel.
 
There are voices that wake us in the morning, she says.
There are voices that keep us up all night.
 
I lift my face and look into her eyes. I tell her,
The voices I follow
to my heart’s shut house say,
A member of the late
and wounded light enjoined to praise,
each attends a song that keeps leaving.
 
Now, I’m fondling her breasts
and kissing them. Now,
I’m biting her nipples.
Not meaning to hurt her,
I’m hurting her a little,
and for these infractions I receive
the gentlest tugs at my ear.
 
She says,
All night, the lovers ask, Do you love me?
Over and over, the manifold beloved answers,
I love you.     Back and forth,
merging, parting, folding, spending,
the lovers’ voices
and the voices of the beloved
are the ocean’s legion scaling earth’s black bell,
their bright crested foam
the rudimentary beginnings
of bridges and wings, the dream of flying,
and the yearning to cross over.
 
Now, I’m licking her armpit. I’m inhaling
its bitter herbal fumes and savoring
its flavor of woodsmoke.   I’ve undone
the knot to her skirt.
 
Bodies have circled bodies
from the beginning, she says,
 
but the voices of lovers
are Creation’s most recent flowers, mere buds
of fire nodding on their stalks.
 
In love, we see
God burns hidden, turning
inside everything that turns.
And everything turns. Everything
is burning.
 
But all burning is not the same.
Some fires kindle freedom.
Some fires consolidate your bondage.
Do you know the difference?
 
I tell her, I want you to cup your breasts
in both of your hands
and offer them to me.
I want you to make them wholly
available to me.
 
I want to be granted open liberty
to leave many tiny
petal-shaped bruises,
like little kisses, all over you.
 
One and one is one, she says,
Bare shineth in bare.
 
Think, she says, of the seabirds
we watched at dawn
wheeling between that double blue
above and below them.
 
Defined by the gravity they defy,
they’re the radiant shadows of what they resist,
 
and their turns and arcs in air
that will never remember them
are smiles on the face of the upper abyss.
 
Their flying makes
our inner spaciousness visible,
even habitable, restoring us
to infinity, we beings of non-being,
each so recent a creature,
and only lately spirits
learning how to love.
 
Shrill, their winged hungers
fill the attic blue
and signal our nagging jeopardy:
Death’s bias, the slope
of our lives’ every minute.
 
I want to hear you utter
the sharpest little cries of tortured bliss,
I say, like a slapped whelp spurt
exquisite gasps of delighted pleasure.
 
But true lovers know, she says,
hunger vacant of love is a confusion,
spoiling and squandering
such fruit love’s presence wins.
 
The harvest proves the vine
and the hearts of the ones who tend it.
 
Everything else is gossip,
guessing at love’s taste.
 
The menace of the abyss will be subdued, I say,
when I extort from you the most lovely cries
and quivering whispered pleas
and confused appeals of, Stop, and, More, and, Harder.
 
To love, she says. For nothing.
What birds, at home in their sky,
have dared more?
 
What circus performer,
the tent above him, the net below,
has risked so much?   What thinker, what singer,
both trading for immortality?
 
Nothing saves him who’s never loved.
No world is safe in that one’s keeping.
 
I know you more than I know, she says.
My body, astonished, answers to your body
without me telling it to.
 
She says, I want you to touch me
as if you want to know me,
not arouse me.
 
She says, We are travelers among other travelers
in an outpost by the sea.
We meet in transit, strange to each other,
like birds of passage between a country and a country,
and suffering from the same affliction of sleeplessness,
we find each other in the night
while others sleep.   And between
the languages you speak and the several I remember,
we convene at the one we have in common,
a language neither of us were born to.
And we talk. We talk with our voices,
and we talk with our bodies.
And behind what we say,
the ocean’s dark shoulders rise and fall all night,
the planet’s massive wings ebbing and surging.
 
I tell her, Our voices shelter each other,
figures in a dream of refuge
and sanctuary.
 
Therefore, she says,
designations of North, South, East, and West,
Winter, Spring, Summer, Fall,
first son, second son, first daughter, second daughter,
change, but should correspond
to a current picture of the sky.
 
Each of our days fulfills
the measures of the sanctum
and its great tables’ rounds.
The tables are not round.
Or, not only round. At every corner,
opposites emerge, and you meet yourself.
 
I bow my head
and raise her foot to my mouth.
 
The pillared tables make a tower and a ladder.
They constitute the throne and the crown.
The crown is not for your
head.  The throne is not your seat.
The days on which the tables stand
will be weighed and named.
And the days are not days.
Not the way you might understand days.
The tables summon the feast
and are an aspect of the host.
 
The smell of her foot
makes me think of saddles.
I lick her instep. I kiss her toes. I kiss her ankle.
 
Don’t you kiss my lips
with that mouth, she says.
 
Gold bit, I think. Tender spur, I think.
 
I kiss her calves.   I kiss her knees.
I kiss the insides of her thighs.
I’m thinking about her hip bones. I’m tonguing
the crease where her thigh and her belly meet.
 
The rounds enclose the dance,
she says.
 
The round and the square together
determine the dimensions of the ark, she says.
 
The water is rising as we speak.
Call everyone to the feast.
 
The smell of her body
mixes with her perfume and makes me woozy.
 
All being tends toward fire, I say.
 
All being tends toward fire,
sayeth the fire, she says, correcting me.
 
All being tends toward water, sayeth the water,
Light, sayeth the light.
Wings, sayeth the birds.
Voice, sayeth the voiceless.
 
I tell myself,
Give up guessing, give up
these frightened gestures of a stooped heart.
 
I think, Inside her is the safest place
to be.  Inside her, with all those other mysteries,
those looming immensities:
god, time, death, childhood.
 
Are you paying attention? she says,
This is important.
One and one is two.
You and me are three.  A long arithmetic
no temporal hand reckons
rules galaxies and ants, exact
and exacting.  Lovers obey,
sometimes contradicting human account.
 
I’m drooling along her ribs.
I’m smacking my lips and tongue to better taste
her mossy, nutty, buttery, acrid sweat.
 
Listen, she says,
There’s one more thing.
Regarding the fires, there are two.
 
But I’m thinking,
My hands know things my eyes can’t see.
My eyes see things my hands can’t hold.
 
I’m telling myself,
Left and right grow wiser in the same house.
 
Listen, she says,
Never let the fires go out.
The paler, the hotter.
 
But I’m thinking, Pale alcove.
I’m thinking, My heart ripens with news
the rest of me waits to hear.
 
Are you listening?
But I’m not listening.
I’m thinking,
 
A nest of eggs for my crown, please. 
And for my cushion, my weight in grapes.
 
I’m thinking, In one light,
love might look like siege.
In another light, rescue
might look like danger.
 
She says, The seeds of fire are ours to mother.
 
The dust, the shavings,
and all spare materials
must be burned in both fires,
the visible and the invisible.
 
Even the nails burned in them.
Even the tools burned.
And then the oven dismantled and burned.
Have you been hearing me? It’s too late
for presidents. It’s too late for flags.
It’s too late
for movie stars and the profit economy.
The war is on.
If love doesn’t prevail,
who wants to live in this world?
Are you listening?
 
You thought my body was a tree
in which lived a bird.   But now, can you see
flocks alive in this blazing foliage?
 
Blue throngs, green multitudes, and pale congregations.
And each member flits from branch to living branch.
Each is singing at different amplitudes and frequencies.
Each is speaking secrets that will ripen into sentence.
And their voices fan my fragrant smoldering.
Disclosing the indestructible body of law.
Ratifying ancient covenants. Establishing new cities.
And their notes time the budding
of your own flowering.
Die now.  And climb up into this burning.

Pageant sash emblazoned on his chest,
White Jesus holds a staff under his arm.
 
Clean. Serene. Suppressing indigestion
as Sunday’s sermon twists, a lodestone bomb
 
locked in my gut, I contemplate still life—
Still, life in portraiture may smuggle truth,
 
if truth is where the bread invites the knife.
We nurse our credos like an aching tooth.
 
When I pray to the Lord, I dream Him moved
in heaven: all ears dragged to the ground—
 
black earth—I buckle in—steel tracks, bent, smoothed—
The engine of the maker runs me down
 
and God is both the table and the hunger,
and I am both the bullet and the gunner.

A murder of crows for the many
whose blood vessels will be shred
by barrel bombs’ shrapnel—the intent to maim
without exclusion. A murder of crows
for each mother and father who pawns all
except what will cover their backs
so they may join the thousands
driven into exasperated seas
to shirk their turn at becoming
casualties. A murder of crows
for the tiny bodies those seas swallow.
And do you see? A murder
of crows for those of us with eyes
keen yet uncurious. A murder of crows
for those who cooperate
and are slaughtered nonetheless.
And do you see the sky? A murder of crows
for those well aware of how easily
rights to a homeland can be voided
by militias adorned with flags and royal
rifles. A murder of crows for those
who have never worn a uniform but have
had war waged against them. A murder of
crows for a uranium pact feared fragile.
A murder of crows for the airmen who study
display screens on an armed force base,
waiting to tap triggers that incinerate
bodies in another hemisphere. A murder
of crows for the downed pilot—his parachute
guiding him into a lake where he is rescued
then burned alive for the camera. And do you see
the sky feathering in iridescent, dark—
how it does not resemble the sky you know?
It is the only sky the many have seen
for years. What little light in condolences
you offer—you, like it or not,
born with bread in your fists,
born adorably feeding the crows
the way your father fattened the crows
and his father fattened the crows. When
the murders of crows arrive broad
as a giant black stork, they claw apart
the hospitals, the nesting beds.
They bundle the last obstetrician in rubble
then soar up to perch above
the scrum, blocking the sunlight.
When the first mother abandoned during labor
breaks—when her bloody yolk runs
and makes a mud of all the dust—no longer
is there a murder. A birth: the debris and rust
tinged clay shape themselves into an unforgiving
mountain—a new scar we give the earth’s
flesh. And sometimes a scar
marks healing. And sometimes a scar can
only remind you what burned, what was
severed, what had to flee
a body—to be beheld never again.

Late hours roll in               sooty & untenanted
the ghosts gone wandering          Woe's plateau
feels plain           like no terrain at all
 
From somewhere              beyond the reach of this pale lamp
a pack stirs            hunched & rangy             an evolving promise
not to spring              Do you recall the dark
 
-knotted trees we saw          across the river's broad waist?
How they held           a number of things
we made no sense of        until they fled
 
gray bodies spanning several feet        once unfolded
each neck an arrow           pointing resolutely away
Will we find them again        if we follow?
 
They say one's grave       is the simplest place
to find                You just look down

Have you noticed how the news has stopped
referring to nations as nations? Nations,
instead, are now named economies, and ranked.
 
We fall asleep in screen-cast light. We stir,
reluctant, when the sun double-taps us.
Statistics and GDP slather our eyes as hiber-
 
nation sets in. There it enters us—osmosed
through the membrane-body to our hearts.
Our arteries constrict with worry over occupations
 
snuffed by export tele-commutes. New industry
promises. We can’t shake belief that manpower and labor
force still share a body. The horse knows this
 
is not true, that we will soon gauge droids, their work,
the same as we rate motors, except we will be the forgotten
beasts of measure. __________-power. The torque
 
from turbines that animate processors crammed with 1s
and 0s. The distance between data and dollar rendered
nil. What need is the negotiated work day or week
 
to the drone that is each product and bearer
of product and consumer (we drones) of product
—that palliation of becoming alien to our work?

O Walt you were wrong, they aren’t placid or self-contained
I just watched a spoonbill make carpaccio out of a frog
& crocodiles dining on wildebeests trying to cross the Maro River
 
It’s wrong to say O in poetry these days
which makes me want to have a loud orgasm right here
in an unashamed animal way
 
You must have been looking at some cows on a farm but who wants to                   live like that
standing around in a shed with sore tits, shitting claustrophobically
or standing around shitting & being tortured by flies & eating grass
 
I know you like grass but it’s no fun to be a pricey pre-hamburger
ruminating with no TV
If you’d had a cable subscription maybe you would have felt differently
watching NatGeo Wild & those exhausted herds on the Serengeti
 
Walt, I still love you even if in this instance you might have been
                a victim of the pastoral tradition
Let me tell you about animals: The green anaconda swallowed
               the young capybara whole
 
O o oh oh oh OHHHH Walt
Capybaras are the largest rodents on earth
 
I don’t think I’d survive as an animal for long, even a large one—look                   at the elephants
Imagine being murdered & becoming a doo-dad
or furniture inlay
 
Walt, I actually like sweating & whining about my condition
Hot flashing & bitching in my cream satin sheets, lying awake drunk                   & weeping in the dark
I’d definitely like to own more things
 
An electric knife sharpener for instance would come in handy
for carving up the less fortunate on special holidays
I want to be lucky as long as I can
 
Walt, Walt, I don’t think death is luckier or leads life forward
               like you said
I don’t think I’m going to grow from the grass you love
I’m just going to have one last blackout in a dirty pink lace dress
& be eaten by tiny ugly legless larvae 

I wonder who created the house
           where the men
now run wild
                  There the tables are running
over         no one says come in
 
the door taken off its hinges
is weighed down by bottles of gin
 
   hidden in a corner of the room
           a man attempts to write a poem
in the terror of himself is an animal
                                            eating all the voices echoing in a gorge
 
     the bush fire is burning down one farm after another
and no one is home
        
        the anguish they ran from is the one within them
 
There in the house with no roof    the guardian spirits wept
and went out
                 to find another village to pass the night  
                                      the drought is everywhere
no one hides from water
 
  the poet writes         I am always inheriting the fear of all that is lost
 
the sweet soprano of a widow      the dying breath of a lamb
 
the morning swoops in     the vultures     always the vulture
 
comes in and waits        the poet’s duty is to wait too
 
what god did we offend        at the end of mourning
 
we did not take off the black cloth
       we waited for the sky     we waited for the women dancing
to the blackened day
 
there in the house where the dog licking his paw
on a hot day ran into hiding          the men will come out 
and wait      the rumble getting louder and louder
 
and then it will drop
the men will jump into air and join the women
to sing
 
  our joy is a memory bird
digging the shallowness of our hearts 
digging quickly to find the source of our doubts
something rootless
a ghost it is molding
into a burning effigy   

After every party at my house, every dinner with relatives, after each meeting, or a lesson I'm not sure how to teach, I announce to no one, Well, no one died. In this case I'm not sure what joke to make, everything good so legislated to be crushed. Am not interested in trying the seafood. Early on, had never considered a political party or marriage. Had not considered until now the birds panting to death in the heat. Did what any part-Mongolian person would do and went northward in summer to Iceland: green, white, and black. Tourists laugh all down the highway at the landscape so operatic it hurts. The lake illuminated by low sun at eleven p.m. Tourists die there, not reading the signs, or we fall from cliffs while finding a better view. I went randomly to this nation where, because my father had shaken his head at me often, You are so damned independent, I recognized their flag, a declaration of never having been ruled by a King, now no standing army. These fólk who invented Parliament, expelled the Danes, discuss for hours the ancient sagas. My fellow Americans say aloud, Don´t these people believe in paper towels? Today, instead of speaking Icelandic, a language so little changed by ten centuries that a computer is called a numberwitch, and a tank a crawlingdragon, Icelandic teens speak English to each other. Because, “It´s easier.” I say to an Icelandic woman, “You know, that´s the inequality between black and white people,” and she says -- hiding on her face that she knows  -- “White person, what is that?” As many guns as us per capita and—hold breath—two murders per 330,000 people in a year. Their cartoonist´s paindeer defeats an entire army. From the top of its head, a small sunset shoots red signals about the end of things and topples each armed man. Pain, in fact, is the beginning of something. The Icelanders held up níðing poles draped with the heads and hides of sheep or cod at corrupt bankers in 2009. Banged pots and pans at them. They lucked out, who knows what would have happened if they’d taken over an inhabited island? Yet, from their country, I saw the angry scribble of my country. That other Americans and I spoke so freely outside home. To walk outside at midnight with zero fear. No tank, no flame could touch that. To souvenir an imperfect but more actual freedom. To hear a language that came back into use from the villages after a colonizer´s language was pushed out. To hear something old, ethereal, musical from every person´s mouth. To turn a bright thing over in the mind, the way a poem gets repeated to oneself again and again.

You see, darling, 
The biggest problem was that they
 
Could not seem to agree
On whether they all were the same animal
 
Nor could they agree, therefore,
On whether they all had equal value. Value
 
They measured, not merely by the fact of breath,
Rendering value obsolete

As a matter of course, but by paper
Dyed into various colors. (They could not agree
 
On a single color, colors were very
Hard for them, darling.) And that paper 
 
That was dyed and used to measure
Value, passing from hand

To hand, from lover to lover
And so on and so forth,
 
Came, of all things,
From their trees, when their trees
 
Created the very air they breathed
Which, though of life, was, to them,
 
Not of value. And so we know
They had gifts great enough to see
 
Into and out of their condition: the voices
They sang with, the music and poems

And toward the end, before the fire rain
Came and the oceans lifted and merged into one,
 
Even the structures they lived within
Which healed them as they slept. And though 
 
The minds of many were truly formidable, truly
Formidable, the hearts of some
 
Alert and alive, they were so detached
From one another, even from those they chose

To birth or raise or walk beside, often existing
Entirely in their bodies, or not at all,
 
They required something they called a self
Which I think, darling, 
 
Meant they would have believed that
You were not I—
 
Not ever—
Which, to us, now, would seem silly, wouldn’t it?

When she’d tried to shush the families behind us,
and in front of us, and beside us, scowling
in fastidious distaste -- they were chatting, during
her grandson’s graduation; when
the ceremony had ended; when the dinner
was eaten, when we took her back
to her room in the college dormitory like a
medieval fortress, and went
over the room, with her, again --
the window, the light, the heat, the key,
the bathroom she would share with strangers --
I pretended everything was fine, but I saw,
for a moment, that my mother really had been
an orphan, she’d never for a moment had a mother
who could love her.  So I kissed her forehead, and left her
there, little pack-rat in an old stone room
with a twenty-four-foot ceiling, and I went
upstairs, and in a narrow dorm bed like a
trough my husband and I flew through the
air carolling -- now I see I was
trilling like the wren who threw the phoebe
nestling out of the back-porch nest, I was
that kind of happy, having put
my mother in durance.  For years, then,
I ate my gladness of her anxious night
without knowing I was eating it.
Weeks before her death, she smiled, and
said, “Remember that dungeon?” and I kissed her
with sudden affection toward the one who without
having been loved by her own mother
had taught me to love her and hate her, to hate and love.

MOON and its dark star of calamity.
MOON like moths: twilight- and night- flying white moths.
MOON with half-suicidal/half-sexual affect.
 
 
Unimpressed, Islamic nations won’t standardize a lunar calendar.
Should we bother to name it soon? A Copernican principle insists
there is nothing at all special about Earth’s little corner of universe—
 
moon      stars      sunshine      everything      else…
 
Yet in our orbit, Neil Armstrong claims he heard the Adhan—the call
to prayer—thus converting. First man bowing from Moon toward Mecca.
Did he think to recheck his horoscope? Astrology is anthropocentric:
 
So, constellations appear entirely different anywhere other than Earth
—Pick any moon; Planet that is a diamond; Planet of inaudible hum.
Tethered to this planet of escalating nonsense, I prefer homemade prophecy:
 
I browse Bibles, pushing pins in random verses, turning scripture into policy.
Call it insurance against a god who seems to be “seeing how things go.”
Personally, I choose to believe I hold death in my pouch—I can not die.

In every city there’s a room
 
lined with boxes of
the unclaimed, each the size of
 
half a loaf of
good bread. My friend collects these
 
boxes, which he then
brings home & opens & empties
 
the ash into a bucket to
mix with a medium to make another
 
painting. One
 
box is smaller, only as big as a few sticks
of butter, five days old
 
typed out on the label. My friend
does not even open this box, he
 
cannot, it is heavier than you
might imagine. Stardust, he
 
simply places it in the center of
a large white canvas.

The look I am hunting: the one
that through color and cut glares
 
the starer into a skull or a skein
of lightning, a switch
 
stalled at dawn, or the gloaming
along an equator. What fascinates
 
I shine like flame-blackened foil,
a rhinestone snoring at lake bottom,
 
a wreck's brass-bound astrolabe,
bright as hard tender, newly minted,
 
mewling and naked under
oil-slick pleather sieving light,
 
prism-like, my limbs sing their siren
song, pull ribbons of pure note over
 
the pack's snarl and bark, teeth pop,
dangling chain of saliva snaps—
 
deep under, I stay
seamless as a safe, a rust-sealed letter
 
box, corroded pill case, my insides
scoured to looking glass
 
by a tangle of wind trapped,
a cyclone circling the space
 
the size a doll's eye makes,
panting my small breath.
 
 
When Wendy asked what we dream, I wanted to say war and drowning. Not drowning exactly, but the moment when the choice is made to drown or not drown, before the mouth opens. Instead I said I never dream of cats. But that night I remembered the cats I dreamed in New York:
 
I’d been in a dark room sleeping, and a black cat appeared. I had wanted the cat to like me, feeling that if I were liked, chosen by children or animals, it made me popular and good in an invisible way.  I had called to the cat, a male, in a soothing way.
 
A man who had stood in the doorway imitated the cat, the way the cat would talk to me, in a very slow manner, nothing like the comfort of speech. The man spoke in excruciatingly slow motion speech, like a caricature: he opened his mouth like a cavern, and said “Howwwwwww   Aaaaaaaaar  Yooooouuuu” behind the cat’s back. Just as he finished, the black cat (who hadn’t heard the man) got very close to my face, opened his black cavern mouth, and spoke exactly as the man had, but with sincerity. Like a play. The cat had a companion, another cat or an insect, and both lay down to rest beside me. The companion cat or insect was making plans for the rest of their lives with me. The man in the doorway said it was obsession, and tried to shoo the cats/insect away with a round bamboo net and a loud “Yaaaaahhh.” The cats/insect were unmoved. I feared they’d be with me forever.
 
The buildings across the street turned blue. Linda said, “You’re a different person now.” She took out her camera phone, and pointed it at me, clicked. In the tiny screen, I saw that I was underwater, almost part of the wall, the corner booth, even the sun that came in through the glass beside me, everything else in between. Linda said, “We should go.” She was keeping the time.
 
Passing the bar, the Hanging Man hung from one foot, upside down. The Traitor in older tarot decks. The Star showed a naked woman, hair blown back. Headband. Her skin enough of clothing. The woman emptied two water jars into the room, more green swim.” I was dizzy from blood loss.
 
And I hadn’t gotten pregnant, like I’d told my doctor I would. At my twelve-week check-up, my doctor said, “Okay, you’re all set to get pregnant, so go get married.” Cocky in all my meetings with him—the man with the knife. In my initial consultation, he’d touched the forefinger of each hand to his own hips to show me where my ovaries were. As if I didn’t know, didn’t feel them tug and pinch every month, releasing. His fingers held there delicately, as if he were a dancer holding a pose. But now, after he’d had his hands inside me, seen what I would never see, after he’d stapled me back together, and was making a little joke, his round eyes wobbled, looked uncertain. His nurse had laughed, said, “She doesn’t have to get married.” I didn’t get pregnant or married. Walking down the street, all the stairs lead up to the sky. A landing in between each flight.

By now you probably know the story: an English professor awakens to find, like Kafka's Gregor, that he has turned into something unthinkable, something so unlike who he was. In this case not a beetle but a breast. Young, perfectly round, its nipple erect. What if he had woken to find himself a breast at ease in middle age, its nipple sure of its opinion but not in constant need to give it? In this room with a turret, the inspiration for the story, you are not turned on, but troubled by the memory of your mother in her last years pushed around in a wheelchair entirely braless. Did it feel like freedom or resignation to no longer have to roust the girls up and about, or make them unwilling interlocutors? You think for the nursing home this was mainly convenience. With so much to do, why harness old women who've wandered off a darkened stage? Your mother who would never answer the door without a girdle, much less a bra. What if the breast had been delicate and shallow, a bead of water trembling on the paddle of a thirsty cactus? Flat as a mesa, scarred like an arroyo? Or why not two breasts, one a full cup larger than the other from having nursed too long in the same position while writing recommendation letters? Above the desk the concentric circles of a white domed ceiling punctuated in the center by a round light that tear drops into a nipple, and around the nipple an areola of desiccated insects drawn to its luminous glands. One understands when entering a room that others have been there before you. But this room is never just itself, it is always a story that hovers over your own. What if the nipple had sprouted a hair, and given the professor’s lack of hands, remained forever unplucked? What if the nipple had been inverted, and not, as the story goes, phallic? A breast leaking milk, its infected ducts hard and throbbing under a cabbage leaf? The domed ceiling has two cracks like veins under pale skin. On the roof, where the turret lives, is another breast whose nipple pulls energy from the center of the desk to its weathervane. It's hard to get a signal beneath it, you have to sit on the bed to text a friend whose father died yesterday. I didn't get a chance to say goodbye, she writes. And, fuck capitalism. Perfectly framed by the window to your left is a long thin tree among a thicket, that pushes proudly from its trunk what looks like a breast, because now everything does, but is actually a scar over a wound called a burl, the result of some type of stress: injury, virus, fungus. Valued for its beauty, this type of scar is often poached, destroying the tree it was trying to protect. A Redwood can sprout another Redwood from its burl if it thinks it might die. The women in your family, their breasts at any age fall sideward. They never point to future or sky, but each, after sex, are waterfalls into canyons.

No tired queens.
 
No ghosts coming back to replay their shredded remnants of old failures.
 
No more wishing for death. No more answering death’s letters.
 
No thousand and second night.
 
No curse for the only President I ever truly loathed.
 
No breathing into the fire, no digging down into earth.
 
No merciful caress of the cat fatally wounded in the street last June.
 
No ear or voice.
 
No tough zippered stride, no declaration of independence.
 
No more searching my skin with my own palms, searching for rib-bones’ or hip-bones’ protrusions.
 
No horizontal desperation, no seeking the sun.
 
No flounce of my hair, that old gesture, every time I open my mouth to begin.
 
No beginning.
 
No making love in the evening light on the hotel balcony.
 
No poem to explain myself.
 
No promise. No more ghosting death. In the index of the planet’s history of god and literature and the human spirit I decline any entry.

When my family burnt it all, we
 
even burnt the dolls. I write
 
about this all the time, but have you
 
ever seen anything like it? A pit
 
of ashes and dozens of porcelain 
 
hands, sprouting up like girlish 
 
weeds. So far in this life, I have 
 
heard a number of unacceptable 
 
apologies and they have all begun 
 
with “I’m sorry” and ended with 
 
OxyContin. It’s a shame 
 
the Pennsylvanian landscape 
 
is just waterfalls, coal, and 
 
pharmaceutical drugs. I wish
 
there were more libraries and less
 
violence, but I have always been so
 
painfully hopeful. On Facebook 
 
yesterday, my sister’s boyfriend 
 
messages “she’s abandoned me
 
at the airport, I don’t know what
 
to do” and I resist the urge 
 
to tell him: that’s what she does 
 
to all of us. Instead I write back,
 
“Oh no!” There are so many ways 
 
to be angry at just one thing.
 
I haven’t seen my sister in 9 years 
 
and sometimes I have a temper
 
with my hand-fruit, bite it, a little 
 
too hard, because chewing 
 
is such a frustrated act
 
to being with. At 7 years old 
 
my father said he was going
 
to push me all the way around
 
on the swing-set; I leapt off
 
at the peak, airborne and so
 
sure of his strength. Centripetal
 
or centrifugal, neither
 
matter if your face meets
 
the ground, alive with blood and 
 
mulch. At 11 my father told me 
 
the legend of Pope Joan, and I loved
 
how she hid her her-ness in plain 
 
sight. So invisibly woman. When she
 
gave birth, and was put to death,
 
I imagined she must have been raped.
 
She must have. I believe strongly
 
that had I known one trans person
 
as a child, I’d have half as many scars
 
as an adult. I could have come
 
around to this body so much sooner
 
and without as many cigarette burns,
 
my whole body a cratered and earth
 
bound moon. Often, when I am drunk
 
and alone, white men ask me
 
what I have against white men
 
if I want to look like one, and then
 
they follow me all the way home.
 
It seems every man in America 
 
has been taught to stalk real quiet
 
in a forest of dry leaves. Myself included.
 
I am not a man, nor do I desire to be,
 
but I suppose I have always been 
 
a hunter, armed and unwilling
 
to consider my own shortcomings.
 
After I woke from my double
 
mastectomy, I thought about the day
 
my father killed two doe with one bullet 
 
and we butchered them both, right
 
there and then. There is two 
 
of everything worth having two of. 
 
Now I am so visibly trans, I am being 
 
photographed in white light, my scars
 
lit like dogwood crowns. It’s hard 
 
to know what to make of this, when 
 
all I have ever known is blood
 
red and a wilderness. Recently
 
a new cloud was introduced 
 
to the atlas, known for its apocalypse 
 
lip color, its mouth opening dark-deep—
 
like a sinkhole, or your trans lover’s eager
 
and previously abused mouth. Nobody
 
wants to be lonely, least of all me. 
 
Maybe I am interested in clouds 
 
because I am one, stratus sliced post
 
surgery, or maybe it’s because I’m an air
 
sign and have been missing my family 
 
for years, despite all their lava, 
 
all their hot angry fuel. My mother 
 
is a better whistler than me, but 
 
I think we both understand air, 
 
and our mouths, and the best 
 
ways to call for help. Listen, 
 
there is a razor in the apple 
 
and the apple is the earth. Listen,
 
my nightmares are dreams in which
 
everyone walks the same direction—
 
that rhythmic lockstep. Both of my
 
grandmothers considered abortion.
 
And can you imagine?
 
Being so close to nothing.

Cows calve, horses foal, goats kid, but women do not child.
Another verb separates us from the noun of it, a distance between
cells that split in my body, my body, and her wet fur on my stomach.
 
I spent all morning as an animal, all afternoon covering
that knowledge up with dirt and sticks. I scratched
out a hole to bury my shame in. Someday my bones
 
would be gnawed at by something with fur. I tasted
bitter adrenaline down my throat. I laid with you
haunch to haunch and rolled back my reason. Once our species
 
could cooperate, we could drop bombs, invent plastic, extract
fossil fuels, burn and burn. Books showed species that could
decimate a herd. Our forward-facing eyes made us predator, but
 
it all seemed long ago: before we’d transcended to these
insulated rooms and screens. We studied bodies we’d made
extinct as a hobby. It seemed impossible we were still
 
roaming the countryside, still on the ships with such large
holds. The animals my daughter loves best she distorts with love:
bear’s fur matted under an arm, skunk’s head misshapen
 
with sleep. I watch her menagerie fray, try to rethread
the monkey’s arm to its body, brush out the horse’s tangle
of plastic mane. In her room, I can repair a species. When she
 
gets older someone will tell her how to groom the animal off
of herself. My body took calcium from my body to make her
milk, I nursed her with my bones. The verb nurse means to care
 
for in illness, to drink too long a single drink, to keep
a grudge too closely. Her cells and mine changed places,
I extracted my elements to feed her. What could be
 
wilder than the body of a mother? Believe in my bones the risk
I feel. Weather the new war our culture tells us not to speak
of. But my body knows to go outside in an earthquake, to huddle
 
down when the wind blows. To bite. To keen. To howl.

missing Melissa – dust turned to waves
in the desert – okra coming up two months
too late – a forward breaking gate opening
into someone else’s field – I walk by
a window and I do not understand how little I see
you – but so clearly the wasp backing out
of a hole inside a long dead
tree – when we were children we lived
with our grandparents and I remember without
sadness mostly the sound of tires screaming into
the street – the porchlight welcomes
whatever intercepts it – I praise
insistence – I kiss
my love because our best friend died
when we were 5 years old – a brain tumor –
and then again at 7, 11, 17…43 – bodies
killing themselves by growing
beyond their own capacity – I am building
a bed for our visitors – it is infuriating how little
I understand about re-joining wood already broken
piece by piece – anticipate everything
I hear God saying to no one – I am still listening
when you stop, for a moment, breathing
in your sleep – I am recognizable
now as a part of the man who made me –
every man is a suspect – inside my own mouth
I am annoyed by who I cannot seem to be –
do you miss this Melissa – every part of our body
is ash aching to be reminded it is ash – unlike fire
reaching through the face of every forest
in order to be incited by wind or offered
some relief – I’ve learned to flinch
by standing absolutely still – it isn’t death exactly living
without you – the purpose of a rope
is to borrow someone else’s strength – that’s why
I’m calling you – when I pray I hear nothing
so clearly as our new voice
singe-scoured and full of disbelief –

“My arm is so brown and so beautiful,” is a thought I have
as I’m about to turn off the lamp and go to sleep.
I look at it a moment in the soft glow, and see it, briefly,
as though it belonged to someone else. A reddish
kind of brown, like a toasted almond, only flecked
with the fine, gold hairs of summer. And it occurs to me,
that I have always loved the brownness of my skin,
The way, just now, I stopped to admire my own thigh,
its deeper tone  against the crisp white of my cotton robe.
As a girl, I wanted to be dark as my mother, whose skin
shone against crimson, malachite, plum. I loved the way
that gold gleamed against her neck, the way dark skin
forgives the accumulation of our years and griefs—and still
goes on, pliant and smooth and new. It made sense to me
that others slathered their limbs with oil, with unguent,
laid themselves out on roofs, on decks, on banks of sand,
gave themselves to the mercy of the sun. Though when
I seek a synonym for dark, I find dim, nefarious, gloomy,
threatening, impure. Is the world still so afraid of shadows?
Of the dark face of the earth, falling across the moon?
The dark earth, from which we’ve sprung, to which
we shall return? What we do not know lies in darkness.
The way the unsayable rests at the back of the tongue.
So let us sing of it—for the earth is a dark loam
and the night sky an unfathomable darkness.
And it is darkness I now praise. The dark at the exact
center of the eye. Dark in the bell’s small cave.
The secret cavity of the nucleus. The quark.
How hidden is the sacred, quickening in the dark
behind the visible world. O Yaweh, O Jehovah,
henceforth I will name you: Inkwell, Ear of Jaguar,
Skin of the Fig, Black Jade, Our Lady of Onyx. That
which I cannot fathom. In whose image I am made.

This will help.
 
Smaller & smaller. Skin looser.
The healthy are afraid to mention, afraid to say what is happening. As soon as you think you know what is happening, you do not know. What is happening?
It is happening to you, afraid it is happening to you.
 
This will help you.
 
There is nothing surprising except everything you are feeling. The giving way.
The way everything is predictable but never to you, exactly.
 
This will help you to arrange, hold, stem, reconstruct words into meaningful predictive protective—
 
The made.
The made way for.
The giving way to.
Words makes you watch.
 
What? your son says into the dark from bed, You’re saying I will cease to exist? Isn’t there any way to stop this?
 
be there watch stay wait into the dark or the dim light into the whatever light there is // as the breathing changes (yours the mothers the fathers the grandmothers the other grandmothers the other mother the machine) / stay here / you want to go out screaming into the diminished environment / the way “we” have ruined everything & the we that wants desperately against everything you know is true to be anything other than I //
 
you need to // stay // stay // here // see what is happening to the diminishing giving way / giving away / words reach / you need words to reach into / where there are no words / “there are no words” /
 
people always say those words / those words are the words people say /
 
stay there // stay // in the unmade made room in the still cardiac place / inside the loosening skin / the polar icecaps giving way / the giving way the world warming // the bodies one by one losing heat inside the giving way / for a brief time / he she they / we / treated each other as theirselves / the
 
polar diminishing animals the vanishing / we were once hearty with a sense of smell touch vision feeling taste future /
 
That’s it, right? The belief that there will be something that does not warm or cool, a second more of—
 
*
 
After the success & controversy surrounding her Immediate Family photographs Sally Mann decided it was time to stop taking pictures of her three children & move on to something else.
 
But what? She looked. She waited.
 
One day, as she stood in the kitchen of her Virginia farmhouse the sheriff called & told her there was an escaped convict on her farm & she had to get out. At that very moment she saw him. Running. Running toward the house. Police running after him as he ran toward the house. He shot. They shot. Police shotgun hit to the hip. The convict turned his pistol on himself.
 
Later she touched the pool of blood near the convict’s head. It was surprisingly dark, she said. When she touched it, it moved, she said. She saw the ground take a sip.
 
She began to photograph the place where he died. She began to go to the places nearby where many had died long or short ago & photograph those places using the materials photographers had used during the Civil War.
 
Then what?
 
What Remains.
 
She was given access to a facility in which someone was studying the decomposition of human bodies. A facility in which human bodies were strewn, laid out, in the open. Fly eaten, maggoted, at various stages. Sally Mann made photographs of these bodies, plate after plate.
 
Then closeup exposures of the children again but not children anymore rather living subjects & similar—like her face but not her face—living, ethereal from the old-timey process. The lens open, open, hold, hold, stay, stay, stay, OK.
 
Prints made & framed, years of work created & ready when the Pace Gallery in NY canceled the show at the last minute. Who wants to hang photos of dead bodies on their walls? Who would buy these? It is the only time in the film that Sally Mann cries on camera. Not when speaking about the death of her father or her favorite dog or the threats to charge her with child pornography & take her children & her equipment into custody.
 
 
I think it [the work] is important, but maybe it isn’t, Sally Mann says. Maybe it’s important but no one wants to see it? she says, wiping her nose.
 
*
 
The inclusion of this information helps you navigate the aboutness of this poem, maybe the whyness. It is a transmission from the poet, a kind of de/composition. The poet is not the you, is no I either.
 
[ here ] [now] the poet takes this opportunity to say:
 
This morning standing in the hot shower, hoping heat would enter my body & be trapped there even for an hour, even minutes, knowing it would dissipate, unlike the arsenic mercury BPAs my cells won’t give up—
 
which is the poem? which is the poet?
how does anything get inside anything else? anyone? how do you get it out?
 
*
 
You’re telling me I will cease to exist? the boy asks.
 
into the night into you the night pressing you in the dark his breathing catching uneven
 
Not for a very long time, you say.
 
but it is a short time // it is no // time // there are rocks & trees & polar icecaps // it is no time at all / it is too short
 
It will feel like a long, long time, you tell the boy. Maybe you will be ready, you tell the boy.
maybe you will feel ready to give way to let your / muscles give way even your heart to stop / beating let go of / the sense of future // the holding tight to clutching to others the we / clinging / the way the poet clings to the boy the night the voice the words
 
This will help you die—
 
asserts the poet not sure of anything—
 
 
—take it take it take this take it
she says
 
the mark you make in the present // weight of your body // way you press into the present your in out of oxygen carbon nitrogen / the gravity that holds you to this planet / is a clinging to others / even as you repel / the fabric of / the only perceivables are //                                           // this is the meaning of
 
the music of the room / live musicians / the nurse reading a book into / the room the stranger the doctor the daughter the friend / the gurney down the brightly lit / the home bedroom with hospital bed / the box the plot the visiting hour // the hours // the breath //
 
what did you think was going to happen? / did you think there was another way of bearing up? / a giving way the giving way to / the suddenly the slowly / the you saying someone else’s pain is worse / is lesser / is a blessing / the you who dreams the gone-away souls back again /
 
the you who goes on toward your own room bed stranger doctor daughter friend
 
We has made paintings of this. Paintings of all the stories in the world. And none of all the stories in the world are the stories of what happens next, only the stories of “we in the face of.”
 
She wrote fact of, but that is the face of it, the fact of it is not faceable. You never can know what it was like for anyone else. You never know birth fear pleasure of anyone else. You have always been alone in the dark with a young boy asking you:
 
how is this possible?
 
You have always been alone in a room wanting any small other to ask anything of you which is the only thing that makes you sure you’re you.
 
[there]
[here]
 
hearing a you, the you you are Hasn’t anyone ever tried to stop this? the boy asks. Yes, you say, People try but—
What happens after? he asks.
 
 
No one knows, you say.
 
After all this time? he asks. Really? Really, you say.
And you’re doing nothing about this?
 
You make a poem called “This Poem Will Help You Die” to hang on the wall for no one to buy. Here, says the poem, Take it, take it in.

I, Instrument
of circumstance, hold most difficult sensations
 
from bodily infirmities
fed by, bound by Negro
 
crops. Permanent provision
is alternative testimony of his attachment
 
to me. Trust this donation
vested in misconceptions, meaning
 
the pleasure of prejudice—so desirable
an object as good matter:
 
Public mind, pregnant Country
limits my Honourable body,
 
sum object I, legal alien (I, Negro), made
as evidence of desire. My private—.
 
My share—. The original design of my head
from me to him unsheathes blood
 
for unsheathed domain bounded at the Gum
to the mouth of his person. My whole
 
deed: two third joint uses and benefits
to the Stone and Oak of the South.
 
Thence, I hold all the rest and residue
of lying—desire cannot be made without
 
my parts: four parts—one part to each
five other parts—one to four parts,
 
one part each give two parts; one part
three parts: one part to each one
 
other part; that is—to each a third of
that part three other parts of person is
 
unknown to him. To take stock and repair
a new one of Brick. To remain entombed here
 
without oration. To digest his sense of intention.
I, binding witness of the State.

The ocean never breaks. It opens
like a fist, rolling us finger to finger,
taking the outstretched hand of the land
and pulling, gently, like a parent.
 
In September, nights are warmer than the days.
The moon burns like a second sun.
The fish, mistaking humidity for home,
swim up to the surface to breathe
 
where the three of us hold poles like
before we held sheets stitched together
where the three of us are never thirsty
anymore, but you’d never know it
 
by how we gaze into the ocean
the same ocean that tried to kill us
but instead buried us in this city
where we’re force-fed champagne
 
like a torture in which you die from being free.
Most cities are places you leave.
Miami leaves you. Looking back across the bay
the city is a campfire collapsing
 
into embers, the hook of a song
falling out of range, a crown of green
Presidentes showered into place
by ice cubes stacked like balloons.
 
Like our city, we have nowhere
to be, no schedule, no curfew.
If the earth misses us, it’s only because
the earth is always turning away.
 
Over and over we stab the hearts
of things just to drag them slowly below
the surface, through the dark of salt,
begging for them to be torn off and eaten.
 
We worship the moon, bending
our foreheads to the deck. We crush up
memories of home as offerings to the wind.
No one loves you as much as an island
 
but no one has ever loved us as much
as we love ourselves right now, at night,
surrounded by engine sounds and a trail
of rainbows that means we’re leaving
 
behind everything we brought with us
so when the channel tosses us
onto the rocks, the only thing we have left
to spill is the wine of our bodies.
 
None of it even makes it into the water.
We love the sea that much.
We could never blame her, not even a little,
and who is José if not the sea’s first-
 
born son? If not the moon but brighter?
Who else could hold the wheel in place?
Snap his fingers and lay our bodies
whole cloth on the other shore,
 
the shore that isn’t sinking, the one
that will never trade us, or ask us
to wear the flags of our enemies.
A pitcher is one who prophets.
 
Who digs the air into a cave.
A brother is the one who dies first.
A city is any place you love
that doesn’t remember your name.

I AM NOT TRYING TO HIDE MY HUNGERS FROM THE WORLD ANYMORE
Not trying to wipe the smears
of gold from my chin, not trying
 
to erase the decadence of seeds
and profanity of onion
 
and grease not trying
to pretend I don’t open
 
my mouth around the zaftig
pearls of rain in the middle
 
of the night or that I don’t love
the moment right before sleep
 
when I am most tender
and translucent my bladder half-filled
 
knowing I will have to get up
and pee knowing my daughter
 
will wake up before I am ready
the way I became aware of her
 
on a climb through the mountains
a heaviness in my limbs a gentle
 
premonition as I walked later
to the Rite Aid and knew in my hands
 
and I knew in my mouth
and I knew in the way my body
 
pulled me forward as I wept
with joy but also grief
 
that a part of my life was ending
and isn’t it good to know when
 
life is about to swallow you whole
take you in its arms and say
 
“Live, bitch, live”
and you believe it
 
and this is how I will carry her
from her crib and open the curtains
 
part-way not ready to let the
world in the trails of smoke
 
and exhaust winter-blue 
as Cat Stevens’ Mona Bone Jakon
 
spinning on the Crosley  
that opens like an old suitcase
 
where my daughter will stand
on a chair lifting the stylus
 
from its perch and guide
it to the starry chatter
 
that hisses between songs
wondering what will play next

I was like you once, a sealed plastic bag of water filters floating on the sea.
 
I thought my numbers proved my time and space on earth.
 
I thought having children was a way of creating more love.
 
I thought thoughts I was ashamed to speak in case they were what everyone already thought or in case they were unthinkable thoughts nobody would dare think much less say which would blow up the world everyone else had to live in if I said them.
 
I muddled that distinction to extinction—pure silence not a piece of peace and a breathlessness not of wonder but blackthroat, choking on backwash.
 
Once a wild tentacled screaming creature every inch a kissed lip of a beloved place, a true and relentless mind, all heart if heart is a dumb hope of reusable pump.
 
What was it you said that made me think I was like you once?
 
 
                                                            *
 
Remember the last terrifying moments? You clenched up and wanted me to be completely open.
 
We’d broken up (remember such terms? Such luxury? We thought breaking up a kind of preservation.) and to cut off circulation decided to sever at the place where our hair had grown together.

An axe, a pair of kitchen scissors. That rusty axe fully-fatigued and scissors which cut raw chicken bacteria into everything it touched.
 
Nothing did the trick. To come apart we’d have to come, together; and so I tried to make you come; you said it was our last time so you’d remember it.
 
You cried out, then cried and I cried and I hardened against you, then softened, then wished we could go back, wanted to love you like before, twisted myself like nobody’s pile of wires.
 
Did you try to make me come, and I couldn’t, wouldn’t? Or did I give you that and let you let me go?
 
                                                *
 
 
And there will be no other way to be, once this way’s gone.  The last song on earth, the last jellybean. Last because nobody wanted it, or everybody sang it, till the end.
 
Once this day in November’s over never another.  Each day nothing like the last except that it’s the last and that’s new too.
 
Each moment broken glasses, a covered mirror, foxed. The waste stays in place. The rest disappears. The unrest, too.
 
There’s no way to follow my own mind. My own mind is not leading. I’m unleaded. I’m gasoline.
 
I’m everything in between this flame and that attracted wind.  I forgot my glasses—how will we drink?
 
Seeing isn’t believing if I believe I see better with something I can so easily forget.
 
And what if I can’t forget?  I forgot the heft and squirm of my own baby in my arms, in my own womb. 
 
I’ll forget anything and call it an accident, match to fuel and breathing it all in as if I’m living normally from day to re-registered day.
 
Why is it, if I can only remember what I myself experienced, that I can also forget what I experienced?  Who records the records and collects the recollections?
 
I had that baby in my womb for 39 weeks, for three quarters of a year, a full calendar minus summer. An unforgettable summer, each day fucking endless.
 
Oh I know all the numbers; everything adds up. I’ve never seen my womb but my doctor has.  I never saw that doctor again.

The road down from everything even you had hardly dared
to hope for has its lonely stretches, yes, but it’s hard to feel alone
entirely: there’s a river that runs beside it the whole way down,
and there’s an over-song that keeps the river company: I’m leaves,
you’re the wind…
 
                             I used to think the song had to do with the leaves’
confusion, the wind letting up, their mistaking this for something
like courtesy on the wind’s part, or even forgiveness. But leaves don’t
get confused. Silly, to think it. And what can leaves know of courtesy,
let alone forgiveness? What’s forgiveness?
 
                                                                  Wake up, for the falconer
has lost his falcon. He has heard that falcons are like memory, they
come back. But not all memories do, not all memories should. If
anyone knows this, it’s the falconer. How long ago that was…Yet
 
all the varieties of good fortune he’s come upon, as a hand comes
idly upon an orchard’s windfalls, how different he’s become since –
none of it matters, when the falconer steps back into memory as into
a vast cathedral, which is to say, when he remembers.
 
                                                                                    How cool it is,
inside the cathedral. And at first, how dark. Soon, though, he can see
a chapel set aside for prayers specifically to the virgin whose story he’s
always resisted. He sees a corner where people have lit candles, sometimes for another’s suffering, sometimes for their own. He sees the altar with the falcon sitting on top of it.
 
                                               The weight of grief over what’s lost,
versus the shadow of what’s lost – forever struggling to return,
and failing: who can say which is better? The falconer’s eye meets the falcon’s eye:
 
I have a story, the falcon says, seems to, the wings lifting, the feathers
rippling with a story’s parts – I have a story; I can’t wait to tell you.
 

Jimmy Page calls my father in the middle of the night, but he’s sleeping, and he’s not my father, he’s a boy in Philadelphia. His grandmother takes the call, doesn’t want to wake him, and it gets worse, she starts up again about the vacuum in the morning, his mother bought the wrong one and so she pulls her hair, spits in her face, and throws her against the wall.Then the boy is between the two of them breaking it up. He’ll write about it in a letter 30 years later: “I grew up with screaming and yelling that never stopped.” He wants forgiveness, but I’m 15 and have yet to empathize. My father wore Jimmy Page’s guitar pick around his neck for 10 years, sold the Zeppelin scrapbook for a grand even with water damage. A year passes with no contact before I get on a Greyhound and show up at the record store. I haven’t been since it opened and my father is embarrassed as we reunite in front of the staff, who don’t know the particulars but have their guesses watching us embrace and cry. My father says you can hear the guitar strings bend on “Whole Lotta Love.” In 1973, he was in the second row when Jimmy Page handed him the pick and it almost killed him, this return of affection, the way in which my father’s love was plainly detected.

His condom rips.
 
No and Stop molt
            in my throat
                        my Adam’s apple
            a wing
                        beating,           
            clipped.
 
                                    Fog billows inside my body
                                    like the San Joaquin Valley –
 
it disseminates
            through orchards, seeps
                        through limbs,
                                    crystallizes boughs
            into chandeliers
            bearing frostbitten fruit –
 
it turns me apparition
            like Gabriel to Mary:
 
                        The holy ghost shall come upon thee –
                                                God’s anointed
                                                            secretion, phantom
                                                                        assailant, his sacred
                                    alibi of bruises
            around my neck.
 
                        Who will believe me?
                                    He spits
 
            my name: S ---
                        from Hebrew S ---,
                                    from Latin S ---:
 
wreath,
            laurel,
                        crown
 
of thorns upon the bastard’s head.

You strike your one good match to watch its bloom
and jook, a swan song just before a night 
wind comes to snuff it.  That’s the kind of day
it’s been.  Your Black & Mild, now, useless as
a prayer pressed between your lips.  God damn
the wind.  And everything it brings.  You hit
the corner store to cop a light, and spy
the trouble rising in the cashier’s eyes.
TV reports some whack job shot two cops
then popped himself, here, in the borough, just
one mile away.  You’ve heard this one before.
In which there’s blood.  In which a black man snaps.
In which things burn.  You buy your matches.  Christ
is watching from the wall art, swathed in fire.
 
 
 
“This country is mine as much as an orphan’s house is his.”
                                    —Terrance Hayes
 
 
To breathe it in, this boulevard perfume
of beauty shops and roti shacks, to take
in all its funk, calypso, reggaeton,
and soul, to watch school kids and elders go
about their days, their living, is, if not 
to fall in love, at least to wonder why
some want us dead.  Again this week, they killed
another child who looked like me.  A child
we’ll march about, who’ll grace our placards, say,
then be forgotten like a trampled pamphlet.  What
I want, I’m not supposed to.  Payback.  Woe
and plenty trouble for the gunman’s clan.
I’m not suppose to.  But I want a brick,
a window.  One good match, to watch it bloom.
 
 
 
“America, I forgive you… I forgive you eating black children, I know your hunger.”
                                    --Bob Kaufman
 
 
You dream of stockpiles—bottles filled with gas
and wicks stripped from a dead cop’s slacks—a row
of paddy wagons parked, a pitcher’s arm.
You dream of roses, time-lapse blossoms from
the breasts of sheriffs, singing Calico
and casings’ rain.  You dream of scattered stars,
dream panthers at the precinct, dream a black-
out, planned and put to use.  You dream your crew
a getaway van, engine running.  Or,
no thought to run at all.  You dream a flare
sent up too late against the sky, the coup
come hard and fast.  You dream of pistol smoke
and bacon, folded flags—and why feel shame?
Is it the dream?  Or that it’s only dream?
 
 
“& still when I sing this awful tale, there is more than a dead black man at the center.”
                                    —Reginald Dwayne Betts
 
 
You change the channel, and it’s him again.
Or not him.  Him, but younger.  Him, but old.
Or him with skullcap.  Kufi.  Hoodied down.
It’s him at fifteen.  Him at forty.  Bald,
or dreadlocked.  Fat, or chiseled.  Six foot three,
or three foot six.  Coal black or Ralph Bunche bright.
Again, it’s him.  Again, he reached.  Today,
behind his back, his waist, beneath the seat,
his socks, to pull an Uzi, morning star,
or Molotov.  They said don’t move, they said
get down, they said to walk back toward their car.
He, so to speak, got down…  Three to the head,
six to the heart.  A mother kneels and prays—
Not peace, but pipe bombs, hands to light the fuse.
 
 
“Fuck the whole muthafucking thing.”
                                    —Etheridge Knight
 
 
A black man, dancing for the nightly news,
grins wide and white, all thirty-two aglow 
and glad to be invited.  Makes a show 
of laying out, of laundry airing.  Throws
the burden back on boys, their baggy wear
and boisterous voices.  Tells good folk at home
how streets run bloody, riffraff take to crime
like mice to mayhem, and how lawmen, more
than ever, need us all to back them.  Fuck
this chump, the channel, and the check they cut 
to get him.  Fuck the nodding blonde, the fat
man hosting.  Fuck the story.  Fuck the quick
acquittals.  Fuck the crowds and camera van.
You change the channel.  Fuck, it’s him again.
 
 
“I enter this story by the same door each time.”
                                    --Julian Randall
 
 
At Normandy and Florence, brick in hand,
one afternoon in ‘92, with half
the city razed and turned against itself,
a young boy beat a man to meat, and signed,
thereby, the Ledger of the Damned.  Big Book
of Bad Decisions.  Black Boy’s Almanac
of Shit You Can’t Take Back.  We watched, in shock.
The fury, sure.  But more so that it took
this long to set it.  All these matchstick years… 
He beat him with a brick, then danced a jig
around his almost-carcass.  Cameras caught
him live and ran that loop for weeks, all night,
all day, to prove us all, I think, one thug,
one black beast prancing on the nightly news.
 
 
“And when it comes to those hard deeds done by righteous people and martyrs,
isn’t it about time for that to be you?”
                                    --Gary Copeland Lilley
 
 
Not Huey on his high back wicker throne,
beret cocked cooler than an Oaktown pimp.
Or young Guevara marching into camp,
all swagger, mane, and slung M-1.  But one
less suited, you could say, for picture books
and posters, slouching on a northbound Bolt,
caressing steel and posting plans to shoot.
He means, for once, to be of use.  Small axe
to massive branches, tree where hangs the noose.
He says he’s “putting wings on pigs today,”
wants two for each of us they’ve blown away.
Wants gun salutes and caskets.  Dirges, tears,
and wreaths.  Wants widows on the witness stand,  
or near the riot’s flashpoint, brick in hand.
 
 
“I itch for my turn.”
                                    --Indigo Moor
 
 
Like Malcolm at the window, rifle raised
and ready for whatever—classic black
and white we pinned above our dorm room desks—
we knew a storm brewed, spinning weathervanes
and hustling flocks from sky to sky.  We dozed,
most nights, nose deep in paperback
prognoses.  Wretched and Black Skin, White Masks,
our books of revelation.  Clarions
to would-be warriors, if only we
might rise up from our armchairs, lecture halls,
or blunt smoke cyphers.  Talking all that gun
and glory, not a Nat among us.  Free
to wax heroic.  Deep.  As bullet holes
through Panther posters, Huey’s shattered throne.
 
 
“Poems are bullshit unless they are teeth...”
                                    —Amiri Baraka
 
 
It ain’t enough to rabble rouse.  To run
off at the mouth.  To speechify and sing.
Just ain’t enough to preach it, Poet, kin
to kin, pulpit to choir, as if song
were anything like Panther work.  It ain’t. 
This morning when the poets took the park
to poet at each other, rage and rant,
the goon squad watched and smiled, watched us shake
our fists and fret.  No doubt amused.  As when
a mastiff meets a yapping lapdog, or
the way a king might watch a circus clown
produce a pistol from a passing car.
Our wrath the flag that reads kaboom!  Our art,
a Malcolm poster rolled up, raised to swat.
 
 
“every once in a while
i see the winged spirits of niggas past raise out the rubble”
                                    --Paul Beatty
 
 
Could be he meant to set the world right.
One bullet at a time.  One well-placed slug,
one dancing shell case at a time.  One hot
projectile pushing through, one body bag
zipped shut and shipped to cold store, at a time.
Could be he meant to make us proud, to fill
Nat Turner’s shoes.  Could be he meant to aim
at each acquittal, scot free cop, each trigger pull
or chokehold left unchecked, and blast daylight
straight through.  Could be he meant, for once, to do. 
We chat.  We chant.  We theorize and write.
We clasp our hands, spark frankincense, and pray.
Our gods, though, have no ears.  And yet, his gun
sang loud.  Enough to make them all lean in.
 
 
 
“Paradise is a world where everything is sanctuary & nothing is a gun.”
                                    --Danez Smith
 
 
A pipebomb hurled through a wig shop’s glass—
nine melting mannequins, nine crowns of flame.
Hair singe miasma, black smoke braided.  Scream
of squad cars blocks away.  Burnt out Caprice
and overturned Toyota.  Strip mall stripped.
And gutted.  Gift shop, pet shop, liquor store,
old stationery wholesale.  Home décor,
cheap dinnerware.  An old man sprinting, draped
in handbags, loaded down with wedding gowns.
Three Bloods and two Crips tying, end-to-end,
one red, one blue, bandana.  Freebase fiend
with grocery bags, new kicks, and name brand jeans.
Spilled jug of milk against the curb, black cat
bent low to lap it.  This, your world, burnt bright.
 
 
“I love the world, but my heart’s been cheated.”
                                    --Cornelius Eady
 
 
He thought a prayer and a pistol grip
enough to get it done.   Enough to get
him free.  Get free or, dying, try.  To stop
the bleeding.  Blood on leaves, blood at the root.
I didn’t root, exactly, when I heard
word spread.  Word that he crept up, panther like,
and let loose lead.  A lot.  Before he fled
the spot, then somewhere underground, let kick
his cannon one last time.  “One Time,” our name
for cops back at the crib.  It had to do,
I think, with chance.  Or lack of.  Chickens come
to roost?  Perhaps.  I didn’t root.  Per se.
But almost cracked a smile that day.  The news
like wind chimes on the breeze.  Or shattered glass.
 
 
 
“We beg your pardon, America.  We beg your pardon, once again.”
                                    --Gil Scott-Heron
 
 
To preach forgiveness in a burning church.   
To nevermind the noose.  To nurse one cheek
then turn the next.  To run and fetch the switch.         
To switch up, weary of it all.  Then cock       
the hammer back and let it fall…  But they
were men, you say, with children.  And so close
to Christmas.  But their wives, you say.  Today
so close to Christmas…  Memory as noose,
and history as burning church, who’d come
across the two cops parked and not think, Go
time?  One time for Tamir time?  Not think Fire
this time?  To say as much is savage.  Blame
the times, and what they’ve made of us.  We know
now, which, and where—the pistol or the prayer.
 
 
 
“…like sparklers tracing an old alphabet in the night sky”
                                    --Amaud Jamaul Johnson
 
 
It’s natural, no, to put your faith in fire?
The way it makes new all it touches.  How
a city, let’s say, might become, by way
of time and riot, pure.  In ’92,
we thought to gather ashes where before
loomed all that meant to kill us.  Rubble now
and lovely.  Worked into, as if from clay,
some sort of monument.  To what?  No clue.
Scorched earth, and then…?  Suppose a man sets out,
with gun and half a plan, to be of use.
To hunt police.  Insane, we’d say.  Not long
for life.  In this, we’d miss the point.  A lit
match put to gas-soaked rag, the bottle flung,
may die, but dying, leaves a burning house.
 
 
“Afro angels, black saints, balanced upon the switchblades of that air and sang.”
                                    --Robert Hayden
 
 
But that was when you still believed in fire,
the gospel of the purge, the burning house.
You used to think a rifle and a prayer,
a pipebomb hurled through a shopkeep’s glass,
enough, at last, to set the world right.
Enough, at least, to galvanize some kin.
Think Malcolm at the window, set to shoot,
or Huey on his high-back wicker throne.
Think Normandy and Florence, brick in hand,
a Black man dancing for the camera crews.
You change the channel, there he is again,
and begging: Find some bottles, fill with gas.
Begs breathe in deep the Molotov’s perfume.
Says strike your one good match, then watch it bloom.

Mid-May, 90 degrees. Severe
thunderstorm watch.
Outside of the subway station,
teenagers hand out flyers
for a politician. This week
already long, only Tuesday.
Yesterday’s medical tests
left me nauseated & sick
in bed. I missed
the poetry reading.
I missed the concert, I missed
yoga. A hidden cost
of illness: the things I spend
money on but don’t go to.
Emma sends me an article
about the discovery of rocks
formed from plastic.
I send Emma an article
about trees having a heartbeat.
No one I know knows
how to function right now.
Every day at least one
new horror in the news.
Emma asks, “What keeps you
going?” Yesterday
Palestinian protesters
were slaughtered in Gaza.
Today: business as usual.
I have a meeting. I meet Erin
for lunch. I read my emails.
I work on the report.
I tell Emma: poetry,
music & friends. The sky,
a minute ago, sunny. Suddenly
dark as the storm comes.
The truth is, Emma, I don’t know
what keeps me going
right now. The wind picks up,
howls down the alley
behind my apartment.
I hear my neighbor’s footsteps
above me. I wonder if he heard me
cry last night when I was
feeling alone with my illness.
My friends tell me I’m not
alone, but I still feel this way.
I was surprised
by the sudden tears
at the bar on Sunday. We
were talking about rents in Philly
& I didn’t even know
I had begun to cry until my voice
cracked. The radio
loses its signal to the storm.
When friends say they’re sorry
for what I’m going through,
I always say, “It’s okay. It will be fine.”
I say things I don’t believe
but believe I’m supposed to say.
The teenagers now running
down the street, seeking shelter.
Thunder & the downpour begins.
I was taught to never ask
for help. My dad mistaking this
for strength. It’s okay.
It will be fine. The radio
has found its signal again. Dear Emma,
it’s okay. It will be fine.
The radio: static. Now: silence.

American Momma keeps a toy gun
in the glass china cabinet she got
from the basement of that building that burned down
with two babies and a grandma inside.
 
She tries to make it look pretty.
Clothed jars of jam    mismatched porcelain     Polaroids
of decked-out strangers lucky tie-dyed rabbit’s foot
chained for power to the 1977 Kiss lunchbox
 
& the gun
grouped with linens
its glossy muzzle
denting a doily.
 
The gun looked so real that once Amatuer Ray mistook it for his
& left on a job with it snug behind the buttonfly of his 501s.
 
That was the day American Momma found out
her biker bitch neighbor stole
her Playboy Bunny Swimsuit.
It was Lucy’s best.
 
One-piece halter strap
ghost sheer backless top
midnight bottom ruched across the hi-cut seat
bowtie bunny cut-out stenciled in nude mesh
hip-height of the upper right cheek.
 
If truth be told
the theft began
a time before
that summer day.
 
It began the time her neighbor peeped
Lucy in a lawnchair
tanline of bowtie bunny
towel flung on chain-link
wind wobbling the fence
a voice no woman disregards
there are ways prettier to be.
 
These are dark times
American Momma
told Boxer.
 
Boxer had been at Lucy and Ray’s for exactly one night.
Boxer stood on the bathroom lino sagging in a swimsuit
dripping from the only bath she had
since living in that car.
 
American Momma crouched on the toilet
a laundry sack of clothes between her legs
sorting to see if any might fit the child.
The child was diminutive even for a child.
 
It was becoming clear to American Momma
she would need to get the kid some clothes.
Ever since yesterday it was becoming clear
to American Momma
she was full-up doubled-over
with feelings for the child.
 
These are dark times
American Momma
told Boxer.
 
It’s true any thief can traipse through your door
swipe a swimsuit off your radiator
stretch it over her wide ass
it’s true
 
I had Ray’s real gun that day
I’m telling you this
cuz I’m not that kind of person
I’m not gonna raise you to be that kind of person
 
plus you’re my responsibility now
I want to make you safe
(American Momma dead serious spoke)
so don’t go knocking on Apartment 5
got it?
That bitch has had it in for me ever since I shot her only lamp.
 
American Momma was not used to having
feelings for foreigners.
 
Do you understand me?
She dead serious spoke.
Do you speak English?
 
In the year 2020, T.S. Eliot’s papers will be unsealed.
Let us go then, you and I. Let us take the dust in
our claws, lap the hundreds of letters spilling secrets
into the waste land of irreverent mouths.
Have we no couth? Have we not been trained
to know good things come to those who wait?
Each year we gather ‘round the cave. We don our Sun-
day best, come to see what young muse has risen
from the dead. Tomorrow brings the past wrapped
in plastic eggs, the seal of history broken in present tense.
Storage units preserve our culture’s haunted houses.
The canon is merely a ghost story. Write a poem after me
before I’m gone, and please do not include rest in peace,
only those that are forgotten go undisturbed.

My nail cuts through the peel, sends a burst
of oily mist through the sun splayed over
my aisle seat. The droplets move
in tandem, refracting the light,
and with the mist come bright citrus notes
that rapidly disperse into the olfactory systems
of surrounding passengers, interrupting their thoughts,
stirring awake the man in front of me
who hours ago told his seatmate I’m taking
a little Valium. If you need to pee, climb over me.
He shivers, rubs his eyes. We speed into a knot
of clouds and before we’re through he’s asleep again.
Chipped ice sweating onto napkins mapped
with the country. An already-completed
crossword in the seatback. A game
I play with myself is to see how long
I can keep the peel as a single coil, its carpeted
underside, its surface pocked like a teenage face.
Each tear releases more droplets I admire
for how they seem to assemble and swell,
a plume that breaks apart with a kind
of intention, a mission, how I imagine chemicals
to operate in a medical context, dispatched into systems
of cells, trained to obliterate, defend, convert.
Depending on the light, some reach an almost
amber tone while others bleach to yellow
as if administered different dyes
like the slides of deformed cells
I studied three nights ago
while googling the specifics of my father’s
leukemia, a browser window opened
onto paragraphs describing how
it’s most common among California migrant workers
and those exposed to Agent Orange in Vietnam.
And yet my father stayed out of the war.
Another page showed photos of drum barrels
stacked in rows, each one painted with
a stripe of orange from which the Agent
gets its name. There’s also an Agent
Pink, Purple, Green, Blue, White, called
Rainbow Herbicides. Because nothing
is too benign to be excluded from tactical use.
I see maps of dioxin production
include a plant in Newark, New Jersey
where a few miles inland my father as a boy
stood at his front door and watched
his father waking up hungover in the front seat
of his Ford where he passed out again
after a night at the VFW, a memory
inherited so long ago I can’t remember
when he told me, or if he even did,
and yet it matures in shapes and textures,
the color of the car, the dewed grass shining,
high broken ceiling and easterly winds
blowing over from Newark.
I remember watching the war in black and white
in someone’s living room, then in color,
my father said once. I searched for images
of scorched bone marrow and my wife
demanded I come to bed. I eat the orange
wedge by wedge, the pods exploding
between my teeth; wipe my fingers
on the seat cushion. I look up and see
on a seatback TV a few rows down
an aged Marlon Brando
as an even older Vito Corleone—
squirrel-cheeked, sitting among the tomatoes—
slide an orange peel over his teeth
and smile at his grandson who screams
and cries. He removes the peel,
laughs, the boy laughs, chases Vito through
the stakes, trying to spray him with a canister
of chemicals that mist over the family’s
San Marzanos, then Vito coughs, staggers
through a pirouette, and collapses.
The boy thinks this, too, is a joke, stands
over the corpse, soaking its shirt with chemicals.
The cabin jerks. The seatbelt sign dings on.
A child behind me coughs. I hold my breath,
flash through panic fantasies of carrying my father’s
death to him. In my head I hear the sentences
that describe how possible side effects
and genetic mutations can be passed down
to the exposed’s offspring.
I read them once, then again, then couldn’t stop,
wondering if I had just been introduced
to my death through reading, that it’s already
in me, a blip on the end of an x-axis
just waiting for the data to catch up to it,
something I can google, read its Wikipedia page,
my death as a searchable item, my death inherited,
manufactured by the war, my death
the result of my country, already fraying
the edges of my cells, a future blankness
detected by scans, the war passed down,
the war inside of me. I stare down at the bare
wintered woods of the Alleghenies blurring past
and wonder if all the acres decimated
by the rainbow look like that, but all the time.
Rolling hills of brown trees give way to sprawl.
Pre-fabricated homes. Cul-de-sacs.
The oils moved like angelic flame,
the scent with incredible speed. I imagine
the phantom waves of messages I can’t yet read
rising to my phone that say
we’ve been discharged and are heading home.
call us when you land. My father
shivering in the passenger seat.
Extreme nausea and aches, fatigue and low
spirits. I hand the peel to the flight attendant.
Gray flaps of wing metal rise and adjust,
a slight shift of the plane’s axis.
My tray table is in the locked and upright
position. My seatbelt is low and tight
across my lap. I look down once more
at the mountainous dirt I call home,
then return to my book about the assassination.

In motherhood I begin
to celebrate my own
 
smallest accomplishments,
as when I wake to find
 
I’ve slept through the night
and I feel a little healed
 
because sleeping is something
I didn’t learn how to do until
 
I was an adult and had to read
a book about it because, I’ve
 
always liked to joke, I was
raised by wolves. I was raised
 
by wolves was, in fact, the very
joke I made in explaining
 
to a fellow mom as the children’s
theater went dark that, like my own
 
young son, I was seeing The Jungle
Book for the first time. I don’t
 
even know what it’s about, I said.
I was sort of raised by wolves,
 
I said and laughed, and then
the curtain went up and I was
 
shocked, of course, to find
The Jungle Book is about a boy
 
who was raised by wolves,
and I am shocked again now,
 
having just googled it, to find
the number one query
 
associated with Rudyard
Kipling is: Is the Jungle Book
 
a real story? People are dumb
is what I was thinking, I admit,
 
when I read that, but then
I clicked and clicked and found
 
that—oh my god—The Jungle
Book is based on the story
 
of a feral boy found running
on all fours alongside a wolf
 
in the Indian jungle, which is
funny to me because feral
 
is the word that has always come
to mind when I think of the boys
 
I grew up with: those feral boys
who moved through the world
 
with the ease afforded to those
who didn’t give two shits
 
about anything, who’d empty
beer cans in seconds, wrap cars
 
around poles, all the while joking
about fucking each other’s
 
mothers. They were feral
in the desert shooting guns out
 
by the airport. They were feral
on their skateboards in the Whata-
 
burger parking lot. They were feral
because they were allowed
 
to be, and eventually we’d all
get in trouble for what they’d been
 
doing, even us girls who—what did
we do all that time while the boys
 
were fighting and spitting
and calling us whores? I don’t
 
know. We were talking to each
other, I guess, which is how we
 
became human. But no—no.
Those boys weren’t feral. Those boys
 
were typical. They’d been born
knowing the world would be theirs
 
long after they’d grown bored
of nihilism and turned their attention
 
to capital, became men, became man-
kind, the kind of men who’d ruin
 
something if it meant they got to
keep it, who’d kill something
 
if it meant they could see it up close,
maintain the illusion of having
 
owned it, having earned it, even,
who’d track a boy and a wolf
 
through the jungle for days until
finally they had them trapped
 
inside their own den. When those
men found they couldn’t lure
 
the boy out with words, they forced
him out with smoke. And when
 
the boy finally stepped out into
the sunlight those men captured
 
him, bound him, and when the wolf
who was the boy’s mother came
 
following close behind, the way,
at intermission, I followed my own
 
son, who is by now too old
to come with me into the women’s
 
room, to the very threshold
of the men’s room door—when she
 
came out behind him, they shot her.

It would be now when you feel
want is no longer your enemy,
that your body & soul would kneel.
O it would be now, when you feel
you’ve culled joy, seized a new zeal
that Death grabs you, fingers icy.
It would be now, when you feel!
“Want” is no longer your enemy.

The river is heavy with phosphorus and scum. 
It causes liver damage if ingested. 
I don’t know exactly whose runoff it is, but so long 
as they’re taking press photos with prize-winning 
children and donating sizeable 
sums to the ballet, I take no issue. River’s yours. 

Once I saw a guy struggling to talk his way out 
of some base thing he’d done, and his underwhelmed 
companion said to him FLOWERS 
WOULD HAVE KILLED YOU? Now I say it 

all the time. The councilman announces he’s sorry 
for taking advantage of the district’s trust, 
or the paper issues the mother 
of all retractions, and I’m right there at the window, 
readying myself for the knock and the spray 
of larkspur and tea rose. You shouldn’t have. 

If in time the book-boxes in the cellar lifted
out of your mind and garnished mine, what I would see
most is the meshing of the universe, not even,
as tradition from Sappho to Euclid, calls it, love
but another sprite more broken up as if mathematical—
one part concept, one part computation,
powered by a relationship with a pencil
inside the knuckles of a person learning not
to believe and to unknot belief into ratios,
fractions, atomic ways of seeing,
each grand time of lost purpose in cul-de-sacs
is symmetry
              depending on the hypothesis—
                                    something, not a feeling but
probably untestable, uncontestable maybe-truth—
a character in a story that half-exists in the mind, you’d think
(there, where you think (you think)) oh, this is not what
love was supposed to be at all, it is breathing.
Age catches up. Telescoped through boxed-up memories
we think about stories: broken spirits, half-righted or lost
to interior demons, murders folded up and shelved in cellars
like ours, letters acrobatic in mind-twist yearnings
of the quietly brilliant on the edge of truer lives.
One day, when the creature-artificial who creates
equal intelligence and it, too, believes: it thinks.
Maybe it will write letters and notice something is missing.
Then and only then when human history fruitions itself
(or so the AI thinks) past biological species
into means-end shared intelligence
(but the computer is on scroll, all zeros and ones)
your synapses firing into mine, from book-boxes cut open,
pages flung open, typeset words from some old analog printing press
which in 1440 defined and changed the way we understood time
flew
       Pandora’s box-like
                                into geographies of air.
Once history was out of wisdom-keeping minds
and clearly stated on paper, recorded, distributed, archived,
in offices, seminaries, schools, prayer-houses, libraries,
it exploded knowledge. Wisdom-keepers
and poet-historians, decided they, too, would write on paper,
bringing us back to this typewriter of the mind we will share
one day, approximately one and a half generations from now
but you see the problem? Who will be contrarian fire-eyed
dragoness and who will be the coal-eyed people of certitude
if structured, coded-in intelligence unpacks its suitcase in our minds
and moves in? Where will antiquity be, if not in our eyes?
I don’t want blue eyes any more than freedom-skin that never
grows old or micromotor pills fixing every toxin that ever
lived in my body with slow-release perfection taken twice daily
forever. Which reminds me of the time I ate oranges
on top of Hadley Mountain, upstate, when you carried me
halfway up in your arms like a box when my muscles,
losing autonomy, felt like skin and I sensed my skeleton
more profoundly than ever, as if it were telling me:
you are not forever,
                         not even in your sometimes-mind,
and the accumulated years win. It was steep, like all learning.
You cannot plug a hike in. So by now I am wondering
if sentient computers will ever learn to think or believe they think
because with the right foot-treads it would be easy to climb
over mud, rocks, water, branches, grasses, and gravel,
and it wouldn’t matter if a thousand gnats were biting.
No blood will come.
                         A bloodless universe can’t redeem the world.
Have we considered the coup of crimson sundown in leaves
lashed with rainshowers when we wander, surprised
at how Eden it all is, to wander among old-oak reassurances
on brambly paths where all the information is biological.
The together-mind people, even us, would not experience bliss.
AI climbers, even if they climbed up five stories with me
into the steel firetower, I doubt they’d scream out,
climbing on all fours against the hurricane of ordinary wind
so death won’t throw them off the ladder,
it wouldn’t matter. I shook in alpine laughter
unabated, and I tossed vowels into crazy wind because
after all it is a hyper-being feeling to see the countryside
cascading downward and upward at once, to measure love
in green that seem to go on forever, even if those colors are only
wavelengths aren’t they real if they produce feeling?
I am inventing the end of myself in the collective future
of what history is, biological and shape-shifting
like people themselves: quantum wave functions with values
we think we know. Realities converge. This multiverse
in your book-boxes are the you of conversations,
your love of reading and philosophy of landscapes
augmenting my love of reading and my philosophy of landscapes
in unbearably solid, soon to be out of service, blood-pump reality.
 
Kids already asleep, the grownups sit out on the deck,
a few empty cans, an open bottle of wine on the table, I’m sure,
 
and stacked paper plates with half-eaten buns and dirty napkins.
From my backyard next door, I can hear them, the living, chatting.
 
I can’t make out many words, mostly the rhythm, and laughing.
Death is not what they’re discussing.  “Goodnight,”
 
a woman says.  “Goodnight,” a few of them answer.  A car
wakes, and then its growl fades into the distance. 
 
~
 
Wind rises and falls, telling
the trees to tell one another.
Air conditioners hum forever.
 
~
 
Clocks ticking. Grains of sand falling.
What else is there to think about?
 
But what is the thought?  Some small animal
crunching around in the ivy.  A plane
 
arching across or falling from the sky.
Endless seas reaching toward the horizon.
 
And beyond the horizon?  Friends?
Memories?  Quiet and perfect calm?
 
A small boat?  A loving hospital? 
A humming air conditioner lulling me to sleep?
 
~
 
It came as a surprise to me:
that mothers die, that mine did
so young, when I was so young, when she
was younger than my wife is now.
 
It still seems so unlikely, after
waking another morning in my bed,
not to wake,  the least likely
and least lifelike thing.
 
She won’t answer
the phone, mail a present, or ever
have met her grandchildren. 
She’ll never die again.
 
~
 
Moths crowd and lunge at
the light above my driveway,
making a flicking sound
as they hit the bulb, the siding.
 
~
 
How quietly the shock begins,
like thunder rolling in,
                                         so softly at first
one mistakes it for something else,
 
each generation learning alone,
anew, each of us privately aghast,
 
embarrassed, hiding as if until
it passes,
                  this one, long night.
 
~
 
A man riding a bike in New York was hit by a car and killed.
This was last week.  There was a newspaper story
about the fourteen deaths this year, an emergency
the mayor declared.  This is merely what happens.
I bike south each morning from the bus station to my office.
 
~
 
Within three years, our family hamster, Totoro, will die.
Hamsters simply don’t live longer. Scientists theorize
that there are tortoises on Earth that are over five hundred
years old, and a clam has been found that was determined
to have been born in 1499, before Shakespeare.
Think of a clam being born.
Montezuma and Napoleon and Emily Dickinson
passed through its years.  Churchill and Hitler.
Kennedy and Martin Luther King Jr., Sonny Bono
and Aunt Fabienne.  Leonardo and Pollack
were this clam’s contemporaries.  The Troubles,
Woodstock, Tiananmen Square, “We Didn’t Start the Fire.”
Shortly after I finished college, the clam was accidentally killed.
 
~
 
My whole life
is a blip
to a tortoise,
 
a single thundering
tick of God’s
imaginary watch.
 
~
 
I want to do something
my friends and my children
and their children’s
children might remember,
to die famous for having
done the things I love best,
 
writing poetry and
talking late into the night
about music and teaching
and supporting the careers
of younger writers and caring
for my disabled son and learning
year by year to be kinder
and less defensive.
 
I like to imagine myself, too,
in an ashen near-future, huddled in
a shack cobbled of refuse harvested
from the rubble, helping
others escape through
a network of secret tunnels,
a rare green leaf pressed
between the pages
of the last beloved book.
 
~
 
Words
like mine live
and die
in lives like mine.
 
~
 
The clam was born in 1499.
Dorothea was born in 1910.
My grandmother was born in 1912.
Richard was born in 1926.
My dad was born in 1946.
My mom was born in 1947.
Bill Callahan was born in 1966.
Brenda was born in 1970.
I was born in 1979.
Cal was born in 2007.
Simone was born in 2011.
Totoro was born in 2019.
 
 
~
 
Crickets chirping everywhere,
the ambient din of still air.
I might have wasted my life.
 
~
 
And what about my things—
books, CDs, records, hats, guitars, devices,
souvenirs, these weights placed
along the edges of my life
 
to keep the wind from lifting it away.
I treasure them not because
they are precious or rare,
but because they are mine—
 
I gathered them and put them in order
according to the alphabet
of my affections, my obsessions’
persistent foreword counting,
 
stacked them like bricks against
storms past, passing, and to come.
I hold them with the mortar of my wishes
and greed.  Will they degrade
 
to mere things again, disbursed
to distant eBay buyers, landfills,
and future generations unable to decipher
the soul-map of which they’re scraps?
 
~
 
I search for Totoro, peering
into the various hideouts in his cage.
He is present everywhere
in our home, a small ambassador
 
from a country on this side
of the horizon, a sure sign,
a whole soul in a body
the size and color of a Twinkie.
 
He pulls me toward him,
a pinprick in the hull of the plane,
which is not falling from the sky
but moving through it
 
in the only direction it can,
the only one there is, slicing
through hope and dread,
which are thin and invisible
 
as air, which drags and pulls
at the plane overhead,
slowing it down
as it holds it up.
 
~
 
The sun rises each day like a fathomless eye.
The Earth choruses randomly at every instant.
 
I wish my wife and daughter were home
from their trip.  No one can ever come
 
close enough. The party next door is dying
down, just three or four friends left, still laughing,
 
a playlist of 1990s top 40 hits
rippling through the infinite suburban night.

I love you early in the morning and it’s difficult to love you.
 
I love the January sky and knowing it will change although unlike us.
 
I love watching people read.
 
I love photo booths.
 
I love midnight.
 
I love writing letters and this is my letter. To the world that never wrote to me.
 
I love snow and briefly.
 
I love the first minutes in a warm room after stepping out of the cold.
 
I love my twenties and want them back every day.
 
I love time.
 
I love people.
 
I love people and my time away from them the most.
 
I love the part of my desk that’s darkened by my elbows.
 
I love feeling nothing but relief during the chorus of a song.
 
I love space.
 
I love every planet.
 
I love the big unknowns but need to know who called or wrote, who’s coming—if they want the same things I do, if they want much less.
 
I love not loving Valentine’s Day.
 
I love how February is the shortest month.
 
I love that Barack Obama was president.
 
I love the quick, charged time between two people smoking a cigarette outside a bar.
 
I love everyone on Friday night.
 
I love New York City.
 
I love New York City a lot.
 
I love that day in childhood when I thought I was someone else.
 
I love wondering how animals perceive our daily failures.
 
I love the lines in Cat on a Hot Tin Roof when Brick’s father says “Life is important. There’s nothing else to hold onto.”
 
I love Brick.
 
I love that we can fail at love and continue to live.
 
I love writing this and not knowing what I’ll love next.
 
I love looking at paintings and being reminded I am alive.
 
I love Turner’s paintings and the sublime.
 
I love the coming of spring even in the most withholding March.
 
I love skipping anything casual—“hi, how are you, it’s been forever”—and getting straight to the center of pain. Or happiness.
 
I love opening a window in a room.
 
I love the feeling of possibility by the end of the first cup of coffee.
 
I love hearing anyone listen to Nina Simone.
 
I love Nina Simone.
 
I love how we can choose our own families.
 
I love when no one knows where I am but feel terrified to be forgotten.
 
I love Saturdays.
 
I love that despite our mistakes this will end.
 
I love how people get on planes to New York and California.
 
I love the hour after rain and the beginning of the cruelest month.
 
I love imagining Weldon Kees on a secret island.
 
I love the beach on a cloudy day.
 
I love never being disappointed by chocolate.
 
I love that morning when I was twenty and had just met someone very important (though I didn’t know it) and I walked down an almost empty State Street because it was still early and not at all late—and of course I could change everything (though I also didn’t know it)—I could find anyone, go anywhere, I wasn’t sorry for who I was.
 
I love the impulse to change.
 
I love seeing what we do with what we can’t change.
 
I love the moon’s independent indifference.
 
I love walking the same streets as Warhol.
 
I love what losing something does but I don’t love losing it.
 
I love how the past shifts when there’s more.
 
I love kissing.
 
I love hailing a cab and going home alone.
 
I love being surprised by May although it happens every year.
 
I love closing down anything—a bar, restaurant, party—and that time between late night and dawn when one lamp goes on wherever you are and you know. You know what you know even if it’s hard to know it.
 
I love being a poet.
 
I love all poets.
 
I love Jim Morrison for saying, “I’d like to do a song or a piece of music that’s just a pure expression of joy, like a celebration of existence, like the coming of spring or the sun rising, just pure unbounded joy. I don’t think we’ve really done that yet.”
 
I love everything I haven’t done.
 
I love looking at someone without need or panic.
 
I love the quiet of the trees in a new city.
 
I love how the sky is connected to a part of us that understands something big and knows nothing about it too.
 
I love the minutes before you’re about to see someone you love.
 
I love any film that delays resolution.
 
I love being in a cemetery because judgment can’t live there.
 
I love being on a highway in June or anytime at all.
 
I love magic.
 
I love the zodiac.
 
I love all of my past lives.
 
I love that hour of the party when everyone’s settled into their discomfort and someone tells you something really important—in passing—because it’s too painful any other way.
 
I love the last moments before sleep.
 
I love the promise of summer.
 
I love going to the theater and seeing who we are.
 
I love glamour—shamelessly—and all glamour. Which is not needed to live but shows people love life. What else is it there for? Why not ask for more?
 
I love red shoes.
 
I love black leather.
 
I love the grotesque ways in which people eat ice cream—on sidewalks, alone—however they need it, whenever they feel free enough.
 
I love being in the middle of a novel.
 
I love how mostly everyone in Jane Austen is looking for love.
 
I love July and its slowness.
 
I love the idea of liberation and think about it all the time.
 
I love imagining a world without money.
 
I love imagining a life with enough money to write when I want.
 
I love standing in front of the ocean.
 
I love that sooner or later we forget even “the important things.”
 
I love how people write in the sand, on buildings, on paper. Their own bodies. Fogged mirrors. Texts they’ll draft but never send.
 
I love silence.
 
I love owning a velvet cape and not knowing how to cook.
 
I love that instant when an arc of light passes through a room and I’m reminded that everything really is moving.
 
I love August and its sadness.
 
I love Sunday for that too.
 
I love jumping in a pool and how somewhere on the way up your body relaxes and accepts the shock of the water.
 
I love Paris for being Paris.
 
I love Godard’s films.
 
I love anyplace that makes room for loneliness.
 
I love how the Universe is 95% dark matter and energy and somewhere in the rest of it there is us.
 
I love bookstores and the autonomy when I’m in one.
 
I love that despite my distrust in politics I am able to vote.
 
I love wherever my friends are.
 
I love voting though know art and not power is what changes human character.
 
I love what seems to me the discerning indifference of cats.
 
I love the often uncomplicated joy of dogs.
 
I love Robert Lax for living alone.
 
I love the extra glass of wine happening somewhere, right now.
 
I love schools and teachers.
 
I love September and how we see it as a way to begin.
 
I love knowledge. Even the fatal kind. Even the one without “use value.”
 
I love getting dressed more than getting undressed.
 
I love mystery.
 
I love lighting candles.
 
I love religious spaces though I’m sometimes lost there.
 
I love the sun for worshipping no one.
 
I love the sun for showing up every day.
 
I love the felt order after a morning of errands.
 
I love walking toward nowhere in particular and the short-lived chance of finding something new.
 
I love people who smile only when moved to.
 
I love that a day on Venus lasts longer than a year.
 
I love Whitman for writing, “the fever of doubtful news, the fitful events; / These come to me days and nights and go from me again, / But they are not the Me myself.”
 
I love October when the veil between worlds is thinnest.
 
I love how at any moment I could forgive someone from the past.
 
I love the wind and how we never see it.
 
I love the performed sincerity in pornography and wonder if its embarrassing transparency is worth adopting in other parts of life.
 
I love how magnified emotions are at airports.
 
I love dreams. Conscious and unconscious. Lived and not yet.
 
I love anyone who risks their life for their ideal one.
 
I love Marsha P. Johnson and Sylvia Rivera.
 
I love how people make art even in times of impossible pain.
 
I love all animals.
 
I love ghosts.
 
I love that we continue to invent meaning.
 
I love the blue hours between three and five when Plath wrote Ariel.
 
I love that despite having one body there are many ways to live.
 
I love November because I was born there.
 
I love people who teach children that most holidays are a product of capitalism and have little to do with love—which would never celebrate massacre—which would never care about money or greed.
 
I love people who’ve quit their jobs to be artists.
 
I love you for reading this as opposed to anything else.
 
I love the nostalgia of the future.
 
I love that the tallest mountain in our solar system is safe and on Mars.
 
I love dancing.
 
I love being in love with the wrong people.
                                                                                                              
I love that on November 23, 1920, Virginia Woolf wrote, “We have bitten off a large piece of life—but why not? Did I not make out a philosophy some time ago which comes to this—that one must always be on the move?”
 
I love how athletes believe in the body and know it will fail them.
 
I love dessert for breakfast.
 
I love all of the dead.
 
I love gardens.
 
I love holding my breath under water.
 
I love whoever it is untying our shoes.
 
I love that December is summer in Australia.
 
I love statues in a downpour.
 
I love how no matter where on the island, at any hour, there’s at least one lit square at the top or bottom of a building in Manhattan.
 
I love diners.
 
I love that the stars can’t be touched.
 
I love getting in a car and turning the keys just to hear music.
 
I love ritual.
 
I love chance too.
 
I love people who have quietly survived being misunderstood yet remain kids.
 
And yes, I love that Marilyn Monroe requested Judy Garland’s “Over the Rainbow” to be played at her funeral. And her casket was lined in champagne satin. And Lee Strasberg ended his eulogy by saying, “I cannot say goodbye. Marilyn never liked goodbyes, but in the peculiar way she had of turning things around so that they faced reality, I will say au revoir.”
 
I love the different ways we have of saying the same thing.
 
I love anyone who cannot say goodbye.

Vultures clean the coast,
          what we couldn’t sing underwater,
we brought back in the throat
          of our afternoon. The shore shaped
by the constant carol of waves,
          like a mammal’s heart. Beached,
the baby Great White, a belly
          gray as a singing knife,
kisses each of her hissing fins
          to the sand. Recovering some altitude,
flashing her wings of cheek. Worn out
          eyes gelled with kindness.
Hurt as a cavity, stalactites
          of her teeth, some still moonset,
let out their dark light:
          I’ve done enough, it is over.
Cupping my hands
          in the geometry of a prayer,
a bedouin by by a desert spring,
          holding all of the ocean I can
to wet her breath as you find
          a bucket abandoned by a fallen castle.
You get behind and carve the sand, too.
          The back fin fanning, your feet
coiled with the same energy
          as a birth. The waves open
and the mossy slip of her tucks
          bravely into your arms, the only way
I know you know how to hold.
          Fins start to coast into
swim and she bursts into
          a glide: so common and sweet as air. 

Because I was too mean to make him a brother,
my son has had to learn to hate alone.
I told my friend I’d only ever wanted
one child for reasons to do with the shape
of an arrow. But in truth I’m so disgusted
by what I know of brothers,
 
having given birth to a son of Adam, I
said “enough.” One son is not a brother;
he’s just a person. I thought this could mean he
would be free to indulge small pleasures like
rubbing patterns in carpet
under a piano and whistling without
 
being followed, but it appears
you can only turn cursive R’s with your finger
in the window alone in the backseat
for so long before you need to stab
someone in the hand with a real pencil.
If you have no brother, that hand is yours. I’m talking
 
here about the spirit, not
the body. When I said “hand,” I meant
your own soul will betray you. I meant by “real pencil,”
earth’s the right place for revenge
because there’s nothing in heaven
like gravity or spit. And here I am suiting up to duel
 
my brotherless child
because it’s time to drive
the rage out of him
into the tip of a sword he will try as pointlessly
as war or poetry to touch my heart with. Given a brother
this struggle would be settled by wrestling near the sharp edge of
 
something expensive. By withholding
a brother from him I have wrongly made
this only a person believe
the artifice of our house is the real love of him
by the world and now it’s my duty to drag him
backstage where any brother already
 
would have pushed his face against the grill
of a churning fan and forced him 
to tell the blades his name
to hear its syllables severed by the throbbing wind
which itself will be unplugged and rolled away
at the end of the disappointing short run of a new play
 
that will never be mounted again.
I just strapped on a plastic chest plate that already has
an impression of a pair of breasts in it. My sister
was once a salesgirl
at Victoria’s Secret. There she was issued
a pink tape measure and tilted
 
the three-way mirror
to bring shoppers to understand
quantum optics and Borges, adjusting the panels such
that self-reflection could be monetized
according to the proprietary
algorithm that is the Secret itself sending
 
American girls back out into the mall
swinging their pink bags as if no one wants
to shoot them. Next comes the one-armed coat,
the plastron, enclosure that shares its name, from chainmail,
with the under-shell of a turtle
into which I have seen oracular,
 
indecipherable curses as if into
the final desk desperately stabbed
in response to such dull questions
like How many sheaves of wheat
will my brother-in-law’s upper field yield?,
even the pyromancer must have grown to resent the court he served,
 
and like the fire, unfulfilled,
anxious to get onto something of more substance
and drama, which is how boys get tricked out for war in epics,
not by passion, but boredom. You’ve seen them
standing around with nothing to do
so burning for action they’ll throw
 
anything at anyone, can
at squirrel, snake at
girl, their restlessness can be harnessed, suited up, and marched away.                   Beautiful,
beautiful chainmail, like a coat of suicidal bubbles,
unsheathed by freelance squires headfirst off the war-dead
along the bottom 
 
margin of the Bayeux Tapestry
exposing each just a twisting line drawn
in faded thread naked under the hooves of his own horse. Doesn’t that                    chainmail,
sold to someone else, and someone else
again, ring the dread
of receiving one in a chain of so
 
many letters it is your fate to copy by hand ten times
in the fevered scriptorium of late girlhood for further ongoing
distribution everlasting to ten more girls
all of whom will receive good luck
if they just proceed themselves
to copy it—
 
if they just proceed to fold and envelope,
stamp and will themselves to drop it
in the blue mailbox, but the difficulty
of making an initial list of ten true friends
on whom the luck of the rest could depend
is the first step of many toward an emptiness
 
that frees us. Parent-child
fencing class meets in a converted warehouse. Shares with
stage and statecraft its
elemental vernacular.
Obsessed like all of us
with distance divided by speed compelled to death by need and desire,
the L.A. Times reports this
 
morning It took eleven hours to hand-embroider
the cotton poplin plastron
also called a dickey
the President of France wore
to the American President’s first state dinner.
A false front. Chainmail re:
oblivion, symbolism akin
 
to the reconfiguration
of the ribs of the spring lamb
they ate together into
 
an interlocking saber arch position
called by chefs
a guard of honor. A grand dismantlement
and reassembly of the ribcage around the hollow 
where the heart was into a diorama of predation
named for how the ribs resemble
 
now a double rack of upraised ceremonial swords
into a long archway I once
saw a bride and bridegroom walk out the chapel through, into their
marriage. It excited me
to see the bride
enter a tunnel
of punishment and wonder like a
 
romantic grownup paddywhack
machine. We were tailgating at West Point with
family friends. Not guests of the groom
or bride, but of the public grass.
When the last pair of the groom’s brothers-
in-arms crossed swords to block her path and
another of the guard of honor
 
swatted her ass before they freed her, according to an old
military tradition I did not
anticipate,
but internalized
immediately, humiliation
did its job on me by proxy, and I was
a woman. The air was
 
so dense with wasps my mother placed a
decoy plate of our store-bought chicken nearby
under a tree. I held a dishonorable
family secret. No one knows how long
I kept it. No one could shake it out of me.
Now I have been fitted for something
 
like a straitjacket
and stepped into
 
it. What a different confidence
 
I am trussed in.
 
Someone from behind
 
up comes to zip me
 
lifting my hair, so intimately. I can 
bend my foil into
a steel rainbow. Such
promise the world
 
has! But now we must salute
the apparent enemy and lower our masks. Am
I satisfied? I’m not. Therefore I advance
up the strip indifferently mythic
outfitted like a gentleman to teach
my child the atrocity of etiquette.

I am too much with myself,
I want to be someone else.
Where is my mind? Going up
the street like a leaf, high above
 
the busy little one-way, in my stupid
hat and gloves I lie awake,
wonder if I’ll sleep
like a poker in someone’s fireplace.
 
I feel stupid & contagious, out
till 3 a.m., pillaging the drinks
of friends. When you have no one,
no one can hurt you. Language keeps me
 
locked and repeating. Never tell them
where it hurts. Keep the bullet
safe inside. Someday the stone
will roll away, & soon you’ll see
 
that year, something I never knew
I had. Staple my lips shut, pour the milk
& I’ll say when. I want to go
back, but I’m halfway to the place
 
that we will meet. America
is just a word but I use it.
In the morning light, I’ll hold
that ashtray tight, waiting for
 
something to break. Here comes
a smile on her face. I’ve never been
too good with names.
Let forever be delayed.

O god of the desublime, allay the vertical penitentes
their limbs, rest them back cold, not in precipitate
but in seed, in potential of hydrogen. Spoon in density
 
to be sung of their winter’s seed and soak. Sip pond
to suncups, over sunrise. Far from the flat dispatch
of heat, its stench, its wayward ever summer barge
 
and fallout. Jesus be a river. Be a untainted float
of deliquescent surge. Be saltless and cold.
O pose of hope, allay the waterfall, hear their prayer,
 
O bed of oxygen, divine surge. Be also brackish sea. Be
seed of the frost, and supercooled. Be shade soup.
Sweet hale of beloved drench and mitochondrial belly,
 
be flint for the watery flame. Douse out the eventual
crunch, the big scorch, the rip of our primordial anus
and mouth, suckling at the place of eco abundance. O sweet bio teet,
 
O hygroscopic lordess. Were we to sit still and let ourselves be cold
for hours, wiped of web crack frost, mild sud of the slow glacier,
rimed vat at the edge of rash season, our legs from twitching.
 
O known keep of tomorrow, might we skill our motor by, pedal
from the crib of our await. O stable evolver, an alms for safe passage,
your earthen cooling, forgive us our erosion. Heal the demanding snows. 

Maybe you need to embrace disappointment.
The way you don't sleep at night,
dreaming of dry dust on furniture
and the pleasant odor of plywood
and what it feels like to peel skin off
of your thumb. Maybe you should begin
that perfect novel which will
save you. Pluck you from the ruddy jaws
of a monster that is right there
beyond your failing sight. Not today,
Satan, or Ronald Reagan—
you learn that often enough evil is not about
nuance. It was raining
the day I was born
and years later I haven't learned much more
about the stars: fire
and cold light afloat in the murk of the cosmos.
Last night I read about
the doctors who removed 526 teeth
from a boy's dying jaw:
hours in they feared there was no end to it.
That his pain was infinite.
Their hands trapped.
Bits of white bone arrayed in a spiral
beside his sleeping face
and it was lovely and an evidence of the divine.
Well, not really. Maybe you
aren't real, aren't listening to the wind
as it goes through the night
like a sad prayer beneath the stippled sky.
Maybe. Just maybe things will get better.
Give it a year.
