His hand clamped inside her claw,
the boy runs to keep up with the black skirt, too breathless to cry, “Slow down, Mommy.” Sliced by winter wind, she has forgotten him and his short legs. So she must not be
time. Time must be the wind—yes?
And what is that red shopping bag
flopping along in his right hand?
Why does he clutch and not let go?
You begin on one side
of the integral
body and arrive (gasp) on the other
No predictable measure of time, no table
of coming and going to pour
by candlelight, the sips, pocks, dregs
accrued with tide. How to believe the overextended
family, our aqueous genome’s reach—
If I push here, where will you feel it? Which village
will cry into the distance? Troops, march, march.
Underwater, a little bomb; above black specks of surfers
Antithesis of stuck, stable, mud posse
rather—failed escape, see Aventilious, Aerating,
Aerial—the cambium, ever-grow, ever-seek milk- Mother, the vascular lair of ground’s company
miniscule at farthest reach
Infinite organ, who playest thou, longest keys between two
Worlds—what injures here could be felt
Anywhere. See the canopy wither— the birds depart.
After the decisive battle, they moved further into the land and came across what first appeared to be a mountain but was in fact an extraordinary, mountainous knot. The knot was so vast that they supposed it would take them two days to march around it. So they camped there at its foot to decide what they ought to do next, and endured a night that was utterly dark yet filled with the uncertain intimations of voices. In the morning they began their attempts to untie the knot; one of them had suggested that the voices were promising riches or other destinies in the knot’s deep interior. It quickly became clear that the rope, as thick as ten men together, was made up of many thinner strands, that each of those strands was knotted to others, that indeed there were countless thousands of knots at the heart of this one mountainous knot. They started to work in earnest, all of them picking and grasping and in fact tearing at it. They continued into the night with its voices, and into the days beyond. This is how their enemies found them, and how the battle was engaged once more. With one hand they pulled at the knot and with the other they swung the sword. Their enemies, too, found themselves caught between a desire for vengeance and a desire to disentangle. Because war never fails utterly, blood was shed. It soaked into the ropes and, as it dried, tightened them, first around hands, then around arms and bodies. By this time, all were quite unable to move. Nonetheless, the fighting found a way to continue, and the knot continued to tighten.
They’ve torn the fields down,
the thick run of empty stalks harvested for I don’t know what. For the good of the sky, maybe— the sky that’s kept its distance all through the growing season. Now in the great open,
the sky rests on the bristling soil. This is a new way, a good way, for us to be alone here.
In that interminable summer of the devil’s own breath it was most all I did:
pull the hayrake behind the old Ford tractor, the arced cutter bars
spread wide, the circled forks spinning behind, gathering two, sometimes
three thin windrows of drought-shocked alfalfa and buffalo grass
together, funneling the sallow, bird-boned, orphan fruit of that unpromised land
into a single windrow that wound the field thick enough for the bailer to jaw up.
But, too: that was the summer of Kevin, my older sister’s thick-necked,
ridiculous boyfriend. God, but we loved him— his jacked-up Toyota
with iridescent silver roll bar, his Wintermint Skoal and seraphic vocabulary
of whistles and grunts. Kevin was from two towns over, the county seat,
was something new, something to set against the neighbors: the broken old ones,
the sad fat ones, the ones eating each night boiled mudfish and boxed mac and cheese,
the ones with names that could have been the names of tractors or weeds—
say Harlan Wilson or Sandy Russell, their skinny wives and gap-toothed girls,
boys bromidic as their fathers. And all of them, and us, dust-stunned, debt-ridden,
just barely hanging on to the sagebrush plains we worked, that worked us. Not Kevin:
he was off to play football for the community college; without asking
he’d flip the dial to FM, throw his massive fists in the air when Van Halen came on;
he wore his sunglasses even inside. So the day I heard that Kevin’s beautiful
Toyota had like some strange bird lifted him into the dark, and he, like my father
and Sandy Russell and Harlan’s baby girl, was dust— I left the house
and walked north, to the one decent field we had left, where I fired the Ford
and turned myself around that patch of dirt for hours, until all those skinny windrows
were one and good, and there was only one world, and God’s or not,
I was in it, and I was pulling the iron-winged hayrake.
1
Oak limbs sprawl into the window panes, and the unpainted picket fence—
fallen over.
Soldiers washed under the sand.
No, there are rats crawling about wallpaper sagging
across the floor
like the necks of men in old age.
I own nothing but my teeth.
I will never learn it all. I am better for it.
2
No children running about this house. No ghosts. But the ghosts
of soldiers.
What of the air conditioning units
for who knows how many years?
They rust like rabbit cages
holding shredded newspapers and hay.
The brick and mortar foundation gives way.
Outside the screened-in porch, across this oak’s roots sprawl —like
that wallpaper, like those necks
I have seen drooping from my jaw—
there,
a white dog with a brown spot for an eye barks at the tails of the rats
—at me.
I trace the lines of his barking.
A soldier.
the yard,
3
My neighbor told me of a poker bet.
He told me of how this home—
he told me how this house was bought. No, he told me how it was won.
When I walk through this house, there is
no family
There is no table.
Only the rats circling the unpainted
picket fence,
my eyes bloodied like maples turning--
and who lived   here?
Who lived   in this empty house?
I must live here, though I
have never owned a thing, but     my teeth,
this winter with no snow—
locked out, this family.
Are they walking down the sidewalk? When I am hanged.
A soldier is buried beneath this house. The floorboards creak his name. Mine.
Not only are we waiting for the right line, the exact emotion is a peach
packed in ice. We cannot accept this, though clearly, there it is, cold
and ripe, and now, in hand, passed around the room like a desperate artifact.
If there is
only one world it is this one
white leaves
on an empty street
a morning
deprived of school bells or a sidewalk
like pieces of bone whisked clean
a wall
looking for stones loose children
no one bothers to gather
All day long they struggle in and out, their sentences smudged with pot, THC shorting out major plot points like a sizzling logo flashing Ingest at Joe’s! One told him
she had the fuckin’ ennui but was taking pills to clear it up. The doppelganger looks down at the insectoid scribble
of algebra that is Arlen’s greatest worry, after his mother
trying to sell his gold-plated penchants on Third Street. Aren’t they all word problems? If Marlena decides
that crystal meth is best stored in her birth control case,
how many Tuesdays will elapse before she realizes
head trauma is not aerobic activity? He has some
spider plants. They are supposed to inspire trust, and are
silent but alive nonetheless, like teenagers, which is why his office is known as The Hanging Gardens of Dorkylon. High-schoolers believe no one else in all of history
has ever used a textbook to express their rage at being carbon-based and deriving nonspecific sexual pleasure from animal crackers. His bow-tie is based on ancient
Assyrian texts and protects him against all 400 known variants of sarcasm. He cannot tell them they are alike, but different, so often he has no choice but to say,
You were born to Middle America in great confusion
and escalating limerick rates. You will never understand that Prussian and Russia are not satisfying rhymes,
and will often think there are tiny red machines
in your spine that eat good thoughts. You are best suited to study either Neuter Astronomy or Advanced Frippery.
The carcasses were there wrapped in tinfoil
just where Harold had said they’d be.
It had been three weeks since his call,
describing the knoll in the backyard so recently his and what was buried there. The kids watched
from the house as our father dug, awkwardly and uncertain.
We giggled at the insanity of it, the incongruity:
our father in his undershirt, elbow deep in earth,
and a handkerchief tied to his face like a thief. He knelt, reached into the ground and pulled up in his arms
first one stiff heap of canine, then another, and stacked them on an old pull wagon Harold had built and left.
Our father towed the hearse across the lawn,
losing the top body two or three times. He left them
glittering like baked potatoes at the end of the driveway
the farthest our father would allow Harold since the closing. He was late, of course, and by afternoon we could smell them from the garage at fifty feet. By morning, the wagon
was empty, but our father, always a queasy sort of man, didn’t fill in the holes right away because of the maggots.
Left open for near a week, the graves were like eye sockets, gouged out and watching me at my bedroom window at night. Left open, that is, until Harold called again
not to thank but to ask about his horse, Mabel,
buried somewhere in the vicinity. That’s when our father, just after dawn, went out before work, necktie
and shirt sleeves, and closed up the gashes in his yard. Tipped the earth back and sealed off
whatever could make a man ask another man to disturb the dead.
They stood in line to buy a slice of melon—
My father and my uncle, in cantaloupe season. When the boy in front reached out to pay,
The melon seller waved his cleaver.
This was Lahore in cantaloupe season:
Summer was working up its heat.
With one hand the melon seller waved his cleaver Over a bright, thick slab of fruit.
Summer was only beginning,
But already the days had grown hot. A cool slab of sweet melon
Was everything two boys could want.
But already the days had grown heated When the boy in front reached out to pay. Chilled melon was all two boys could want, Or so my uncle claimed.
When the boy reached out to pay,
The melon seller brandished his cleaver.
My uncle paused before claiming,
With the other hand, he stabbed the boy with a dagger.
The melon seller brandished his cleaver, Drawing all eyes from the fruit.
He stabbed the boy with a tiny dagger, Putting his other hand to use.
All eyes flew to the cleaver—
The boy fell on our feet.
No one was watching the other hand. This is how my uncle told it.
The boy fell on our feet.
My uncle’s voice was full of wonder. This is the way he told it—
As if a comet had passed overhead.
My uncle’s voice was full of wonder:
The boy was reaching out to pay.
As if a comet had passed over
My father and uncle in melon season.
The only aunt I know would tell me,
This is how you knead the dough. I don’t remember the old stories— Make sure it doesn’t get too tough!
Knead carefully to make the atta.
Good girls know how to make good puris. Make sure the gluten doesn’t toughen,
A puri should be light and golden.
Good girls know how to make good puris. They don’t ask for the old stories.
A puri should be light and golden,
Like your cousin’s and your cousin’s cousin’s.
I overheard the stories
When all the women shared a bed.
My cousins and my cousin’s cousins—
The older women slept still dressed in saris.
When all the woman shared a bed
The fan chuffed through a cloud of talcum powder. Still fully dressed in saris,
They whispered names I’d never heard before.
When the fan chuffed sandalwood and roses, I raised my arm above my head.
They named the aunts and daughters.
I caught hold of my cousin’s hand.
I raised my arm up in the dark.
There was a niece who could have been recovered. I held my favorite cousin’s hand.
Her name meant light, like mine.
There was one niece who could have been recovered. My grandfather had her traced.
Her name meant light, like mine does.
I’ve tried not to imagine her face.
Somehow my grandfather found her,
But her brothers refused to take her back. I imagine the row of our faces,
Women in bed in the dark.
Her brothers refused to reclaim her. This was after the riots and trains. In bed, in the dark they could say it: This is what broke us apart.
After the riot of years,
How should we remember the old stories? What will break and what will toughen— The only aunt I know would tell me.
We waited, of course, to become disks as the sun and moon
and Mother’s mirror. We thought
it would be perfect to be endless edges gliding, perhaps flung
and cutting things off at the knees.
The cruelty of such circumstance would not belong to us
but to the shape of us
merely, an accident of science
or a miracle or fate as, say, a sudden bright blue rose rising like a cobra beside a white gate.
We thought doilies, lids, and portholes
were our secret sins
wheezing in the hallway’s dream
of flattened hats and all things orbital and thin enough never to grow old.
We imagined the face of our round lake a god or djinn
demanding sacrifice, which is why
we tied and threw our neighbor in.
“Don’t worry,” we said to his disappearing frown. “What’s drinking you, that perfect ‘o,’
will make you one of us as you go down.”
She came down the road
like a piece of the road dissevered
from itself by two legs and a shoe.
She carried a rat trap basket of brown
and brittle flowers: her companion, compass
and advisor of whom she asked, What
is the name of that bright red unseen bird?
This is East Prussia, perhaps, and the beaten armies drag through the orchards leaving a trail of dented canteens and coal scuttle helmets.
The soldiers walk right past her, they know death when they see it: always the withered flowers and haunted look of a girl
going nowhere and a road that stops
while seeming to go on. Always someone
lifting tea through its own steam
as he writes on a yellow pad.
Always the disgrace of his probing
and then the rain
dark as blackbirds falling into ditches
the girl would see if she could see anything
but rain. And what does the Kaiser have to say, now? The soldiers are through listening
and after a while the tea is cold. The ragged child picks a few flowers and asks their names.
i have a nightmare in which i write & write but the ink with which i write
bleeds not just through the paper
but throughout it
slowly at first
then an ever more rapid spread from the clear line of each rigid “i” out
throughout it all
filling the space & paling
until the original ink is nothing more to the eye than a faint
offing
of the white
the rains cause
an archipelago of ripples on the pond 
widening    points of contact
little blue & little yellow
green   diagrams
of discreet childhoods
indiscreet human dust
caught in the polyps
of a lapse
When I Sleep, It Still
comes to me,
not a dream, with that raveling,
reel to reel, spooling behind the eyes,
circus and slow motion.
No. It is more like shadow,
instant before waking,
eyes opening, sleep a gravity that pulls on me, the window bare of curtain or shade
and the stagnant, ambiguous light
of morning, a frost that etches across the glass.
It comes to me:
woman with a finger to her lips,
in a doorway to a backyard
of rusting grass, grass with a sour blight,
finger bloodtipped and raised in the gesture of quiet, mouth a carnelian flame that turns in on itself,
and a girl in a plaid dress
four feet away,
arms fixed to her sides,
pale, milky arms
like the breast feathers
of the dying hens running by
the girl barefoot in the reddening grass
refusing, refusing
all that the woman asks.
Had he not looked up from the chapter of Confucius’s Analects known as “The Master Shunned” to see a young woman smiling, Li Wan would not have put away the book and, leaving the library and its tides of shadow, seen everywhere in Ju-Xian Town the chrysanthemums heaped up in the flower- sellers’ stalls as people might be who throng the streets in the capital of the sun to view the emperor and his retinue—or, say, as the sea is at the molten hour when the waves lie down in sheets of gold. His mind forgot in an instant (like a cup drained of its measure) Confucius and even the compilation of T’ang poetry on which he had for so long labored below the Fragrant Mountain—remembering only the character for chrysanthemum, as a man cast into darkness will that moment when his eyes were dazzled.
After, in the little cramped stall in the dark where we had spent those moments together— unnaked, exposed—he didn’t leave
at once, he held me there a while
on my knees still on the foul tiles breathing hard.
My hair where his hand gripped me was damp. And then the grip loosened, becoming
after the violence I had loved
something not a caress exactly but gentler than before, expressive of kindness maybe
or gratitude or finally just relief at having thrown for a little while what had ridden him
onto that ground we shared. Then,
still gripping me with one hand, with the other he reached up and twisted the long bulb back.
We looked at each other in the sudden flat light. He was older than I had thought,
his skin was drawn, the striking gray eyes looked at me a moment and then
shifted away. He leaned back, his hand light
on my neck now as I worked my own need,
as I pressed myself to him, neither free nor bound.
It’s late. The doors to all the theaters are closed. But in broad Place de l’Horloge in the shadow of the palace we shoulder aimlessly our way through crowds.
Every third step, a hat laid out for coins.
In a corner streetlamp’s circle a man
batters out Rachmaninoff on an ancient upright
that creaks away from him on its wheels; actors
from the little troupes declaim at every curb; somewhere by the toilets a brass band plays. Noise—
confusion and noise, everywhere in its bright rags art
pleading for alms. The coin of our attention, snatched at, slips: nothing in the tumult to love. Faces
eerie as moths endure painted above us, men
on high crates impersonating stone,
waking sudden to startle
the children who shriek at them and scatter
and gather again like fish. Only at intervals, discreet
as the Rhone, the very poor hold out their hands.
We cross into the dark leading down to the river. Close to it, where pavement gives way to grass, we stand and feel
the huge water sliding silent in its banks. Then,
placing your palm on my back, turning me to you,
you knit your free hand with mine
and slowly, to a cadence entirely clear
of the music behind us, you coax me into a dance: simple, solemn, your face in the fold of my neck,
a dance by the black river, a dance in the midsummer black.
Somewhere in the crowd someone is holding surreptitious and trembling in his hand
the cell phone taking this video of you inhaling open-mouthed to sing. The angle isn’t flattering: from the first rows looking up, your face
slides even more alarmingly down, like a cake left out in rain; your terrible bangs, dyed implausibly black, hang ragged into your eyes; the mercifully formless dress keeps slipping from your neck, and you rearrange it
with a gesture like a dream of glamor,
the fat on your arms set shimmering like a fish.
The strings behind you are holding their accord. You hang fire a moment, bending the time, then, tilting your head just slightly up,
you sing. And I feel like Alcibiades cracking
the statue of the monster to reveal the god. Miracle in the digital light, your voice
rides eerie its column of air, like a vindication
of metaphysics, so that all your ugliness seems ordained. Climbing the terrible scales, the strings helpless to support you, you lift your arms
over and over your head, like a diver reaching for the bright surface sliding away above him.
At the crucial moment I freeze the frame.
How can you survive it? Leaning close to the screen, I love you, I say, I love you, let me devour
your shining face. In the real world
the rain falls down. You stare out unmoved.
April
I did consider the Blue Book value
against airbags, the other trade-offs: no
sunroof, loose bumper, tilt-back lever jammed. Got the title, fair speed in general—and just
one concession, a speed bump’s tenderness.
I have to thank the shocks, and certain thrills out on the open road: tail-fires blasting
out the carbon, the license to stop or cross
the tracks and shriek. Other top features:
full blasts of heat, salt-damaged chrome,
two roll-down windows, at least one headlight
to track the sun back home. Dings. I hated
this marriage, damaged slowly beyond repair, though I thrilled at rides that blew back my hair.
May 7 (your birthday)
For eighteen years we drove to your parents through smog from steel mills and rivers converging, the swift Connoquenessing,
the Slippery Rock. But they’d bulldozed
the ovens down, girders and rust melted
away, a graveyard where you once smelted stainless tubes, ablaze, dark eyes smoldering. Across from Loccisano’s Grocery,
that ash hopper for dumping chemicals,
slag, where you and your cousins lobbed footballs, snowballs: grace and iron. You held onto those plays, kept your aim to forge raw elements
into enduring forms, choreographed
a life’s dream that the mill would send you on.
Memorial Day
A in alone is a sound known as schwa—
a slight uh we make with our tongue low and level, a common hum. In old Hebrew schwa stood
for letters not noted. Schwa, written e,
but upside down—remember? You probably learned it on a first grade chart. But that’s not important. It’s how schwa is spoken: just pretend that I’m listening for your admiration,
for an unstressed us. I’m all anticipation, wet lips barely open, then out your mouth it runs:
uh, uh—affair—your schwa, so ancient and correctly pronounced, far back in the throat.
Say it again: affair, affair—now more
smoothly. Watch the syllabification.
July
Black soil over an ancient privy pit
where I must dig out clay chips. They threaten
the delphinium. I wonder who once
flung garbage into what is now garden.
Whole nuts, nit combs, buttons and pins, fragments of lamp float up now and again. And this,
another pentimento: blue cobalt
tattoo of nightingale, without saucer
companion, soaring still on a cup’s cracked
skin. Repented belongings that turn up
like runes, talisman discovered, taken
for woe. The time was when I didn’t think
it odd to find a perfume stopper or
entertain the question it was raising.
November 11
Instructions for a plague: Burn entrails.
Always check the pulse with gaze turned away. Obtain ring finger knuckles. Gather shirt,
apron, handkerchief. Squeeze vinegar through
or taint stays. Turn mirrors for protection.
Poultice thigh to trunk. For disinfection,
forget not bud roses nor herbs with strong
perfume. From solstice to the equinox
scatter blood meal. All this doth wring a cure.
Or flee. Sing, laugh, indulge every new
appetite. Choose finest sweetmeats, drink dry
wine, but temperately. Collect whatnots,
dulcet hours for hunting, dance, and suchlike pleasures. When the sick fall, show them the stones.
December
I take the children bowling, yes, in hopes
that at the alley a little disco
bumps my heart, and if they turn the black lights on and each pin glows, I can somehow gauge
the angles right, find the velocity
that knocks ten pins down. Silhouettes, neon
lights, rows and rows of worn black balls on shelves, the shuttlecocks, young foosballers and league bowlers times twelve, all of us hefting weight
to fling and slide, then wait, genuflecting
on one knee, all the right body English
imploring a strike, that resounding sound. Christmas is next week. I’ll be alone. Our
kids, your new girlfriend, will be with you.
February
Our children believe you when you say you’ll live.
I hear you’re wasting—you’ve lost sixty pounds.
From that crest of hill above the train yard
they’re gliding down on their plastic Christmas
sleds, not too far from where the 280 bridge straightens highway, combs train tracks to the ground. Maybe twenty detached coal cars tonight
wait to hook up, load up, full again.
The distant overhead billboard says,
#1silent killer? Depression.
The kids bring up other things. Their mittened fingers’ burning cold. That they toe the hill,
don’t fall down. In a film at school some Bronze Age man dug from a bog, skin and bone.
April 1
Breath in blooms, I cover new flowerbeds
in blankets. They’re forecasting cold like pox.
Now the garden too becomes a hospice
and we’ll likely see a spring killer frost.
As for death, we just delay the petals.
Doctors steep you in treatment, your mother
says her beads. Do you care they’ve made a priest your accountant? Does he keep his raven’s scorecard of your soul? Do you give a lot
of thought to contrition? Arithmetic?
You’ll see now what’s behind the sliding door.
I haven’t kept good faith or religion.
For this—contrition. Try to pardon me.
What can I add but flowers for the bier?
April 15
Aida, sharp and sweet as blood oranges
that young spring in Verona when you
led me to market, palmed a few lira
for stained labels: the village wine. Nearby
in a meat stall the butcher’s knife opened
a stunned hare. He peeled off the skin, seized the cardinal organs, the scarlet liver slid.
A clot with its syrup clinging, it filled
a small bowl. Today doctors call. We hurry.
You hold up a plastic bag, say: Contents
of my stomach. Are you impressed? Then our daughter runs shrieking from your room. More bags hang ungenerously from metal hooks,
silently ensure the coming encores.
Late April
You said yes. A secret was the twisted
part of you, and shame, in the end a debt
your body had been mortgaged to. The cost
of losing face—an organ turned to pus?
A slowly slaughtered faith, trust wormed through. What couldn’t wait, or last. You said young, and young, you’d seen the lake. Why had you never guessed that it kept from you its source, its depth, how it looked at you and loved? Weeping
made the water cloud, lust the hidden ledge. Reflected, the light from your abdomen,
the margins—of you, of us—changed just at
the end, your own face floating up, hopeful
lines, tubes, serum. No, your mouth and eyes said.
End of April
We were all leaving our bodies—but no
one helped us, no one said, Breathe into
the spaces you can’t feel. We were all losing our bearings. We’d seen you, Vesuvian, you who grasped any hand to crush it inside yours, voice rasping out: See how strong I am! and your will greater than chemo. Do you
agree it was your plan all along, your brand
of curative violence—mind’s NO versus
body’s letting go? How funny, dying,
you didn’t remember this: on a mountain, years ago, you’d encountered a vision. You would die young. You never got sick of your body. It kept you as long as it could.
Early May
Vermivora peregrina, pilgrim
warbler, old devotee of maggot grub
and upturned stump, mossy hummock lover, ace catcher—who yes, slyly, took to branch, snatched an insect then glanced around—seet, seet, seet—and flew. Little molter, just
back from Panama this glazed May to make your northern nest, ever the mover, straggler from scrub, thicket breeder, builder of dome from the hair of moose, fine moss, quill and here in the city where larvae crawl trash cans,
dead. Near glass, one olive-gray handful. Nothing sullied except your black eyes drying, worm-eating pilgrim I rescue from worms.
May 7
What choice was there but to layer pancake makeup deep, his undertaker cousin
says. Chemo mixed with embalming fluid could work like that. My husband, eighteen years, my children’s father, laid out wearing three of his father’s shirts at once, and still looking small in his casket. We all sob.
Up close we see through thin hair to green scalp. I touch his chest, once barrel-shaped. Beneath my hand the rib he broke the first time I
saw him on stage, a night Newsweek reviewed, singling out his Drosselmeyer, to his delight:
“ . . . an unusual reading of the role— like Clark Gable crossed with Dracula.”

A rush of words comes unannounced: all at once, jacked up into flight like a heraldic bird, mystery plumed by shadow. And even in this pandemonium of pomp and poverty, as if the past pardoned men, a silver presence: a fistful of cantos to measure the span from sword to soul. All lined up, an indelible geometry, like lightsome ships set for the great journey.
You couldn’t say they haven’t committed every error of feeling. Nor rationed the body’s share of detriment and thirst. The height of contradiction: men, inured to beatings and self-affliction, compose triptychs of birth, copulation, and death, and so, submit to their torment. No other comedy would carry them straight to the destiny they write unwittingly. No other path, spiraling like this, through the labyrinth of their own shadows.
Now and then, detonations, rumblings, menaces. What kind of magic, precious and sterile, do men assign to these sounds? What about these war props dazzles them? Something proliferates in- explicably in the sky, then on the bloody ground, and it’s always hate, a scattering of viscera equally illegible. A few beasts try to escape. A few skeletons, steadying themselves, on an infamous manuscript.
Today it’s Hopkins and his obscure spiritual contraptions— everything I read is heart-corseted, like a concealable vest, police surplus good as new. Some fanatic is packing a gun.
I turn to Hopkins—living speech—sprung,
stressed, compressed—then I’m off again, help me, obsessed. O, restless mind—my own strange spiritual contraption.
Armor with a warranty: order it online—unless you’re a felon.
But a killer aims at your head when you’re his holy pretext.
Right to choose: third eye, bull’s eye. Some fanatic is packing a gun.
Why is the body so feared, its physicality, its passion?
Even Hopkins—the beauty of the body is dangerous—wrestling with God, that obscure spiritual contraption.
Last week I read we’re wired for God: blessed evolution. We’re (spring me!) wired to control—oil, water, sex.
God help us: tonight a fanatic is packing a gun.
Another doctor shot. The killer thinks he’s won.
Bodies, ourselves—mere rhetoric? Beauty is the spirit fleshed. I mourn, I get ready for work, I put on my contraption,
it presses on my heart. Some fanatic is packing a gun.
Dulce it’s not: How many miles underground do we tunnel? Into darkness, the tunnel rat goes past black pits
and poison traps and once
he comes round an oblique corner into a hospital with operating theater,
sweet air blown in,
beds still warm, the wounded fleeing
down the tunnel before him.
􏰀
You know the story,
the king buries
dragonteeth into the sod
and they jump up—
soldiers to fight for the kingdom.
􏰀
Once you’ve introduced the teeth,
the rest of the animal can’t be far. Think
of a dictator pulled from a spiderhole, tell your friends, tell them it’s dulce. When
the soldier comes home from Iraq
he flees the house of his uncle
and disappears into the sand and palm trees of southwest Florida.
The ’Nam vets go looking for him. Rumor
he’d been seen on a bus stop bench
dirty and unshaven sends the old men to the jungles, dressed homeless to look for the young man
because Gilgamesh said to Enkidu
on his descent into the underworld: “Do not put on clean clothes,
lest the [dead] heroes come forth like enemies; Do not annoint thyself with the good oil of the vessel,
lest at its smell they crowd about thee.”
􏰀
The tunnel rat goes to the last place
the kid has been seen; along the highway embankment he finds a drainage pipe “large enough for a man to crawl into,”
or something to crawl out of.
It’s not usually the old ones who go out searching. Telemachus goes for his father, and Oedipus finally finds his parents.
In Vietnam now they’ve opened these tunnels to the tourist trade;
here’s Orpheus, the original tunnel rat,
and the shade of the young man flees before him.
The old man, gone into the ground, sees again the briefing room desk, the well-stocked hospital ward
(as if those things could make them whole again).
The black echo whispers now ahead of him, the oblique
turns twist away before,
and the white phosphorus burns brightly above Dumuzi’s Euphrates.
The smell is overwhelming. The maggots had no trouble finding Dumuzi in his dream. The shadow face passing by, petal on a flower we never saw bloom. The dead follow us even as we leave
their museum: they’re tired
of the blandness of death’s feast.
They crouch at the edges of our sunlight turning stones in the dust:
“My sister,” the dreamer calls out from his slumber,
“this is the heart
of my dream,
rushes rise up all about me.”
this is the sleeping sleepless face of the parent this is the cry of the father
a long letter the owl keeps in his feathers this is the sunflower teapot, the sunflower
fading on the black and white porcelain form the voice you cannot listen to, you do not want to hear
this is the sleepless sleeping face of your parents the cat biting its paw in the dark
the shade that goes up, against which rain patters
carried by wind, flute, and drum
this is the chime in the temple that is pressed by the hands this is the still silence of sand and wet as a flower
the home of the red desert
where children touch the feet of their parents
if I could change one thing it would be in childhood to have touched the feet of my parents
white bulb onion of my mother’s feet brown earth soil of my father’s feet
nowadays my feet are sand and I walk toward them toward home, toward the funeral of rain
toward the rice paddy and the clay saucer for tea the tea leaf in the soil growing tall as I walk
In Judea, the ancients hold the scrolls
near to themselves: within caverns, the papyri
roll out songs and laws, in fragments, in tongues.
The body is finding
a library that the dead have left behind.
The Dead
Sea divides
around a peninsula called
the tongue. It wears
a blue-white cloud
and a shroud of salt. I wear
my words; I am embroidered
by pain, daily, whose garment I will leave my children. The design is undetermined, but gently, you may
read it for yourself. You may render it valuable. What I wear is an heirloom. For thousands of years
after the ancients disappear, the Dead Sea Scrolls lie dormant until the boys who wear sheepskins find them. This day,
I have found a sleeping infant
inside me, and have loved. In The Marriage of Figaro, mistaken identity finds
love, after all. Women wearing each other’s
clothes. A good story. When a white woman reads a black man, he sometimes turns to see her
watching him. She recognizes
his clothes. Perhaps a case
of mistaken identity, but possibly
she is thinking, I am near to you. I am near to you. Perhaps he interprets
Somali in the evenings for his American cousins, but tonight, he asks the woman to the opera. He has misread
the situation: she is a lesbian. Tonight, another woman
has taken herself
from her home to safety, the blue-black prints of a man in her skin. Biology is an interesting
story. The brown-haired marks of a man appear on the hermaphrodite’s skin. Pronouns
divide her. Verbs multiply her. For years, I did not have names for the nouns
in my body.
Sometimes syntax fails. Scientists are fighting
to own the basic translations of our human genome. Biology
is a dangerous story. The body finds
a library of letters that the dead have left behind. I find
that the literal is singular, but metaphor is plural. Myself, I have often appeared
in the third person. She mistakes herself for someone she knows, for someone
she could write. She remembers
the nights of the years she has nearly taken
her own life.
I ask the woman
in the shelter to sign her name, or an X, and she doubles over to clutch her knees with one hand, my arm
with another. We
must be here. We
may appear like the asters
in dark fields where the shepherd boys have entered the caves, and now,
they near the finding:
what there is to have, it is among us.
Shadow. Dark watcher there.
Would you taste it then,
in thinking toward some other? A want that worries sleep,
lulls a way into. Turned, so suddened, you’d sense yourself awake, but of a moment made,
still spare as light, uncertained upon wandering. Breath, insistence, desire now—
your hand open, old words, body—how they drift their hurt down seas and seas and seas.
I learn the word leilot: nights, plural,
a false feminine. How often I’ve sung nights
without knowing what I sing. Each night you carry me, frozen child, from temple
to the house’s citrus heat. You bathe me in the lowest tub. The body is washed,
dried, dressed. The body is wrapped
in sheets. The light withdraws. The door
slides shut. Footsteps darken
in the hallway. The child mourns every night,
until mourning is its mother.
Believe it: father made the world just for you—
the sunlight fluttering like ribbons in a pony’s mane,
the river that pony a child leads through the hills. This lullaby he licked clean: the riverbank
peddling hellebore’s fat pods, flowers antique and verdigris-hued. The fence he painted the dulled color of comfort. Believe it:
he made you this lushness, these extravagant blossoms cut and vased. Made you a porcelain tub, mildew-slick,
and called it river, the water flushed red,
clear again. Made you a bird shot through
with light and called it defiant girl.
Bang, he points with forefinger, thumb straight to heaven,
the tiny eye an explosion of red. Bang. The neck a soft torn cloth. Bang. The beak shattering to dust.
When I followed him to the river, it narrowed itself to a needle’s point—the morning clear,
the cicadas’ swelling hum a comfort.
Lures spread out carnival-bright on newspaper,
those feathers trembling. The day’s catch was usual:
fish too tiny left on the banks, a snake flayed open to the light.
Later, when rocks bit the backs of my knees, the haze of insects crowding around us,
my skirt pushed back like a gasp and the water the water a stagnant slash across the land
I didn’t fight. You see, I was older now. I wasn’t scared anymore;
I was tired. Back at home, I brushed my hair, put on a clean dress.
I thought it was this taking that would follow me through the halls his fearlessness with the sky so blue and vast above us
but instead it was the field beyond the river, those daffodils’ pursed lips,
the cattails bending in the wind.
The light again: it interferes
with matter. In some cases, as in Monet’s Seine, the objects vanish
before that shimmering. No poplars, no
water but a density stuck before them.
It’s what I wished for:
that something would intervene between
my friend and her dying. My error was
in confusing ground with figure: the fog, gauze, little dark spots I was distracted by
were her dying, not some overlay.
The way the poplars were the light.
sky over the lake, an emptiness on an emptiness
the paler space of sky retained
useless as the kayak passing in the near dark close by the dock
not metaphor or ghost though the rider casts a torch
forward, then passes back into the dark
and her vanishing continues, my wish
to feel her presence
shorn by me of touch, cheek
and lip removed or blurred as if I didn’t know where
to look for her
or she’d grown invisible which I cannot bear
and require, as if I’d reached down my cupped palms
toward the water’s surface which is too far to touch.
1
In a slant of light, a woman crochets a doily, working the hook in and out. She wraps
a thread of cotton floss around
her index finger, almost
as if she were writing. The words fall from her crochet hook, linked
into white lace, a white page.
Words tangle in stringy ink,
almost manic, a speaking in tongues, looped, caught, tucked under a stitch of breath. Memory rises as if
it were a doily of lace, beautifully edged, holding what once mattered.
2
Memory snags on a doily’s lace, a ring game of thread—
Put your hands on your hips, let your backbone slip.
The past wears the body of a girl-child to skip, spin-
dizzy, fall and leap up again. There is resurrection
in a jump rope’s twirl. The past tosses the unseen
like a stone, then, scooping it up, claims it, the present
a pip, a prize for having journeyed. A doily starched,
shaped into fullness, the hem of a child’s skirt as she twirls, twirls and falls. Our first sex is with the earth that pulls us down, that holds us against its skin as a doily draws the eye.
3
From fiberglass, an artist crochets doilies of resin. “Arte Povera,” she says, “chaos theory,
the Fibonacci sequence, the numbers pi
and e, and Pascal’s triangle.” Fiberglass chains and joinings gather light and transform
into shining, into narratives of mathematical precision, from simplicity into hybrid
space and form, thread and fabric, plane and dimension, maker and made.
How measure a doily’s self-similarities? Unraveled, a doily is skeins of cotton thread. Untwisted, the threads are fiber. Released,
the fiber drifts over a mill in Carolina or a field in Alabama, over a cotton row where a rat snake coils under the shade of a cotton plant, unaware of a descending blade, how things fall apart.
Another artist links antique doilies, builds sculptures, webs, womb rooms, huge cellular amoebas of chains (sc in 2nd ch from hook and in each ch across for 34 sc). Elsewhere
a poet writes that a single doily is the cell
of an extraterrestrial organism. Objects drawn past its plasma membrane are consumed.
At night, doilies levitate upward toward
their host colony, frequently mistaken for mist, cloud formations, snow, or vees of geese. Doilies have always been amongst us.
4
A man lies on top of a woman. Which is the doily?
Which is a vase of clear water
Which—the man or the woman—lifts this moment above smooth flesh, bare and shining like still water?
5
Doilies are two-dimensional planes until starched
and shaped or crocheted with wire or words or breath.
Then they are architectural. Doilies are flat
like stepping stones, like old graves, like the known
universe before longitude. But they can be bowls, mesh cages, or equations of hyberbolic geometry,
say Russian kale or a coral reef, say old grief or a black woman’s hair on a humid day.
6
Consider the doily, a plane, space made lovely, space that is and is not, form that is and is not. Atop a doily you may place anything of value, anything that you want to beguile the eye:
a porcelain soup tureen from the Azores,
a lead crystal candy bowl, the photograph
of a soldier in uniform. Consider the doily, how it shows what does and does not belong to you, what little you have, as if, surprisingly, there is always poverty in such display.
7
646.42 Doilies, The Art of Doi
Patterns, repetitions, skeletons of lace used for display, to protect, proclaim, give status, attract the eye, give access, to prove, as she said, that Somebody loves us all.
Subject headings:
1) lacemaking 2) crochet—history 3) handiwork, women
(see also geometry)
The doily knows only one word: Behold!
9
Questions the doily asks:
1.0 Is space a material thing in which all material things are to be located?
—Bernard Tschumi, Architecture and Disjunction 1.1 If doilies are material spaces, should space be understood as
form?
1.1.1 If doilies are intersections of form and space, what is the boundary between conceptualized space and the space of the material doily?
1.1.2 If the doily’s purpose is display, does an object placed within or atop a doily represent the measure of its display? Do doilies display, at every moment, all objects in any space? We display the doily. Does the doily display us?
1.1.3 If a doily contains an infinite number of spaces, does display alter the perception of space?
1.2 Doilies replicate gardens: lilies, roses, palm fronds, carnations, forget-me-nots, daisies, as gardens themselves replicate the wild and fecund. What is consumed in a doily’s replicated garden?
1.2.1 If doilies are figurative gardens, are they subversive in the context of the large-scale monocultures of modern agribusiness?
1.2.2 As metaphorical garden and embodied paradise in which divinity and sexuality are not separate, do doilies deny same- sex desire? Are they petitions to an absent divinity?
1.2.3 As metaphorical gardens, doilies feature flowers, the classic emblems of sexuality. Is the doily a means of seduction?
1.3 A doily belonging to Eva Braun is sold at auction. A Negro folk artist paints pictures of his wife’s doilies. A black woman passes on a cardboard box, filled with her mother’s doilies, to her daughter. Which doily does not represent memory?
1.4 Are doilies beautiful because they balance absence with presence?
1.4.1 If doilies are hybrids (form and formlessness, repetition and variation), is what composes a doily also hybrid—space, connection, beauty?
1.4.2 But if the doily is itself beauty, as well as a marker for beauty, does it compete for the space allocated to women? In making a doily, does a woman replicate woman, feminine, womb, girl?
10
In Spring Flowers with Lace Doily, 1944 Pippin paints gladioli, chrysanthemums, roses, and orange poppies over a doily
as intricate as a spider’s web or altar cloth, a pictograph across a sandstone cliff.
Wild abundance or what is only lovely? He argues with himself
about the divine
and the earthly,
about chaos
and order—he can’t decide.
He paints a doily, labors to show
every intersecting thread, each thread
a path untaken, a path that might have
made all the difference, each thread
a journey. He paints the spaces,
the interruptions of pattern that are also pattern. His doilies look like nets, sieves,
or the aerial cartography of a vast irrigation system, labyrinths where there are monsters,
but also, surely, gods. And so the flowers,
and so his doilies, and so his petition.
Flesh and blood turn mathematic. The limbs illustrate opaque angles,
the sky rotates three hundred sixty degrees around eyes burning
black zeros into its center. The light
is solid geometry, testing the premises
of interlocking masses: rifle stocks that won’t be stripped of hands,
legs nesting among the salley branches, brocades mounting bones, sheer
vests and their torsos intersecting brambles, plains crawling forward
into the smoke. The scratched lens is a blackboard solving equations,
each one for its elusive X: maybe
a single cell regrouping, maybe the tasteless
cleanup of an unrelenting sun, maybe a wild animal tracking fresh scent into focus.
As is the case with Duchamp’s painting we are not trained to imagine less
than a full field, no less than a shuffle of form wherein one figure sways,
behind it a series of selves leaning forward on brace root ankles,
lock-kneed and peeling on tawny stalks, the echo that leads to now, to one
plant at the ditch’s verge. October gusts comb crooked parts through rows,
and the plants rattle their low-growling engine of cob and leaf shifting
and bowing in girlish angles.
It is not newly made for you, this sound,
it is the sound that tracks each stalk
like shadow, the sound that haunts these
hiplike husks, these willowed legs.
Might the painter ask, where the corn
without this field of trail? Might the painting answer, where the woman still unshucked?
Walt Whitman, when I stood unmoved
at your tomb, I wondered, then, what place
might move me. I read the plaque
but you were not in the grass. I touched
the moss and still you stonewalled from inside your barred hole in the hill,
from your casket stacked up with your kinfolk. Like a pebble
dropped into stale waters, your death rung out others: around the cemetery
the gray hospitals, pale office buildings, then chop shops and shacks with their
flagging dispositions, paint shattered on panes, cast-off condoms and carless
tires. To be invisible is to barely be, and so Camden becomes, with you
lodged at its heart in your reluctant sublime, your drunken embrace
become hangover, your tickled palm turned itch. In your quiet park
on that sweatered morning, I knew what you meant by monotony, I felt
the old expectation, the wanting
of wanting, I suffered for lack of better
pains, and from this there is no relief either. But also hear this: just as sure
as each breath beat its path from your lungs as it beats now from mine, as you are
bones in a box as I stand in my skin, as we both should have known
you would not wait at this place, hear how my voice has the gait
of a woman who wanted something better. And is not afraid to ask.
1 Corinthians 13
Though I speak in the tugs of glitches, my splotch
at grace beglottled
enclanks persymboled faith, dark in the godclutch enlovelied, outglibbed for
prayer -cum-impasse,
but sound interpretorsion must enstammer glory
till time at sunder deconstutters love.
The edge I’m at is eleven feet high and safer than the dirt lot below, where shattered glass doubles
as ground. Three rusted-out pickup trucks have been outfitted with yellow steel boots
and stuffed with flames, igniting steady gusts of ammonia—bodily and actual—a smell
inextricably related to the tear ducts that also combusted here, and why I’m standing atop
a single-wide eyeing punched-in mobile home darkness. I’m thinking
about Grandmaster Flash. “The Message”:
an open row of a freshly set chessboard, bleak
beneath a pink, umbrella-donned table. And the two rats, fat as badgers, schlepping around
a dog’s charred carcass is the move I will make
to hurt you. It’s 3 AM. I just pulled off a Nowhere,
Indiana road to watch a trailer park smoke. A fist of ash like nail polish scorched with salt blasts
me to my knees. Everything disintegrates from this angle. Bit by bit. Like blacktop
sweating off layers in sun. Like police tape singed with flame. From this point of view
soot cloaks stars. Even a white, grinning moon finds its cheekbones eliminated here. I’m talking
about real lives and white rock rubble. Eyelids, pocked with reddening cinder. Noses, eroded
and raw. I’m wondering if a face on fire looks the same in any city. In any hue.
A phone rings an answering machine awake. The trailing silence harkens to a boarded-up
project building. And in one great big empty alleyway after another, people are boxed in
or burning up. Vanishing into thin air. Here
I am again, sketch pad in hand, glued to this spot
watching smoke stifle everything—white and black chess pieces melting in slow mo.
So wrap your cultured-up skull around this. I woke
to a red cross stenciled onto mismatched logs
and “The Entertainer” weeping from a black baby grand—each note a hound dog’s droopy ear. Hear
me when I say, I was lost. Stranded at a teen arts camp so north in the U.P. I was hearing southern tongues.
Some flannelled blond man trailed a finger in the air.
Bumped cha head perdy good there. Reckon ya twisted that ankle on this. He aimed at my foot
with the bottom of a snapper’s lacquered shell— hazy compact, reflecting a dark, faceless me. Am I
in heaven? I asked. He cackled at that; shaking his bronze leather face at the wall, No, no. ’Least not like him.
My vision steadied on a hunchback boy in a yellowed white tee as I rose from the cot. His erratic, thunderous sniffling
spooked words in my throat: Is he going to be all right? —Oh yeah. That there’s just my little boy, Tim. Been
carryin’ on like that since a babe. Just a’cryin’ and playin’ piano that way. Go’on over and say hello.
I joined the boy of five or six at the small black bench
and forced a nervous smile. Timmy’s glassy blue eyes kept time with a wooden metronome. His pupils shrank
and grew. Shrank and grew; dilating on each upbeat. What if I said he wrapped my hands around his
wrist? Would you think me stoned as Snoop Dogg at a slain rapper’s wake if I told you he stared? That
he wept and played? You think I’m talking shit. His pupil’s penny-sized screen flashed small
looped horrors: the snapper’s shriveled head lopped off with a boy scout knife; a muscled teen
pissing on an old, vagrant man, drooling snuff on courthouse steps; the night clerk’s nose stud
nailed to a bloody boot heel. You better believe I bounced; hopped toward an exit. But Timmy
kept on playing, drilling notes into me like a downpour thumping a well.
True story. The boy never left that room. Go ahead. You can ask me how I know.
Maybe the Saddest Thing
is a shovel sighing earth—
is what’s stirring beneath a well,
where I always go: that suck and push
of air, swelling the chest—its starting
place. That I couldn’t end there
is as sad and annoying
as watching a pet mouse collide and
collide with its mirrored glass quarters:
is any ordinary beast acknowledging himself with a battering ram—dense stump
that slams through the wrong door
in a smoky hallway, reconstructing
the face of an elderly woman
as dumb gold teeth can do.
It’s the slim probability of that and
the swinging arm of death falling
for the woman’s granddaughter
at the funeral, who has stems as
if a comet’s trail could begin at an ankle and end in a dark, stockinged thigh.
And just like that, we’re back:
in the chamber that regulates all.
If you’re locked outside its door
or cannot find this room, I sing:
You are lucky as a virgin.
If you’re unsure this place exists—
this saddest thing—
Fine. Don’t believe in it
or me. But please believe in this
latched dirt-box of a house
speaker strapped to my back, blasting everything blue—the same.
In the goose-down air
of spring a song drifts up
the row of trailers.
The voice, pale and unprofessional, lingers like a scent
on the porches, under eaves,
rises through cottonwood leaves.
Neighbors have stopped talking, as if accepting a blessing
of the unsayable, the unknowable. After it stops we hesitate, unwilling to let go
of something we never held.
my vision for this series hinges on the postulate that fallacy—the unexpected momentary collapse of authenticating mechanisms— might actuate a disturbance of sorts, that the overarching perspective which customarily validates the relational aesthetic between the inventive impulse and the essence of realness, but which is so often diminished by the ‘thereness’ of geometric forms and their corresponding figure/ground relationships, would, rather than reflexively abdicating its hierarchical imperative
to the mediated space, exploit the cross-referentiality between that intuitive realm from which the carnivorous self lays siege to legitimacy and the restrictive albeit reassuring body-politic of day-to-day understanding.
this incursion of graphite into pressed cellulose means to embody the eternal struggle between that which is overtly transparent and that which is eternally opaque. the dry fuzz of obfuscation and clarity’s glittering razor set up an über-prophetic resonance whereby the underlying territory of energies (perceptive maxima of optimism and truth mingled with the visceral detritus of fear) implicates the chaotic embrace of self-actuation in the lingering tautology of extant maleficence. this phenomenology of disappearance reflects an ontological nexus at exact odds with the preternatural impulse effecting the cartesian mind-body split. as an artist who is concerned with beauty, it is my fervent intention to deconstruct this meta-spiritual fidelity to exact ideas, thus annihilating the mythology of linkages that grips our world in an ambivalent yet viselike embrace.
Knuckle-pure & forehead-finished, spear- perfect & canine-wise, it wrestles with mammoth-peculiarities & flint-feelings. Unnumbered, its days amble stag-free across the cave-plains of Lascaux-like visions & Altamira-like ambiguities. She- wife tolerates & transposes & transcends he-husband’s mud-mutterings & dirt- ditherings & finds love buried like the first & fragile shoots of ungathered & unlooked- for affections.
Two cups of squalor & three heaping teaspoons of overcast/oppressive village, add several cases of undiagnosed child- hood consumption with a dash of petty larceny, stir over a low heat of human indifference, cool with a blast of bitter accusations & serve thick/black wedges to starving artists on the eve of the only war they will ever regret.
One day, an assortment of people went walking by the window.
It was clear as the sea foaming crisp at the base of the white cliff, this was a procession.
I am a curious girl. I was born for obsessions.
Wiping my hands on my apron, I left the baking table strewn with flour, herbs, oiled bowls of rising dough.
The loaves murmured disapproval from dish-towel cloisters. On my apron were two white handprints, so I left it at the door.
I am a curious girl. My mother tipped me back and forth to watch my eyes slide open, shut.
The women in the procession wore their hair like sculpted seashells.
The men wore mitts as if to protect their hands from an anticipated heat.
I fell in toward the end of the line. We skirted the cliffs.
As a child, it took me a long time to recognize myself in the mirror. I was startled by how my teeth betrayed my skull.
Some people had sewn pouches into their shirts in which they carried their animal familiars.
A cat, a monkey, a bat sleeping with his wings folded like a steeple in front of his eyes.
I am a curious girl. My father bound my hands behind my back and tipped me into the shallows.
The mood of the crowd started to change.
Some women dabbed at their eyes with handkerchiefs pulled from their towering hairdos.
The men produced bouquets of kelp and sea grass from behind their backs.
Before me the procession parted. I craned my neck to see.
We were at the town square. The familiar cobbles, the yellow café, the hibiscus opening their tequila throats for inspection.
Someone had built a bandstand.
Someone had hung an archway with anthurium, each petal like a waxy plate waiting for the dessert.
My little kitchen seemed so far away. My baking table like a raft adrift and the sorrowing dough searching for a horizon.
Under the arch was a tower—a man, his beard like a hurricane, bells swinging from its cumulus. An orchid pinned to his vest.
I am a curious girl. My favorite brother put his fingers in my mouth and under my tongue left a ring and a key.
The crowd began to sway from foot to foot. The crowd began to clap.
The cat picked up a ukulele, the monkey a mandolin. The bat flew to a tympanum and patted a sleepy rhythm.
They made a music like water sluicing through sentinel rocks.
It took me so long to recognize myself in the mirror. By the time I looked again, it was too late.
The crowd pushed me to the front, many hands at the small of my back, under my skirt, feeling for purchase.
The bearded man took the ring from under my tongue and slipped it onto my finger.
I am a curious girl. My sisters went before me. Their dresses were mailed home, mended and neatly pressed.
All my loaves were lost at sea. They sank to the bottom, dish towels shadowing them like rays.
When a storm brews over the ocean, I recognize my face in the whipping waves.
All that is left in my mouth is this key.
On the cover of a comic book, two girls bemoan their virginity.
“Hinkeys! Everyone else has found love!”
says the girl who is colored cappuccino. She’s the kind of cup
with chocolate shavings, a cap of foam
dipsy-doodling over the edge of the oversized artisan mug.
“Not everything is only a thing,” say her very tan arms and her breasts, high and succulent.
Her friend is a peach frappe. There’s some ice in that complexion, some granulation.
“Willikers!” she sorrows. “Do you think there’s something wrong with us?”
The girls are on a bench. The girls have identical, improbable bosoms—heaving—and identical legs.
The kind of legs you’d see drawn on anthropomorphized
salt shakers or oil cans. Legs just made for pumps
and garters. Let’s-Face-It legs, meant to be hyperextended. The blue hollow of the tendon as the hip pops.
In the background, happy couples are staking out the bushes. Everyone is hail fellow, well met. A jock with a jock,
nerds prisming the world through duo-lenses. Even the red- headed boy—so pale, his freckles like liver spots
betraying a deeper unhealth—has paired up with the sock in his pocket,
a picture of the oil can clipped from the coupon circular and pinned to the inside of his shirt.
In a moment, there will be a tremendous dystopia. The girls are about to be surrounded.
The world is a moist place, busy, undercurrented.
The world swirls algae in the shallows,
buries the small bones under layers of last year’s leaves.
But these girls are singular.
They go it alone on the bench, knee to knee,
wrists bent like royalty, love-lashed eyes (two blue, two hazelnut-cream) swooning the horizon line.
Just off scene, someone is cocking
his arm for the punch. Someone else is pushing
her super-do—a Jackie-O, fresh hairspray beading
like rainbow spiderlets—a little lower, a little lower, almost there.
In the country where believers eat the bodies of the gods, we meet a priest who pulls a rope of thorns through his tongue to make his mind
pure enough for a vision. He dances to music we can’t hear and waits to come trembling into knowledge. We don’t recognize ourselves
in his radiance, but we do in his suffering.
He passes through pain and into healing without seeing the holy rendered visible. He tells us the oracle died
when she refused to divine the future,
but we find her tangled in her own hair wearing
a garland of feathers and burrs, manacled to the bed.
We ask for a better world to die in, but she says, Submit to your freedom. We tie new knots in her hair and celebrate the feast of the dead gods
and the festival of the living. We hold matches to a bush, but it will not speak. Rumors say the secret of life is sewn into a dead man’s coat,
but when we unearth him, all we find in his sleeves are his fractured arms. We want to believe,
to split open the myth and lie in it, return
to original dark and be changed, but the bones won’t yield to us, the gods remain so quiet
we hear water speaking between the stones.
On a mountain, we find monks who won’t speak because they cannot bear the way sound travels
and returns. They take us to their cave—genesis-dark and deep as dream—and there we read their history
by the light of their bodies. The book says: Myths
invent nothing. And the book says: We are all born again.
And the monks point to a nova pulsing in the eastern sky when they mean to say: Creation is a sacred violence.
When they learned they were ruled by time the way
the sea is ruled by the moon, they came to the wilderness
and buried the cold machinery of clocks, the arms and wheels and chimes that signified their dying.
They grew an orchard of pears to escape the mysteries, to take solace in the wonted work of sow and reap.
Here they could feel the heft of a harvest in their pockets,
count seeds and the fruit they bore, and record the measurable world.
But then they cut a pear in half, and halved it again, and again halved it. They divided it by zero and have not stopped counting,
the trees slivered away by arithmetic. What is zero, but an elegy? we ask. We are afraid of everything
we cannot touch, they write, notching bark with a number that continues unsolved—ordinary and divine and forever.
It happened suddenly: the novice carried off
by a gentle madness as the other women sat weaving. In the tapestry, angels played with their serpents.
Where once they embroidered hounds given a dead rabbit to know the scent of the animal they hunted, women now sewed a bomb to a man who measured its ticking
with quarter notes. It could save him if he sang it, but he didn't want to survive the pain that made him. The novice spun thread to reorder his stars.
She wanted flowers to take back the gods they birthed. To paint over the walls muraled with unsolved mysteries. She wanted to rescue a man from his sadness,
but she kept saving herself, kept seeking the paler loves, waiting for a naked stranger to stroll through the courtyard, his skin dappled by the night shadows of the persimmon trees.
She was stitching more minutes into the bomber's song to deliver him from his fervor when the darker joy found her, the wound and its ecstasy unfinished.
In the field where I’m always returning,
in the jaundice, in the wheat, I am eight
and we’re stomping stems with our running. Hand that bears no mercy, I ask for none.
In the field where I spend the afternoon
in the Y-crook of a tree, I have been crying.
Mama Bird, hold me quietly. Our lawn is littered by the gouged car’s organs, Papa’s oiled hands that repair, the cigarette that weeps
on the motor. I’m expected to help
but under my skirt I hold secrets.
Hand that does not seek to understand,
here is my face. Here is the rest of me.
My sister and I are pretending in the wheat
we thought hid our childhood. We lie in its itch long after we should. World of wonder,
world of fireflies and satellites,
the winking of those burnished wings,
the arcs grasshoppers make—early night
smells like wanting. Our world is small
and always shrinking. I take the skirt
from my sister and slip it on to feel
the swish of silk around my thighs.
I run through the field where I’m always returning to feel its flag drag behind me.
My sister and I are just pretending:
you be the Mama Bird and I’ll be the chick,
you be the hand that knows and I’ll be
broken on the linoleum floor. Hand that gives swift reply, answer me now. We sit in the sandbox the cat thinks is litter. My sister makes me eat every one—it is the nature of our play,
my obedience. In the distance, a windmill
sounds like declaration: we are, we are, we are. While we pretend in a field that’s more
like a stage, Diesel Papa has had enough
and the skirt is taken, my mouth left sour.
Hand of insurrection that resurrects the hem, return my self to myself. I retake it
from the closet, hide myself in the field
that betrays while Papa’s body is occupied
inside the cavity of a Chevy. The bluster dries, makes sails of my skirt, and in the distance the windmill sounds like heartbeats.
“Kill these yellowjackets,” he says, gesturing
to the winged shards of flint and gold converging
on the edge of the folding table all but
buckling beneath the weight of squat mason jars
and stockpots brimming with parboiled tomatoes.
He hand cranks the sieve that squeezes pulp into
a bowl and sheds the rinds like a molting snake.
His bare arms, like an army surgeon’s, are mucked
to the elbows, the gray threads on his chest now
stark and coarse against the backdrop of skin gone
hazel in the unshirted hours spent tending
the heat-breathing vines, staking, twining, pinching
the rampant shoots. In one hand, he lifts a green sweating bottle to his lips, while the other
readies a dishrag to smack a syndicate
of insects vindictive as a frayed lamp wire.
“Damn these wasps,” he says, flicking the dazed and dead with his slotted spoon. He tops off one more jar
and screws the lid ring with a sound like tires
on gravel far away, and holds it aloft
to let the sunlight fuse through it, transform it
to something molten, pulsing, like the heartflow
of Vesuvius, or a blood-oil pressed from
twenty suns to grease the engine of the day.
“That’s gonna be good,” he says, gently nodding
his satisfaction before setting it down
with the ranks already marshaled on a bench.
He drains his bottle, still sweating, and towels
the bright gore from his hands. “Someday when I’m gone,” he says, like someone who understands at last
the dry wisdom of advice he didn’t heed,
“you’ll remember me with all these pots and jars,
up to my chin in fresh tomatoes, swatting
these damned yellowjackets like some kind of fool.”
There’s the work, and then
there’s the dig, down through carbon-
brayed Manhattan, just to brush the dust from the shingles of the old job
wherein the work lies waiting.
Someone’s father feels a sure and certain gestation here, beneath the caked waste
of the buildings’ single clot, pulse and flutter same as the wings
of any botfly, come to prick this minute
and fill it on up with larvae:
pain, obviously, but foremostly there’s
accrual, with each sliver of time passing into coin and piling up
in little anthills in his mind (one,
perhaps, for each birth, birthday, each one’s good grades, bad root canals, wedding
bills) (accrual in the lungs too, counting down to days of gagging, nights in deep sleep
at the next job), little piles
to block up the processes, to stamp out the synaptic network of antlife
before it can gnash roads wide enough to traffic in the colossal, political
bunker buster of what happened here.
Someone’s father must be only parts, like the beams, like the limbs laced among beams below, only
a work boot steadying on powdered stone, then only fingers picking concrete
from only tear ducts, here a shovel driven askew
that he might hope is unlike the paralyzing work of the expectant hornet, even less like the prey
rendered quiet and ever awake, that the heart may persist for the housing and the feeding of the strange lives
sluiced inside him.
[Surveying the quiet auditoriums
for effects left behind, my father
is alone at work tonight when he falls unconscious falls straight down
the aisle stairs to wake standing
beside his daughter’s bed at home.
It feels late and like winter it feels electric and cold like the eve of every holiday and he’s home, his tie still tight and the house quiet.]
The doctor tells him
to always seat himself
when the dizziness starts
and, unable to afford something better, he does, and so the next time it comes
he passes right out in an auditorium chair
and dreams he’s at someone else’s job, bending to adjust the spray of artificial rain
on three bodies lying
in grass.
[No eyes: Lids only. He tucks
his sleeping daughter in gently, so she stays asleep, but then he notices the snoring: hers, and
his wife’s, the family’s breathing, the house
idling.]
He’s a pathologist, he realizes,
at a body farm, and rises
from the water spigot, the measured weather washing him for a second. He doesn’t know
if this is how the other pathologists do it, but it’s how he does it.
[Shirt, pants off. In the blue night
of his bedroom, he shakes his wallet onto the bed and draws out the check from the Canal St. job, then the cash from the one on West 4th and lays
it all on the nightstand beside his wife.]
The three
in the grass are the surrogates
for a family murdered and found in a park; the three have only conceptual blood in common, blood-
shed in common. Even my father doesn’t know what they all actually died of.
[He feels
they’re like dreams, his wife and daughter, though he is awake, like this is a zoo for dreams. He knows all he believes about them was programmed at the moment he entered their rooms:
his daughter had, somewhere, a fourteenth birthday,
his wife wanted the kitchen bigger, the bedroom different.]
He doesn’t know if the woman below
really has a child out there, if the girl ever wore anything like this blue jumper, if
the boy had ever pretended to be someone else, to be killed, before. [Like seeing dreams
while awake, reasoning them
and the offering on the nightstand barely ruffled
by his wife’s breathing. When he woke in two hours, they’d be gone, dreamlike: daughter to school, for science he knew,
somehow, wife to work at the lab.] These discrepancies
don’t register on the time of death, on the physical matter of decomposition. Look, they look so
much softer today, a red tumble flung together holding in rain; who wouldn’t believe
they had struggled, and loved each other—
He’s letting them be now.
After he’s placed
the careful marks he’s careful
to fade back to body, auditorium,
the shapes still reclining in his eye—
it’s their lids on his eyes—and branding the stage ahead.
He
watches. The processes
[take them.]
The windows all close up and she softens
a sedative with her tongue, then her eyes
blink. When she blinks she gathers the scattered flowers. She stops gathering baby’s breath and lets fall the fat heads of hydrangea still fresh from the sprinkler’s hissing spray.
It does its work; it works its mellifluous song—tongue
to throat—the odd integers dissolve.
The birds’ closed bodies hunch in the trees.
And it is pleasant. They will not fly away.
It is pleasant to lie on this purple space between breaths, between sleep and the next brush
with fame through death. The space between evening and night.
A thousand magazine
articles, asterisks of snow. Dead skin. The water must be cold beyond the sun. The water must be cold before mixing with blood. When does
what’s taken in become our own?
Something was lost outside, something left. The water
must be cold even in sleep’s monochrome,
even with logic unfolding, the dress billowing
over the water, over the quilt mother made.
She is not floating on the water. She is not imagining. She is several.
Sing a song
of sixpence, a POCKET FULL OF RYE
four and twenty blackbirds baked in a
skreek, and he comes home, clicky-key
rattle, ahem, “Guten Tag, Liebchen,” he says to me,
and I say to him, guten click, tag, baked in a PIE!
He can pace and pace. Scratches at the music-twigs, a tune—I know it!
“Schön, yes?” he says. “You copy me, Liebchen,” and turns a page, crisps
a turning page.
“Ach! But now I’m copying you—Scheiss!—my ink writes in your tweedle,”
and takes from the stand the huge feather, leaky blue— gritchy, whistles it
gritchy, I sway to it— skreek, what a dish to set before a
—soft beak, he has to say pretty birdy, pweeady boody, and I teach the soft beak,
wasn’t that a TASTY dish
to set before the—
He’s got it. Nattering gut sequence. He’s ruffling.
But one note’s sharp.
No way to thank them. Bathe in finches
singing fugues with each other. Tag! the child says,
passing on the touch
and the it.
Our timing as it. Robins
feed morning to a pinking sky— My vertebrae, each,
tune to sound-slice then sound-slice. This is how we stand.
Thinking you could even hold court in this belly. You who do not exist: once it seemed the function of poetry
was to mean. It was to last and to be and to hold
a place for you. While I slept you stood in the kitchen
watching beans soak in the silver bowl. These messy omens and symbols and how,
like Odysseus, we might get home after all. Stiff filler, you were an epoch in
our bed. Thinking you could divide your cells even now. I spared nothing for you.
I want only your nerves in my endings.
And a hearth. Keep me
on the lookout for noon, unimaginably awkward and here.
If you have this streak of indigent loneliness, I don’t know it.
If you have a motto, it’s plenty.
If you were a woman, you would be
decked out in gaiters, up to your knees in the snow too short for this life
and loving it. I was only ready for the momentous embers.
Hello mousseline frost, and hassocks,
hello shuttered garden, rabbit warrens timorous under the solstice field.
Here I am tending this fire in ignorance: all I know is how to set it hissing.
1
You awake
panther tracks around your head cave entrance
black wick of burning candle
thing not yet language approaches on the path
2
eight times through the crystal a drop of water inside
the oldest on earth
turning in sunlight
below a mountain drying and a single bird
the fourth time
you rounded up wild bees
rolled them into the yard like a hoop for the dogs to leap through
climbed into the fur
of lawn
when you had bagsful of sand you walked away
scattering the sand as a road
white bandage wrapping your eyes
3
nights you fall asleep on your eyes
they lift the cover to find you
plant an oak
in your chest
whatever words they stitch to your thumbs or feet
do not find you
they must let
croon of summer frogs
condense on their brows in sleep wipe you from their eyelids
in the morning
4
when you extend your hand
a window stops it
you hear apples rolling on the floor above
there is something over the doorway that keeps you
from walking through
what’s in the next room you stare until it moves
go outside
stretch arms high in the night toward sprays of stars reaching back through cells silence buoys the trance
you must hold
until there is something to hold
5
your name
there in the wind
6
when the river widens and slows anything might happen
bird alights on a treetop freezes
its motion permanent and
rubbed off by a bee’s foot
7
catch a big fish
toss it in a sack haul it over the road
the ocean
ends in each hand fish
crying take me home between apple trees across a stream
rain on glass door
mirrors their silver waters
curtain of steam pond of faces
8
at first you thought it was the second time you walked
between these white trees
in sight of signal sheep
wilting on the hillside
glowing mountains more a gold mist than land
when did clouds mutter in breeze
like water-lapped scows
when did the banner of birds
split apart like a line of weeds on a beach
it must be the second time because you know where to go
to rest and drink
earth smells come back
but nothing seems to know you except the sheep
fixed in stone
their glance a footprint on your face
Hoy enterraron al Monchie.
El Mero Mero de Durango. Mister No Contaron con Mi Astucia.
They found his body afuera de Eloy,
debajo de un mesquite.
Hands tied,
a bullet to the cabeza.
Dicen que murió
por el polvo.
Tell los chismosos
he pushed a lawnmower
in Palo Alto.
Tell los chismosos
he flipped burgers
in Sacramento.
Tell los chismosos naco
but not narco.
and blackness ahead and when shall I reach
(the trumpet cries)
that somewhere 
morning and keeps on going
(the accordion moans)
and never turn back
(the trumpet wails)
She was only just here. That’s her,
that’s her in the red dress, that’s
her, too, fists full of balloons as if
she would fly away. That’s her at the bottom of the hill. She ran as fast as she could toward the top, arms wide,
cheeks flushed. She reached me breathless and toppled both of us. That’s her, and her again,
her black hair in pigtails held
in yellow ball-stay barrettes.
Girls of that age are particular about such things. I sleep in her room some nights with all the lights on, everything as she left it.
There she is in Rostov, there she is and there she is and there she is. There she is: bits of black hair
and the earrings. They say: Maybe that’s not her. Look. There.
The ball-stay barrettes. Yellow,
flowers stretched around. There she
is at Christmas. There she is that
summer she grew three inches. They say: After forty days, go marry again. But
there she is, and there she is again with her friend from class. That girl is dead too. There she is at the carnival. There she is with her mother, her fists
clenched on the balloons. There
she is at the door, lunchbox in one hand, waving with the other. At night,
I pretend to sleep; there she is
standing over me as if there are words
left to say. There she is. There
she is in the dark.

Old Tom took a room and never came out.
Jimmy the Waste faded, said to have moved in with a taxidermist.
One evening Granddad Wu went where he couldn’t hear us calling any more. Even the rabbit hound Edward, who could only cough
Instead of barking, was gathered to his ancestors.
For myself, I must be made of iron to still be here,
Leaning on the back fence, looking out over the green hills as they enter
evening.
The crossed angry eyes, the double tusks.
Not in a child’s hand because not a child’s story,
though perhaps the exact darkness a child at night
in a bedroom knows, a child’s mind alone—
the bedroom a broom closet, the child’s body the broom
and the straw of the broom like hair cropped close to the skull.
To break with the past
Or break it with the past
The enormous car-packed
Parking lot flashes like a frozen body Of water a paparazzi sea
After take off
And because the pigeons laid eggs and could fly Because the kittens could survive
Under the rubble wrapped
In shirts of the dead
And the half-empty school benches Where each boy sits next
To his absence and holds him
In the space between two palms Pressed to a face—
This world this hospice
The notes murmur and stir,
moving like a bag blown across a field, touching down only between gusts
and if you looked through the doorway and saw the girl on the bench you’d probably be surprised that she
is the one drawing such sounds from the piano in the front room,
its endless teeth always waiting
beneath that dark and polished lip.
She lifts the lid and plays while the cat watches, green eyes narrowing into slits as it approaches
sleep or perhaps bliss—its expression as inconfundible as the music
or the sun falling through the window—
there are dust motes floating in that shaft of light, stirred by the music in
the air
and I know exactly how the cat feels,
lying there in the shaded room as it grows warmer outside, but I’m not sure you do—
which is a problem, frankly.
You’re probably still hung up on inconfundible, which I’ll admit is a poet word if ever I’ve heard one, but what if I told you it’s precisely
the right word and falls flat only because you don’t happen to speak Spanish?
You’re going to insist
that I should have signposted it for you through the use of italics, as is the convention,
but what if every time I challenge you a bit
I lapse into italics? Wouldn’t you’d feel as if I were talking
down to you, from my incredibly ornate chair on a raised platform,
or, to put it another way, my throne.
The fact is, it’s too late for italics now—
you’ve already read the word twice without them,
and if I were to go back to that room, and the sunlight and the music
and the girl
and somehow change it, right behind your very eyes,
that would clearly violate incontrovertible laws
of time and space, revealing powers I’m not ready to share.
Consider for a moment
what would be demanded of me by a hungry populace, how I would be commandeered,
all the petty concerns that would be laid at my feet:
“Mistakes were made, my youth was misspent, please
unmarry me, allow me to erase what I spoke in anger, why couldn’t
she just be
alive for one more day?”
You see the difficulty.
These are not powers to be treated lightly, and I am unprepared to enter such a realm. I would need a cape, a suit of invulnerability,
perhaps a fortress of solitude,
and even then I’d still be as lost and alone as that young girl playing piano, not certain what was moving me, not even a cat to keep me company.
enough of this grasping after purpose
when the black racer twines through the ivy
swerves toward the brown cup of the cardinal’s nest the eggs it holds the life in it and the life-taking
require no explanation nor does the glistening
of the scales when later sated the snake basks
on the white stone   the light beating the rough skin risking
hawks and hands   nor do the hands
one holding a saw   for cutting ivy
the other weasling   behind the sleeping head
To bring the snake to the child   show it to her
nor does her look of busted glass sparkling need to be explained
yet in crown-most delight when the oaks loose
clusters of rust catkins stinking up the place
when the wisteria’s thousand fetid hands swarm what’s nearest the daffodils and violets bloom in unison and I catch
myself looking for an idea to ascribe to the complementary relationship between the colors an idea in itself
I get turned around come out babbling
like something missing teeth that beauty will in the end if only because it has to suffice at least
when the weather thrills and does not last
When he spoke
about Lachesis, Clotho, Atropos
when he spoke of them as women
at a loom—not three points defining an infinite plane, slicing any thing
man, monument, mountain, the sun— not wall, nor floor, nor constellation,
when he,
before solid geometry,
before space-time, believed in is
and still incarnated in air the women
turning whorls studded with planets, was he
condescending
even to his spiritual sons—or had he come in fact
to ecstasy, to a region
where reason’s heat passes blue and
shatters into gods?
And then when I was fourteen I discovered hunger
for the second time:
it didn't take me but I kept it like a secret
never before having imagined more than need's blunt response
I had a new question
leading me
to a foreign country within myself
land of my own discovery and naming
the scraping-ache left when you choose against satisfaction
having an altogether different meaning but with all the
colorflavortexture
I rubbed my hunger like a worry-stone
held it and it didn't change like fear to anger
still hunger
still my very own
blade
I used to cut myself
from the family snapshot the perfect adolescence
all summer long climbing
the trellis of my to-do lists loving
the expansiveness growing inside me
the hidden abundance lunchtime refusals
the game of it
long walk-run-bike afternoons
honing myself alone against the evening sky aching azure
sky with just a single star
The painting, my daughter explained,
Is in David Duchovny’s bedroom,
Just watch, and when the first nude woman Rises from the designer sheets,
I follow her body past a wall
Of unfamiliar art. Somewhere else,
I think, and soon, because he fucks
A succession of women in that bed,
His teenage daughter often nearby,
She, too, sees those women naked,
Entering like a maid, all of them
In that bedroom with my daughter’s painting That doesn’t appear in episodes
One or two, David Duchovny
Bedding those women in Los Angeles
Where my daughter lives with her daughters, Seven and three, who ran naked,
This summer, under the sprinkler
In my central Pennsylvania yard.
I fast-forward through each external shot, Hurrying toward my daughter’s painting In David Duchovny’s bedroom,
The naked woman in episode three
A creative writing student
Like those I teach, nineteen or twenty, Sliding one step to the side so
I can see the chairs suspended
In the tumultuous blue sky
Of my daughter’s rented painting
On either side of that girl’s bare shoulders. She talks and talks until, at last,
She turns into profile, her breast
The focal point of this artless scene,
The painting completely exposed,
Half of the dark chairs silhouetted
By the faint light my daughter allowed Behind that storm of identical chairs
In David Duchovny’s bedroom.
It’s not the herpes that cause problems, them I can accept easy as sea-monkeys—like the ad in Mad Magazine says, a biological novelty turned into a reality.
I name the pink translucent marks Bob & Wanda. Always Bob & Wanda to avoid any feelings of loss between rejuvenations. This isn’t to say I don’t
notice you layer on sleepwear, incessantly wash,
beat an itch like fisting the sting out of a new tattoo, to avoid any contact that chances me catching you. We lie
in bed, together, thinking how long it has been since the last shock of entrance—like a ninth grader, you canoe-roll over to my side of the mattress. We dry-
hump like summer-camp kids, quite sure/not sure, how much better it would feel without clothes on. Nebular wads of toilet paper appear in the bowl. When
I ask where the floor rug has gone, you say it needs washing, accidentally peed on, but we both know it wasn’t urine that you on(ed) the carpet with. After
weeks of not having sex the word in syllables starts
to sound like her piece—the Other virally stringing you along, just as the slight hope that she may
reallyreallyloveyou prompted a mid-day break-up fuck. For a week you wrote yours & Other’s name together, hoping she’d show up like a care package full of cookies.
We lie awake together with Other between us. I think to myself how beautiful you are overandoverandover, lipping my own tongue, imagining kiss after slimy kiss.
I couldn’t eat for days.
I couldn’t keep my hands off you
and for a time wherever you touched me, no matter how softly, I bruised.
So museum, in the right light, sounds like mausoleum.
Torso and torsional sound like torn. See, this one’s muscles braid blindly
in sinuous currents, just like that one’s:
with no discernible face, no encasing, no skin.
I have tried to say that
at times I miss your enclosures,
your protrusions, your aquiline face.
And that to feel my own body, obsolesced,
in the colors of a crushed plum
was to evidence a life under your touch.
We’re closer to ocean than the limits of sky but it doesn’t feel that way—I’m three hours from a woman
who whispered I’ll miss you in a language I barely speak, five from anything I’d point to if asked What’s home?
In the seat next to me a young man cradles a woman he didn’t have to leave in a country he never dreamt
he’d dream so often about. She stirs, he shifts, we bump arms. They’re maybe five years younger, eight, than I was
when I believed I could take my love with me anywhere—a darker side of town, a different country—yet here I am, miles high,
still wanting love to be more like wine: close at hand, plentiful,
in containers which, once opened, stay
opened until every drop’s consumed. Sorry, he smiles, I smile,
then turn again to the window. I suppose there’s
an ocean down there beneath the oceanic clouds, and beneath
that ocean there must be whole whorls of life
gone undocumented—creatures uncatalogued, imagination-boggling
monsters of shadow and privacy. We believe
the monsters are down there waiting for us and our nature
documentaries, believe the monsters will wait.
His sigh is massive, big as a time zone, and we both look at
the woman restlessly resting in his arms. Fatigue pocks his face but I want to whisper We have to keep
letting each other go to hold on. Our only real discussions
are tactile, our only stories of longing and for months it was magic, her
fluid and strange words, yet now all I want
is to understand her when she says I’ll miss you. Something’s important
in the hearing of it. His finger grazes the tiny cup
of water on his tray and he brings his pregnant finger to his girlfriend’s
lower lip, rubs the small wetness in. She doesn’t move
but to me he whispers She’s burning up; she’s been like this since Umbria.
The first night. Dim hills stretching darkly beyond the house’s clay walls. The hearth lit with so much fire
it seemed ceremonial, even our shadows trailed smoke. The kitchen dark after our long meal—mussels, bread, wine—
the bedroom upstairs with sheets turned down and pillows arranged, but, for now, we sat in an old stone room off her kitchen.
Wide screenless windows, long cool benches, the night gathering around and around us. Bats swooping among
hills and her hand smooth, calm on mine. The windows I pointed.
What if they get in? The bats? We could just barely communicate, had traveled from Madrid to Trieste with a window
always nearby—view as sketch pad, pictorial dictionary—telling our stories to each other, stripped and un- elaborate: the barest bits of self, just enough.
Bats? she asked, and I pointed to the dark shapes beyond in the dark sky, used my free hand to mimic
a wing, some flying thing. She shook her head and rubbed her nose on my cheek. No come in. We watched
a handful of bats swoop, glide pale-bellied almost within reach, right past the window, and she was right.
An unseen screen, I thought, something Italian,
and we sat together, letting our silence seep
and our exhaustion deepen, watching bats fling themselves through dark before we finished the wine, spread
the fire to embers, climbed the stairs to the bed in which she above me whispered All the love and I beneath her
didn’t say or think a word of translation.
She groans, he shifts again
into me. Ten minutes ago the pilot told us to look down, that
we were above the deepest trench on the planet.
If you flipped Everest over, shoved it down there, it still wouldn’t reach bottom.
Her cheeks are flush, eyes for a moment wild— she didn’t expect to wake up this far from the ground.
Are you okay? he asks her and I hold my breath, translate, practice. Siete buono? Nods. Smiles. It’s so hot she says
and though he already must’ve known—his own
love as oven, there in his arms, of course he could feel—her saying it
changes something. Here, he says, brings the water
to her lips. The plane shudders. Now is the moment to fear, to clutch
at anything stable. Shudders again—a throat readying to shout, a surface broken by a pebble—then we stabilize.
We look at each other, the young man and I, then
at the woman in his arms. She says Water over water, settles deeper into his arms and chest.
With a different faith I might believe, though both float so seemingly easily across great gashes of night,
that there's some difference between our tin cradle and the changeling moon way out, gibbous
and ghostly. He sets the water back down,
the cup’s nearly empty. There’s a story she keeps trying to tell me, about her father and mother, some boat trip they took
and ended up stranded, some island. They burn
the boat she keeps telling me; it’s not metaphor or story but true, I’ve looked up all the words, for burning, for boat,
for stranded. Two nights and their only warmth the burning bits
of what should’ve carried them back.
How long? asks the girl in his arms, the girl next to me. Out the window
there’s so much distance to the next cloud, far light, it’s hard
to believe there’s such a thing as touch, arrival: How long until we’re back?
1
Tonight at a party we will say farewell
to a close friend’s breasts, top surgery for months she’s saved for. Bundled close on a back step,
we wave a Bic lighter and burn her bra.
At first struggling to catch nylon aflame,
in awe we watch as all but the sheer black underwire melts before forming a deep
quiet hole in the snow.
Sometimes the page too goes quiet, a body that we’ve stopped
speaking with, a chest out of which music
will come if she’s a drum flattened tight, if she’s pulled like canvas across a field, a frame
where curves don’t show, exhalation without air.
Then this off-pitch soprano steals through.
2
Then this off-pitch soprano steals through
a crack that’s lit. A scarlet gap between loose teeth. Interior trill. We’re rustling open. Out of a prohibited body why
long for melody? Just a thrust of air,
a little space with which to make this thistling sound, stretch of atmosphere to piss through when you’re scared shitless. Little sister, the sky
is falling and I don’t mind, I don’t mind,
a line a girl, a prophet half my age,
told me to listen for one summer when
I was gutless, a big mouthed carp that drank
down liters of algae, silt, fragile shale
while black-winged ospreys plummeted from above.
3
While black-winged ospreys plummeted from above, we were born beneath. You know what I mean?
I’ll tell you what the girls who never love
us back taught me: The strain within will tune
the torqued pitch. In 1902 the last
castrato sang “Ave Maria.”
His voice—a bifurcated swell. So pure
a lady screams with ecstasy, Voce
bianco! Breath control. Hold each note. Extend the timbre. Pump the chest, that balloon room, and lift pink lips, chin so soft and beardless,
a flutter, a flourish, a cry stretching beyond
its range, cruising through four octaves, a warbler, a starling with supernatural restraint.
4
A starling with supernatural restraint,
a tender glissando on a scratched LP,
his flute could speak catbird and hermit thrush.
It was the year a war occurred or troops
were sent while homicide statistics rose;
I stopped teaching to walkout, my arms linked
to my students to show a mayor who didn’t
show. Seven hundred youth leaned on adults
who leaned back. We had lost another smart kid
to a bullet in the Fillmore, Sunnyside,
the Tenderloin. To love without resource
or peace. When words were noise, a jazz cut was steel. I listened for Dolphy’s pipes in the pitch dark:
A far cry. Epistrophy. A refusal.
5
A far cry. Epistrophy. A refusal.
A nightingale is recorded in a field
where finally we meet to touch and sleep. A nightingale attests
as bombers buzz and whir
overhead enroute to raid.
We meet undercover of brush and dust. We meet to revise what we heard.
The year I can’t tell you. The past restages the future. Palindrome we can’t resolve. But the coded trill a fever ascending,
a Markov chain, discrete equation, generative pulse, sweet arrest,
bronchial junction, harmonic jam.
6
Bronchial junction, harmonic jam,
her disco dancing shatters laser light.
Her rock rap screamed through a plastic bullhorn could save my life. Now trauma is a remix,
a beat played back, a circadian pulse we can’t shake, inherent in the meter we might speak,
so with accompaniment I choose to heal
at a show where every body that I press against
lip syncs: I’ve got post binary gender chores . . .
I’ve got to move. Oh, got to move. This box
is least insufferable when I can feel
your anger crystallize a few inches away,
see revolutions in your hips and fists.
I need a crown to have this dance interlude.
7
I need a crown to have this dance interlude
or more than one. Heating flapjacks you re-
read “Danse Russe,” where a man alone and naked invents a ballet swinging his shirt around
his head. Today you’re a dandier nude
in argyle socks and not lonely as you
slide down the hall echoing girly tunes
through a mop handle: You make me feel like. . . . She-bop doo wop . . . an original butch
domestic. The landlord is looking through
the mini-blinds. Perched on a sycamore,
a yellow throated warbler measures your
schisms, fault lines, your taciturn vibrato.
Tonight, as one crowd, we will bridge this choir.
when your grandmother mistakes your girlfriend for a man
do not rise up over the dinner table like a sequin tornado
or a burning flag. it is Christmas. though the forks
curl their tines into tiny silver fists and the frost-
rimmed windows blink in embarassment, focus on your lover
as she clears her throat, extra low, passes the salt to your grandmother
who thanks the young man with the strange haircut and delicate
hands. this is no time for declarations and no one’s seemed to notice
though the milk’s gone solid in the pitcher and your father
is suddenly fascinated by the unmoving air in the other room.
your mouths do not move, except to chew. this is family,
this is holiday, there are no affairs, no addictions, your family
crest reads in elaborate embroidery
the less said,
the better. though your father did offer once
to pay for your therapy
back when no one you knew was in therapy and there was no way
you were going to talk to a stranger about things you’d never say
to your mother, even drunk, even on Easter. so to say something now
about what might be a mistake, or just the easiest way to explain a mohawk
would be bringing sand to the bank. unprofitable and a little bit
insane. you study your lover’s chin. the tweezers wince under the sink.
she could be a boy, you think. apocalyptic Christian emails aside,
maybe your grandmother is progressive. astute in her own
Southern, incidental way. your voice offering her the butter is a punk band
playing an abortion clinic. all feedback and nobody wants you.
she’s your grandmother. she’s nearly 100. your uncle
took thirty years to get sober. your grandfather died still owning the manual
to every piece of machinery he’d ever owned. you still
don’t know how to make any kind of pie. there are no
family recipes. in the far corner of your liver your other grandmother
looks up from her patient sectioning of a grapefruit,
offers you a chunk of your own atrophied tongue, trembling
at the edge of her serrated spoon.
Unexpected and interrupting in your wet boots on my grandmother’s antique Persian, you have once again taken from me your absence,
a thing I have come to treasure and one whose loss grows harder to bear than
once your absence was,
and these are only five of the quick and small of why,
henceforth,
I hope to help you
to perfect a perfect non-attendance record at this address.
she wrote he warped his arms around me and tickled me. Soon all I liked was not
a hymn’s “I know” inflection, guilt perfection, or some
hissing blessing, but errors. Airs. Apparent selves
of steam. When large birds fooled through blowing firs, the white
gulls vanished into greens
and came back clouds. Black crowds of crows. They lit where taillights
stared at their red ice. Then flew
where now a sharp arc goes weathering
across the whole blue psyche like . . . a fighter’s contrail. But
it doesn’t disappear. Dove-white, it widens. Whiles. Smiles.
And still it’s there. Sky-sized it’s warped to one vast quill
feathering.
. . . and now
removes redoubts around the tented
I-don’t-know: the
circumflexed [dear] unpronounceable [valuable]
behind the breastbone. Still,
it comes round: the will—
not numb: nummular, circular. . . . I dream
I’m fingering the sternum: hers, my mother’s. As if it held,
hid there, something crimped, something finely-folded.
A small fan, perhaps. Black. With mackled
markings. With sleek ribs. In full
splay. Making the case for concealment, effacement, the mew need, the new moon.
And its rattailed-handle? A dark root: glänzend, glossy . . .
hard to grasp.
Ceremonial, then: a formal flabellum. High German?
I don’t know. Here, feel this: see? It has missing & snapped brins. So frangible. Such a small
gust of wind. And breathless now. No beat, beat, beat. No flutter. As if to be this hide-bound-brokenness
is her bequeathment.
No fanfare. Death. Such a round living thing. I mean it rays out. You mean in the dream? I mean here.
Right now. Shy &
careful & . . . . Zartgefühl? Yes, that. That
tact-of-the-heart, that taut
delicacy: hers. It rays out, unspoken.
Something breatheable.
The mourning lily’s black-veined face.
The unmown fields I trespass
daily. The iris’s slack- jaw mouth. Ruffles
of blue lip webbed
by a spider’s stintless
hours. The quiet.
I will not re-leaf unmarked by this my season of alteration.
Swells of sweet
pea, my witching hazel, I am nothing
you would recognize. Unruly, I teem—
moth-powder & mouthless.
Velvet-blank
the little faces ghost their old green galleries.
slacken those jute-strung almanacs blow-dust those shellacked urns finger the flaky diluvium
of fragrant panniers
tread tenderly, it is a churn
of Minton, molten with star-fall and tinted thimblefuls from
a bedewed belvedere
how brokenly it gathers whole, this whispery coda annealed in a fire
of anecdote
of kenaf tethered, roof osiered, ashlar river-whorled blue plink of adze, chintzy
all smoothened to life’s music
how we slapped linen at the rill, how we fired a stone of joy
stoned a fire of grief
it’s all about longings as they say, be a drop in the ocean to find the ocean in a drop
the varied aggregate, mind-body electrum, thirstful of the damson trail, resinous fume breath alight with ballade
fill the mazer, tipple and flow,
in the crook of heart to know how
one leaf it is mints the whole green glade one nimbus wheels this cosmic clay
‘Wind and thunder cross my threshold’ Child masturbating on the edge of a door —any moment in which to practice calm ‘With your own body carry yourself’ Though we were less strong
than stubborn
Writing with gloves on, burning scrap
Freeing a doe with her hind leg caught in a fence ‘If you don’t wash your clothes
you can carry smoke’
scribbled inside my copy of High Path
‘Roads appear and disappear’
‘We walked upon the very brink’
Large, therefore, is spoken of
Tea settles in a dirty cup
And a few pennies left
for the news
‘War horses graze by the city walls’
‘Seed pods ripen to brilliant red’
Trim the wicks, so the lamps burn brighter Leave the window open
for company
The car high-centered in knee-deep ruts Ridge-tops shining by starlight
As the master says: impossible
to set a mountain before your eyes
Small cakes of lily-seed an assembly
of swallows branch-bound assembly of clouds burst your face washed
in pigment no sati under pitch
under night & timber heat
skin burnt to blister living into
atrophy or enclave the mouth of a horse tells the beginnings of the age
of grass of red spearfish shale & black hills a reconstructing reckless this getting
& becoming lost you the figure
of crouched skeleton under gaze
how bounded the boundless
new area of contestation
Red crowned field sparrow
trills in minor-key in minor places
cut forests now shrubland of
fences & abandoned pastures
sieve of redbud leaves sewn together
like a length of rope engineer a noose pink-billed new-world song plaintive
& unceasing during the search for another noise herded into rows & hoof-prints where old railway decays into foxglove stream carves into gully into dusk into bodies boiled in lye then scraped clean turning bones into rusted machinery
a stand of pale orchids no longer
A tomb constructed of bark this remainder covered with branches with lichen & rock painted yellow & decorated with emu feathers contains three figures of straw & one man arms tied with a thin sheet of wood
a still creek flat & frozen
corpse placed with head sunward
the direction of origin of ancestor
miles & miles & miles & miles
life that we called yours on a good day on a good day this love for you
a “house of wooden fingers”
house wren in a tree hollow
tree hollow occupied with bone & straw
Two rivers “ticking softly into one” leaf-cutter chronicle a fern frond left in a bath of sedges & blackbirds
our “machine in the garden” over & over slash of green sweep of
gray thought beneath so slight
a field of white-lipped peccaries
under the piha’s ascending whistles
& screams the chronicler the echo- maker “we must not worry
how few we are & fall from each
other” a boat-like shape in the dark of the milky way a way of knowing brings the world forth as not
Trade horse for tea & tea for horse
this cobblestoned knowing brings us
into being we must worry we must
a clutch of red & cream white eggs
silly goose mud-caked & barefoot
among dry sticks trash & moss
an occasional sentinel how to occupy this desert world our little camp
our little home inside where a lamp burns uncertainly yellow then white then
wild plum or peach leaf willow & smartweed we feed our horses with cottonwood
upon this spotted plain
an open grove a glitter of flint
Arabian ostrich Atitlán grebe black-faced honeycreeper endemic &
no more our trail canopied in wild grape & sunflowers did I say counterfeit or crabapple coneflower or copy
prairie after heavy rain will soak
a man on horseback up to his waist water clinging to bluestem
grass clinging to wind & sun
an “ache in the bone” a litany in negative we stand at the river’s edge to watch
the fish swallow what’s left
of you this keno a bathing place
for the after & the rest also
Red buffalo pushes the hardwood east
trees & wheat & dust
an ache in the rind after a summer storm we are without the way defined by absence by
presence of great feats a morass this
place of ours fire licked grasses & rushes
define the treeline we share
with the rest carrion cardinal compass-flower bringing a way of being with
not against into rivers oceans empty
into oceans rivers splinter a continuum
that sparks this consolation of sow
& form of joint & oxbow you empty
into this & splinter into that
To wander in restless want & penury
to wear a necklace of green herbs
to keen over the corpse embalmed
with honey & washed in water of chamomile of blackened faces for thirty days of
water poured on the roots of the nearest tree of feasting & footbridge of being sewn in
a mat of threadbare linen day at its most long its most blue sky knit with clouds mountains crowded with long-needled pines lying flat & still on a good day this love stopped with cloth & cardamom
a plumed chimney reduces the muscles to ash a fern in a summer fire
A wire cage of fledglings
of the California condor
red extant & permeable
the cloud” & cliff the boundary between this world & that thought to be impermanent
at times grasses grow in the rain
shadow of the Rockies islands in a sea of steppe
a tract for dying a good death for dying well
anoint with the right thumb eyelids ear lobes & lips ovenbird catbird warbler wren
what of the marker between
the human & all else misplace a howling experience skins drying over coals
smoke broken into silos & rings
Mountain as adaptation quick clouds rags of mist wolf elk bison bear creatures of grass plains & burrow contained a skull wrapped in woven cotton ancestor figure fashioned of wood & mud of one shepherd or another principle of center of dislodging to introduce other order old skin over this
truth as bald as cold as middle
no meddle every settlement had a house set apart for the dead new way of burial as manipulation as a tactic for conversion funeral as cover for war “a month’s mind” untenable the red deer the cordgrass
Summit or sun living rock
to which the heart is given by obsidian
skeletons disarticulated & tied into bundles
before the ossuary furthest part of the world
must be sunset & sea mouldering the order upset loggerhead shrike peregrine falcon
black footed ferret the Missouri river hems
the Big Horn Mountains a hinge between
one land & another an effigy was made
of wood & wax verisimilitude will have to suffice
for aspen for sage-thrasher for pipit
stalks burnt like feathers convoy of
corn & flesh hope to graft the present to
the predicament   to all my tenderness
Canary's corpse  copse of false
Solomon's seal  rivets of stars & sharp notes
the men were “found slain
with their mouths stopped full of bread” beneath the blue lupine & wild strawberry by springtime only a hundred were left having subsisted on dogs cats rats & mice gust goes obscured by the storm entrust hope inherent & lashed tincture of snow some shrieking O & you no longer
named what you were a handful
of farm buildings behind the windbreak wheat planted in alternating fallow strips how the cinder draped the field then
Wasp’s nest found inside a skull
the tiny clay pot of the mud dauber dispossessed island of trees & people wilderness makes it hard to be
“unregarded & unburied”
bodies decaying in the hedgerows
after surviving on only oysters for eight weeks ineffable slight the land not an after
thought ember or tinder particular disaster headed for half-lives for we are tied
to the place that made us no ledger
for that map mouse-nest eggshell slaughter cellar sequester root out
what as remedy for this condition
Vanilla grass & sage brush flank the hills
a gleaner an ax an owl a honeycomb knee-deep leaf-rot a certain joylessness
a cage of ribs apple trees leafing on a slope a chance to still the worst of it
wreck of thaw encampment of charred wood pheasant quail hare what of plenty
of mending or maelstrom private burials disallowed for fear of covering up
the “violent context of life”
flocks of cranes landing on a bank filament fissure sawgrass
surely we’ll survive if apprehensive if fixing the outside within the frameElska is not a word I expect you to know
but to someone in Iceland it is love, which is also nothing I expect you to know, but means etymologically there is steam under the earth
which may gush from its fissures any time day or night but often when no one is watching, not even the stars caring either, their white light glowing
with an aloneness no one even knows to feel sad about.
Or maybe we would be floating there
like John White searching for his daughter
in our fragile barque just off the coast
& for the first time in a century we would see
the earth cracking its seam just a bit & the steam would seem like the earth sighing,
& the waves lapping over the gunwales
would feel less cold than they really are,
& the mist like a
tongue like a
palm like an
aureole
like nothing after you’ve died would rain.
Oh! I know I go on
too much, all
gathered into the prow so we might sink,
but I want us to watch & imagine
in our human way
that the light is for us, when I know it is not, though at least I am for you. Do you forgive me
my fecklessness,
this indolence of too much & too many?
Inside, something touches my tongue that might
be a cloud, or might also be just stone.
Always this pressure under the earth must explode.
1
He had agreed to write the paper, as he had the others, though he knew little of Yoo & nothing of the student
who had requested it, who would pay for it,
top dollar this time since it was a rush job requiring citations, an upper-level thesis, an original work of art, though he wouldn’t define art that way, but the student had & the student was boss, brought in the cash
& the student had a working title, “The Logic of John C. Yoo,” some ideas, too, as to the arguments the paper should make, which begged the question why didn’t the little punk
just write it herself? But then he would be out of a job
& he reminded himself that this wasn’t a student
but a client who was owed a product & he was just a prole, a cipher & what the client did with it was her business.
2
Charging three whites & two reds to his American Express
the 30-ish man with the slight paunch slouched out of Eros Liquors & crossed the street, not looking for traffic, hugging his
brown bag to his chest to stop the pounding or maybe
to keep it going, walked up the block, past
Acapulquenos Mexican Grill, past the shuttered gas station,
the Public Works yard, a dull thread of bottles
knocking together & then turned onto the grayed packed-dirt path leading through the woods to his apartment building, stepping over the emptied Red Bulls & other trash in his way, keeping a sure grip, his fingers laced together now around the bag, until fumbling
for his keys, one knee balancing the package, he pushed
open the front door. He went straight to the kitchen counter, unpacked the wines, pulled the drapes, dropped two slices
of whole wheat bread in the toaster & surveyed
his catch: two Italians, one Californian, a French, a South African. “A U.N. delegation,” he muttered to himself & in the half-dark plotted which landscape to overthrow first.
3
He slipped the red into the white, made a pink,
though depending on the ratios, the colors changed:
rosy, fuchsia, carmine, magenta, hot,
Barbie, coral, salmon, ruby, shocking, cherry blossoms in spring, flamingos & their algaes, Dorothy’s tights,
pink of the dianthus, its frilled edges, thus the pinking shears, crossways pattern, interminably one-way, but never
in the same direction. They were innumerable, at least
in theory, one atom more or less changing the shade,
refracting the light differently, since it was really the light
& not the wine, though what he could perceive,
what his eyes would allow, was only a certain number,
maybe 100, give or take, until he forgot what pink was,
whether it had any real substance & then
he just went back to thinking gray, bottles empty,
poured down the sink, where the wine would mix with water
at the Public Works, those chemicals, then disappear.
4
Starting a new project he always listened to music,
mostly grunge rock, Pearl Jam & Nirvana, the Seattle scene & it reminded him of the U-District,
from Ravenna down to Portage Bay, Dick’s Drive-In
open till 2 a.m., where he had read French & sipped coffee before his comprehensives, CNN playing in the corner
over the grill, screeching brain-numbing music
like he heard the first troops had played in their APCs
raging into Baghdad, hearts holding their breath inside their metal jackets, though the city was quiet, the world too, which reminded him of the Stevens poem, until later,
he now knew, when the screeching outside burst
over the gunwales, the APC a struck-and-foundering Pequod, & here he pulled down his OED, the wale,
a ridge of stone or flesh, a dicwale in Old English,
on ða eastlangan dicwale, on that eastward stony ditch, dying there, while he had read Je voudrais pas crever,
Boris Vian, I would like not to explode & ate cold fries.
5
So he set to work in the dark, buttered bread
& booted his Mac, the client’s requirements
spelled out on clean paper & he circled
what he would have to prove, the number of citations, their style, the tone, the approximate argument,
what $1000 would buy: coffee & cigarettes
(he only smoked when he worked), his month’s
rent & other bills, celebratory martini at the Ram’s Head when it was done & if he was charming, maybe
a girl there he could bring back & read French to
before she fell asleep. Then another paper after that,
maybe medical this time, something pulmonary, breathing coming easier to him now despite the smokes,
something in his chest loosening, finding each paper
juiced the soul, let the tether out further, enlarged the scope of what it owned & what it could do.
6
He had heard of this John C. Yoo, what he had written while soldiers packed black-hooded men into planes
& wondered how far they could go, when it would be too much & for how long it could be endured, but Yoo
was a bartender, a mixologist, making
adjustments—too sweet, too bitter—so skilled (is this what one knew after Harvard & Yale?) at jiggers & proofs, siphoning cheap vodkas into designer blue bottles, switching labels on the Johnny Walker—Red to Black.1 The hoods were not for the prisoners. The hoods were not the opposite of maps or the soldiers’ names, which were already blank. The hoods were a permission.
Lights dimmed, music cupping its sonorous white hands around the prisoners’ ears, it was easy not
to meet the eyes, just to look at the lines in the grain
of the bar, serve up the shots. What was war, what evil, what measurements could be brought to bear?
7
Of course, there were the “torture memos,”
which could signal, if they were metaphoric, the little notes his wife had left him taped above the kitchen sink reminding him what he hadn’t done, how his shaking in bed had become intolerable, his dreams
in which he woke himself with muted howls
more than the treaty of their marriage had demanded.
But Yoo was a literalist. Bound, gagged, shoved
& pinned in a dark box where lay the soft-green tarantula the torturers had named A. Gonzalez, Yoo could
argue his way out & the spider would think itself wrong. What was evil to him? He wrote of Remarque’s
untrammeled sovereignty of chance.2 Said the peacenik
was wrong. Said intent meant no one would be blamed.
8
He stuck the square Post-its across his desk,
up the sides, then marching along the top
like he was inserting himself into a frame,
each yellow cell a perfect fact or equation, who said what, to whom & in which upholstered office.
NOTES
Torture = 31
(usage in all of Shakespeare’s works)
Techniques ≠ Tortures (see below)
Number of techniques usually needed to bring detainee to “baseline dependent state” = 3
(1, nudity; 2, sleep deprivation, with shackling & diaper; 3, dietary manipulation)
Number of times a detainee may be “walled” in a single session = 1–30 Cramped confinement = 18 hours/day
Confinement in “small box” = 2 hours/day
Etymology of “torture” = Latin tortūra (twisting)
Length of Alec Guinness’s confinement in a small box in Bridge on the River Kwai = 31 seconds (movie time)
(number of Academy Awards = 7)
Texas police convicted of “water torture” = 4 Number of 24 episodes = 24
Angle of repose = 45 ̊
(degree of backwards inclination while bound in stress position) Earning a degree from Yale in 1992 = John C. Yoo
(Deputy Assistant Attorney General, USDOJ) Earning a degree from Yale in 1993 = Jonathan Coulton
(performer of “Code Monkey” & folk acoustic version of “Baby Got
Back”)
Location of Donald Rumsfeld alumnus portrait = Yankee Doodle Tavern,
Princeton
(next to Brooke Shields)
Harvard’s founding purpose = train Puritan ministers
Fate of Harvard’s first professor = fired for beating his students
“Code Monkey have long walk back to cubicle / he sit down pretend to
work / Code Monkey not thinking so straight / Code Monkey not
feeling so great.”
Gross U.S. receipts for Legally Blonde = $968,689
(week of 9–17 September 2001)
Alternate titles = Blonde et légale (France), Cutie Blonde (Japan)
Among tortures committed by Japanese in WWII, cited by IMTFE = water
treatment
Among tortures committed by Americans in Philippines, cited by JAG =
water treatment
Why FDR vacationed in Warm Springs, GA = water treatment Euphemism = 0
(usage in all of Shakespeare’s works) Alaska sable = skunk fur
(OED regarding euphemism)
Other euphemisms = facial hold, insult slap, attention grasp, abdominal
slap, wall standing
More euphemisms = “no evidence in literature or experience that sleep
deprivation exacerbates any harmful effects of the waterboard” Periods between interrogation sessions = 1–24 hours
Number of waterboarding sessions permitted per 24 hours = 2 Zubaydah = 83
(number of incidents of waterboarding)
Average age children learn to swim in U.S. = 6
Average annual salary of adjunct professor of French literature =
$23,532
Tenure of John C. Yoo in Office of Legal Counsel = 2 years
Duration of “Monkey Code” video = 3:49
Average charge for original term paper w/ citations = $800–$1200 Number of illegal wars of aggression = ∞
Number of illegal preventive wars = 0
Number of Dick’s Drive-ins in the greater Seattle area = 5
“Code Monkey very simple man / with big warm fuzzy secret heart /
Code Monkey like you. Code Monkey like you.”
You kicked me in the teeth of my language, which was when I found out what a mass of flesh
my words are, how they develop syntactical hematomas that bloom like corals, fathom-deep
under skin, behind eyelids, bed linens
& the veneer of a supposed and hoped-for life.
I deserved a good mauling, of course, a thumping, a trounce, my words had leaped ahead
& you just sat there silent, waving a copy
of Flaubert & reminding me of what I hadn’t done.
One could argue, I said, that what I really meant was something I had imagined I could not say:
“There is only one beautiful thing, and there is no end to all the beautiful things, and on this
problem my entire rot sits, waving stupidly under the sea, waiting for the right combination of egg
and sperm to light the tip of my tongue with speech.”
But instead I said, “Your meat loafs remind me about something my mom once said about remorse.”
9
He learned the first verb before eat or love or sleep
the French verb être—”to be”—
he is, they are, I am
in another
language, another tongue, autre lèvres,
lips not the least organ of transformation. Derrida writes of world hospitality
as antidote to toleration,
& Habermas
of mutual perspective-taking,
the I permeable, a slice of toast5
the world’s butter melts into,
not the I of the life raft, which
if punctured is sunk.
Sitting inside Dick’s, in Seattle,
he watched the young men go off,
board planes, east to Afghanistan,
bound west with black-hooded citizens confined,
of no country, dark-skinned, praying.
They were, he was, not going
to become anything new: tongue-lashed,
sand-eyed, bone-shamed.
10
He tried to imagine himself naked,
perhaps while dancing to Lady Gaga’s “Bad Romance,”
perhaps while drinking an Ensure,
which would make for “nutritionally complete meals,”
perhaps while hooded in the phosphorous glare
of 24-hour lighting
since interrogators could “exploit the detainee’s fear
of being seen naked,” Yoo said, though not the fear of sex,
since interrogators had been taught to avoid “sexual degradation,” for fear perhaps, it might turn Zubaydah on, there being
no women in CIA custody, though evidently
on the payroll since being “seen naked by females”
was & is always a permissible threat.
She sings, “I want your horror. I want your design.
Cause you’re a criminal
as long as you’re mine.” He knew they were different, he & Yoo, but when he went to bed at night & thought no one
would ever touch him again like she had,
he remembered the facial hold
“one open palm placed
on either side of the face”6
how she held him immobile, enduring the indelible dark between her fingertips.
It was always a threat to him.
11
Repetition will not be be substantial
because the techniques generally lose their effectiveness after three years, the wet-mop of Seattle
left in his rear view, moving toward a promised job somewhere dry & free of constant growing—
mushrooms, mosses splurging underground
while he stood in the university quadrangle, immobile
& forgot which direction was his apartment
or else one half of his brain didn’t want to remember:
a hood over his face so the only breath he breathed
was his own, headphones over his ears
a continuous loop of language pointing toward the foreign pointing back toward himself.
The duration of confinement varies
based upon the size of the container.
The body is a container, the sound box & score
every language delineates, no more,
unless one is a warrior, a crusader,
for whom the box is just a coffin
waiting to be filled.
You have also informed us that he
sustained a wound during his capture,
which is being treated with the utmost care,
& awaits his complete recovery from the wound we inflicted because he had wounded others, horribly, completely,
so that we may wound him again.
You did
deuise Strange Tortures for Offendors.7
12
Because he had gathered evidence, started the paper, made citations, and Yoo was coming into blurry focus, he went to the porch to smoke, his furniture
being leased, not wanting the memory of burns
or smell to cost him anything extra, though neighbors complained, smoke rising into their open apartment windows & they occasionally yelled out & though he couldn’t
see them, he knew they felt safe yelling behind the screens, yelling costing little when the other was just a smell, not a face, but for him, after a while, the yelling just became
part of the ritual: light, inhale, watch his breath rise
into their bedrooms, mingle in their clothes, maybe
settle on their bedsheets, reminding a boy how good it was
to think bad, then wait for the voice to dribble down, a faceless voice like a sudden whitecap flaring in a flat sea—what
made it happen, just below the surface, anonymous, gone.
None of it happens for the best,
not the plane late, dinner spoiled, train tracks running through sleepy town square,
not boyfriend huffing Wite-Out,
not daughter vomiting her breakfast
every damned morning in the same bathroom stall.
But there it is again,
as if Jesus had conferenced in the break room under the clichéd bare bulb, shadows like
the missing maquiladora workers of Juárez
burned into the walls, and he had said,
“Yea, this was according to plan.”
Meanwhile he’s pissing in his pants.
But it will all work out, won’t it? Even the
not working out is a kind of solution, though some solutions I cannot live with,
which is another kind of teleology. Evil,
whatever mismatched sock that is,
always knows.
I want to say it all makes sense, that the tattoos, beer kegs, spotlights are just so much
extra foam mushrooming my pumpkin-spiced latte, effervescent, weightless,
but I have no proof, not even a gut feeling, since my guts are roiling, the toilet’s flushing, & the only concrete is the concrete.
13
In a paper he wrote for another student, the topic was voyeurism
& he found that when Marie Antoinette was imprisoned in the Conciergerie
awaiting execution, une garde never left her room. She slept, ate & prayed all under his gaze, his body hidden behind a tall screen
but his head protruding above, like a phantasm, a secret eye
hidden in plain sight, a panopticon of one, voyeur itself French, for “to see.”
The concierge named his castle after himself, proud master of the keep, master of the three towers: Caesar, Silver & Bonbec, the last,
where the torturer slept, between prisoners, bon bec, or good beak, which is the problem with the literal, since the torturer operates by analogies: make him squeal, make him sing, bring in the Judas chair, break out the veil. Hamida Djandoubi, the last one guillotined, 1977, a Tunisian, an amputee
before his execution, “quite flexible despite his wound,”
himself a torturer, selling Algerian girls for sex, like Barthes said of France
(by analogy). Marcel Chevalier, the last executioner, beheader-in-chief, knight on horseback, chivalrous because he drew the veil, forty times. “You have informed us that he appears to have a fear of insects.”
When they kept him awake, in that room with lights, where the mornings
kept tripping over night, Yoo wrote, “no more than eleven days at a time.” Did he go blind from all the seeing . . . have I?
14
When he didn’t eat, he smoked British cigarettes
in the same motion as the grasp,
the individual is drawn toward the interrogator.
He doled them out like rewards, one per completed page
not lasting more than 20 minutes in any one application flicking butts off the porch when it was wet or into a small
watering can with a spout, not wanting to set the woods on fire i.e., the perception of drowning.
He cited every source immediately, waiting was such a student’s sloppy error.
He drew the client forward into an oily desire,
the country of his defection into a shining release.
With the exception of the insect8
there was little he hadn’t tried, or begged, or wanted.
He read Yoo aloud as if sharing a letter found after years hidden in his desk, whistling a slow, faint
halting song no one else would hear.
15
In another paper, “On Typography & Music,” he wrote
on the ampersand, its belly and twisting,
its tortūra, looking almost like the musical clef
introducing the score of connect-a-dots, its tissue & joints, where also the stave found its home & rest, the beat
in between the beatings. Once he had held his wife’s hand all the way to the operating room doors, where
they made him let go. When she returned,
they were halves. He was unsure
how he was culpable,
why their untwisting. The paper
was a success, his client wrote, the A+
he had paid for. The &—which used to be
printed at the end of the alphabet, not the beginning.
16
He purchased irony at the Cumberland Farms Convenience Store, great pudding cups full of it, though this was not Cumberland, nor had he ever stepped foot on a real farm
& “convenience” in this context was not a noun
as in Auto Parts Store, where one could expect to purchase
car oil & filters. No, convenience was not a “thing”
but an “idea” & here poets of things & ideas met at the checkout line, the poet of things cradling a Styrofoam carton
of chicken eggs in his palsied arm while the poet of ideas
slipped a 2-gig memory stick down his pants,
already remembering the images he would place there.
He purchased a thing called Dark Hate,
which would give him energy for another few pages of work,
as well as some Mentos & a Hungry Man frozen meal
made with Real Chicken parts. When the President said he would follow the advice of the Office of Legal Counsel,
he thought of his dinner, how a man would eat anything
if hungry enough, including the cranberry crumble
which contained neither cranberries nor crumbles
but looked a lot like it might, though where it was going, it didn’t
really matter. He was not an artist
of things or ideas, just a copyist, Bartleby, folding-sheets man
working in an office he’d rather die in than leave.
17
The “baseline dependent state”
was his usual modus operandi
his ipso facto,
so he didn’t require a special diet or a diaper,
just fishing his keys out of his woolen sports-coat pocket was enough, the problem of evil
just another problem
among the unwashed dishes & his color blindness,
the green & red lights of the Christmas tree blending— a deuteranopia as John Dalton first called it— confirmed by DNA analysis of his preserved
eyeball. Green-blind, that eutopia
οú τόπος
his “no-where” place seeming perfectly right.
What he saw was real.
Some saw halos.
Some saw scruffy dogs where devils were.
Some saw existential threats in disgruntled pop guns. He saw an empty apartment, filled with papers, a perfect tinderbox of words:
false wall, facial hold, lovely, please, your hair.
Outside my torturer’s room was the water, not
a cheap plastic bottle, its label peeling, but a glass, tall like a cylinder, so that when my moans leaked under the doorway, rousing the anxious guard,
who had not looked up when I was led past,
I imagined the liquid trembling, a miniature sea frothed like the storm that swallowed Jonah,
that set his monster free. When the torturer told me it was delicious, summer light trapped inside,
the glass did not care if it touched the torturer’s lips or my thrust-out tongue, though the guard, eyes at the edge of the cell-door window,
watched the drops form, merged with torturer’s sweat, where he had kissed only the night before.
18
He read, “Peace Through Law? The Failure of a Nobel Experiment,” which on its face seemed to argue for lawlessness & he thought not about Peace or Law but about Beauty & its contours, whether it was made or just was, whether it was a consequence or a Prime Mover, a struggle & if so then against what, if it indicted Truth & if so then what
was the First Truth, which he imagined was Aloneness.
“They attacked the idea of freedom,” Yoo wrote,9
though he didn’t think about Freedom but that a Pluralism is not a
Relativism,
which cut both ways, toward Yoo as True & toward Yoo as False, since the man standing up in the snowstorm couldn’t simply lie down because the snowplow was coming, but that he also should lie down lest everyone stand in the road, no plowing done,
the snow piling up like a wet cloth, suffocating, which might though
give Beauty some permission, since everyone in their houses would feel quite alone, which would be True, & might go mad to struggle
outside, scraping, clawing with spoons & kitchen ladles toward whatever wasn’t wherever they found themselves. And here, Beauty would be
both Cause & Effect.
19
At night he replayed the Vanity Fair video,
Hitchens strapped down, having hired large-armed men
to choke him,
to prove the naysayers wrong, though no one could feel what Hitchens felt, proving only
that phenomenology was a slippery floor upon which to set the sneakered feet of logic.
He threw the dead man’s switch.
He forgot the code word.
He was suffocated in a garage, a white Frigidaire
humming next to his head.
He gave his account
in front of a piano, Haydn peering over his shoulder
from an instruction manual, perhaps The Creation, its so-happy Vanities.10
The angel Uriel, solo:
O glücklich Paar, und glücklich immerfort, Wenn falscher Wahn euch nicht verführt, Noch mehr zu wünschen als ihr habt,
Und mehr zu wissen als ihr sollt!
Oh happy pair, and happy forever unless weak-willed and mad
you wish for more than what you have, to know more than you should.
He lay between the slick sheets & tried to imagine
would he have gone mad & whether he wasn’t already
to live like this, even if to live like this
meant he read Pilgrim’s Progress & listened to music, watched YouTube. Moaning, a little contra-alto, he woke himself
from the nightmares in which beautiful music played
& grayed figures walked toward brick houses, their undoing.
20
Smoking another Dunhill on the way back from Eros he wanted to think that he had found it
another such escape from the area of ascertainable facts how 0 became 1, without addition or treatment,
how Eichmann in the box became
Eichmann in the box & we all watching the drama unfold and personal responsibility
in The Harvard Crimson, next to his paeans for Chicago hotdogs based on non-specific, hypothetical, abstract assumptions
from the Zeitgeist down to the Oedipus complex:
here was how torture became a technique,
drowning a release from breathing, grievous pain an antidote to love
so general that they explain and justify every event and deed
On this Judas chair, Yoo had set his mind, which in a night of infinite standing
could almost be called relief. Yoo was 21.
Ready with remote pointed at the sweet spot on his TV
the now-ancient ’80s movie he watched again & again began to roll,
no alternative to what actually happened
is even considered
the French schoolboys are marched out of the courtyard by the Gestapo, and no person could have acted differently
from the way he did act11
the question is not so much why the Gestapo man
orders their expungement
but why the students, who number many more,
watch & like a dove has been stuffed in their mouths, don’t.
21
He had to escape to the sex clubs,
though everyone there reminded him of his clients,
who had paid him not
to be ordering vodkas with lime & ice at the bar,
though whereas they all wanted to get laid, he just wanted to watch, usually, though the sameness bored, not so much the women as the men, each the same
sour smell, colognes all named after adjectives indicating desperation, or what passed for desperation in French, which none of them had studied.
So he often moved over to the gay clubs,
their Caesars & Neros, the men on top of the bars
dancing with laurel crowns in their hair, his Lycidas
in a G-string, enormous codpieces
portraying slick leather veneer as truth, Veritas the Harvard motto to which Yale added Lux,
meaning light & also meaning toilet soap
made in the French method.
There, the dreadlocked fat man, his face lost
in his black jacket, could wave his dollars, just as the punk
& the middle-aged professor & the skank &
her lover & the bald phoenixes
reflecting strobes. Here, he could dissolve
into the corner sofa & wait,
something like truth & light materializing
out of the haze, something he could bring back to his apartment & add to his project,
the shape of what was real hiding in dark.
22
So Hobbes argued that life is “nasty, brutish, and short,” which seemed pretty well common sense
(my carpet smells of sour grapes & the last woman I brought home) but then his solution, since he was a humanitarian
& interested in love, was the Leviathan, the corpus regnum,
the Big Daddy, the Darth Vader, to which Filmer did not object
per se, but having misplaced Hobbes’s memo in the loo
argued that the monarch was descended from Adam,
& as Adam had dominion, ipso facto, so did King (insert name here), all very logical, supported by textual evidence, in fact, citations!
Which Hobbes thought was so much bollocks
since one hardly needed the imprimatur of divinity if one’s
cudgel was big enough & one wasn’t afraid
to use it, though one needed, first, the cudgel, which most arguments of this type required. But then Locke, meek & forlorn Locke,
coveting his neighbor’s property, called them both on the carpet, citing Natural Law! Democracy! & the biblical necessity
of capitalism & stealing the Indians’ fruit trees,
all very logical, supported by textual evidence, in fact, citations!
“Another improvement we made over Treblinka was that we built our gas chamber
to accommodate 2,000 people at one time.”13
I so wanted this to work. The logic of epistemology.
So that KcA reads “Agent c knows A,”
or BcA reads “Agent c believes A.”
So that what was known, say the rate of human decomposition
given the set of conditions: temperature, moisture, soil composition, season, whether the body was covered or uncovered,
computed, verified by previous observations such as those
borrowed by General MacArthur from the torturers at Unit 731,
would yield what is now suddenly more known: the body is a vessel made of hinges & ropes & it breaks, most certainly.
Though what is believed, say the music of the spheres
or that one loves the other & vice versa is less easily testable
if not equally known, given the set of information that one can access & therein lies the secret detention camp of my beliefs
such that BcA: in all possible worlds compatible
with what c believes, it is the case that A is the equation of holding my head in the toilet while it is flushed.
“Children of tender years were invariably exterminated since by reason of
their youth they were unable to work.”14
The logic of Théodicée holds that my penis is not a weapon because God made me of flesh & not of iron.
The logic of embrasure holds that it is an opening
through which I have aimed my cannon,
embraser means “to set fire” & embrasser “to take you in my arms” & my belief that murder is not a sin depends on the context
of three men, something we have given the name
waterboard & a small can with a spout the janitor uses
to keep the flowers alive.
I don’t blame Yoo.
Maybe the philosophes. Melville scholar & ranked
ping-pong player William Spanos blames the Terra Anthropologica & so do I. In the country of myself
I am no torturer.
If intent equals goal, as Yoo said it does, then I am never your torturer.
My intent is to get to work, not to run you down on your bicycle.
My intent is to pay my rent, not participate in your magic tricks.
You who had the misfortune to stand between me & my intent, you are
an escarpment to me, not a destination.
Though I may drive many miles
hearing this screaming
under the belly of my car—
just the muffler, a piece of sheet metal—
some wire will fix it,
bound tight against the chassis, this chest.
I would blame the poets, their discoveries, which are like the New World to the aborigines who I would like to think
thought, “Are you kidding me?”
Plato had it right. Fuck the poets.
Dawn as night. Night as the y-axis of cotton candy. This was the logic of metaphor.
Sense run up the mast to blow in the breeze. “What ho! Tashtego,” nailing your red pennant while your ship founders into the darkening Pacific & the whale’s jaws come
to swallow your Indian-ness, which is not
even your real name.
23
Monday, the sun rising across the gray packed-earth path,
he attached what he had to her email & hit send, just his notes
& an outline, declared there had been an emergency, what a shame she didn’t have more time, maybe she could make sense
out of what he had done, still make it to Harvard in the fall
where he now knew there was a great Chicago-style hotdog stand,
if it was still there—there would be no charge.
Or maybe the notes & outline would accrue to something else
in her brain, an irrational map pointing the way out of
a confined box with a small hole near the mouth to breathe through or where something could be inserted—forceps or a letter
from her future self, rolled up like a Dead Sea scroll.
He drew out an old translation of Vilmorin:
Oh! The soft steps of the innocents, their silences overbrimming
make so, make, make
make of an evening dance a country where flames will converge.
These lovers met, so
the snow melts, the snow melts, and melts, and melts.
And he thought he would finish the translation,
which was like a transforming, out of his wife’s breath
something the shape of a hot meal they could share, something brilliant in its use of bitter, at a small table against a window
where, having chosen the wine, its origin, he could begin
to explain what he had done & why, which would lead
to a question, the only one that mattered & ever would.
Oh chrysanthemum, you are so evolved,
so selected to live communally.
What fine scale. Yes, we could learn from that.
But if we had to act as one flower
yet be in fact two hundred, it would go
so hard on us. Your petals, worlds. Your worlds
are cups to suck the windy water.
The new thing is inside. Loaf of pistils— oh, oh. That is too much. Oh no. Oh you.
From beyond the patio’s aureole
it stared at me. It became she, and she conformed to rules of Tudor portraiture:
pointed chin, black eyes burning,
white-faced little sister to Donne, to our
new, the handsome, Shakespeare. Worried, too— by the land, the lads, the lazy servants,
her love for the parish sexton holding
the keys. Their velvet burrow, the golden trees. Oh, how he loves her rat tail, her long lace cuffs of black, the way each night she sneaks another morsel in his lap. Carriages await her
but she doesn’t care. Her aimless lord
is ruination but forsooth tomorrow
is sufficient. Evil waggles but not
tonight. Venus winks in the sky.
Up the cutbank of a creek named after stone, striking stone, I came walking, my fingers stained with the pulp of raspberries picked
from branches arched over descending snowmelt beneath two clouds and blue sky no one
built. Napped between that extravagant
quilt and sun-warmed sand until the taut line woke me, tugging in my palm. The trout’s
eye was a polished nickel poleaxed
by a drop of ink, though I am writing this
in the brown juice spit from a grasshopper’s lips, instinct having made for many a miracle
such as this emergent mayfly shaking its wings dry, to whom I whisper—Go light and soft
with this pittance, straight to the lord
whose commandments are writ in water.
Milkweed pod gone to seed,
pried open, wind-
emptied:
two shallow
cups of shadow—
On Sunday I went to Albania.
No one understood, clearly, at first, why I (or anyone) would go to Albania. Except my father, who knew at once: “Because, before, you couldn’t go to
Albania.”
It had never occurred to me, before, to actually go to Albania.
For years it was there, a Mars, the ultimate hole in the atlas: Albania.
Our government said you couldn’t go to Albania. Passports self-vaporized, I thought, if you went to Albania. The Middle Ages with Missiles, over there in Albania.
And somehow also China, Albania.
But then it was suddenly Sunday, forty years later, and it was right there. I was right next to Albania.
There’s a thin strait, with small islands. You pay a ferryman to cross to Albania.
Before, people who tried to swim away were shot by men in trenches and towers guarding Albania.
Everyone was surprised when I left, alone, for Albania.
“Given her history, were you worried when your mother went off to Albania?” “No. Well, maybe a little,” they said. “She had never mentioned Albania.”
When I came back everyone asked about Albania. They said, “What did you see in Albania?”
I began to reply but that was enough of Albania. Perhaps it was hard for them. The idea of Albania. Maybe they never had an Albania.
They weren’t panicked. They didn’t ask, “What will we do, now that we can go to Albania?”
It’s been a few days now. It’s as if nothing happened. As if I never went to Albania.
The chart shows two ports and several small harbors but from this far offshore there are no lights anywhere on the coast of Albania.
As we move north, somewhere to starboard, steep and with snow, is Albania.
Yes, you overlooked them
when they lay easily in sunlight
across the stone threshold of a Tuscan farm.
They did not race up behind you mad on the scent, the way a fire sears up a mountainside outrunning its own breath,
nor did they force you off the trail through bare trees and snow,
out onto the surface of a nameless pond.
Whoever would bring them to the trailhead and under these gray skies
just let them go?
They are here by the fire,
my friend, waiting to rise
from the intricate carpet as you enter.
Like a crazy, I have shed the lived-in places, chosen ruins. For the silence.
For those moments when the nameless dead remove the talismans and you can sense
the blue dome fragment in the household wall.
It’s how you see the distance:
all the oared ships at anchor
in the silted plain that was the harbor.
The wind this morning
like a meanness in the world
spit snow thick and drifted— but right at noon
that runaway sky
went silver-blue, bright
and disquieting as the coins of some far country.
Where cattle bones grace the truck path I made my choice,
a tibia, in colorless sun. Scratches where the rodents gnawed it
had filled with pink clay
and made it resurgent, useful, achingly so. I would chew on it myself
but in the kitchen, Mama,
its whiteness does not blaze.
On the edge of the arroyo live
the dead gray piñons.
Drought weak, they were done in by beetles. This they do not admit. Shut
the mind they say. You leave yourself open to far too much.
They’d bought Canadian gosling chicks to raise as decoys, but when live-bird lures became unlawful, the sportsmen termed them feral and left them to forage local farms.
Surviving birds, elderless, unled
from incubated hatchling days,
came with autumn to know their untamed blood in its surpassing
urge to seek in height what wing
to follow, so soon among the hard- frost dawns their arrow headed off, only to return the same forenoon.
The next day too returned them early.
Thus their pattern, wedged in flight as in fixation, sometimes even
three of these unmigrations rounded in a day, their cleaving quest for years not piercing more than county skies.
1
The night my father died I buried myself in a little language, a testament of will, measured out the way the stonecutter
measures out our names to make them fit, and as I leaned beneath the bell of light
to the cursor where it pulsed, I placed there
neither man nor the shape of his absence, not grief as I knew it, but the tiny bones
of ink that grief made, rising to the surface.
I have met with those who disapprove
of passing through too quickly into song, as if, with death, we give to it the first
word which is none at all. Anything more is to make light of suffering: mine, yours. Or worse, to make far too much of it,
to lose oneself in the futures market
that seeks to clear a profit on misfortune. They have a point. That is, some songs need
a certain hesitation to break the ice
and move more deeply into winter’s current. Then again, tending to a song’s needs
gives loss a vocation, and who is to say what will come of it, any more
than what comes of music while it lasts.
2
Audubon loved the creatures that he killed.
That is part of the story. He loved the music
he silenced, gutted, stuffed with clouds of cotton,
the bodies he cleansed with a surgeon’s care then mended with needle, a stitched seam tucked beneath the feathers where they shone.
He loved the eyes that gave way to seeds of glass, the small black blisters gleaming with light that went just so far, so deep.
Somewhere in that region of inquiry,
in what he could not paint, the illusion of life took, and fluttered to the surface,
informing the angle of the head, the beak, the bright rustle of wings as the ivory- billed woodpecker turns away from us
to make out some motion in the distance. Movement is danger. Or so the heartbeat says at first, until it settles back
onto its perch, its branch of understanding. What you see within the sure lines and blush of these renditions is an artist’s gaze,
so steady, cautious as it crosses the lip
of stillness, our open coffin, careful not
to break the perfect silence where it breathes.
3
Suppose all the world is a house lit up against the night, and the eye of the bird our only window. If you look through
the black air, you just might see a man, a father, say, who takes his broken sleep down the hall to a desk in the distance.
He is peering over his heavy glasses
to the near at hand, papers that await his signature to put his affairs in order.
When he writes, his pen bleeds a little ink over the line, real or imagined,
to lay a name against the emptiness.
Birds slip into the flowered portraits
of his study, silent, and yet made flesh
by the hand that murdered to create them.
The Carolina pigeon dips the nib
of his beak into the mouth he feeds.
If he spreads his colors, ribbed in black,
it is one more song that calls the thing unseen. The man closes up his desk, and with it a passage in his testament,
the part where he asks to be scattered, remembered the way a body remembers to breathe. A ghost thread pulls outward, like a word.
Into the bath drawn cold for fever
I lower myself until the water covers all but my breasts, eyes, & nose—
one o’clock, & I imagine B’s body
now in the chamber where a magnet will skim her ashes for screws, bone fasteners, & crowns. On the plane,
the boy behind me asked why
I was wearing the blue mask
& held a cup of ice to my neck
& wrists. Pressure points,
I said but didn’t explain.
At security my bags & body— searched. Why are you traveling?
Why are you flushed? A pacemaker explodes in the fired
chamber. But the heart slows
in cold water, the fever drawn
out of the body—hot to cold, hot to cold. In the terminal, waiting for the next flight out, I studied the magazine
cross-section of Al-Jazari’s elephant clepsydra in whose hollow body
a bowl continually fills, becoming heavy with each hour. Underwater
I hear slow breathing, far off as someone else’s.
All night the shirts unbutton from the hangers, drop
to the floor on their own. I gather them in the morning.
A snakeskin yesterday, on the water, gave me
a start—the eyescales, pearl. Slough. Deflesh.
Slaughter. Today, no word
from you, Louis, or your dear Paul—
just the hissing again of the iron, the steam blinding the window.

Honey given : Honey taken By virtue of and
we divide and separate: branching into palo verde: green stick tree
precipitating yellow blossoms: green tree, yellow blossoms: a mind sticks
on certain images, certain colors: phone’s ringing interrupts: it’s the neighbor again she wishes: someone would do something about the bees: yellow blossoms
delicate, fluted: all the wind
they need blows: the blossoms let go
so easily: falling one
at a time: it’s impossible to determine
the moment of separation: descent
a small scheme in the wind’s master plan.
What the girl goes through to get here—thickets, coverlets, the half-built halls of this manor,
and its elegant, crumbling drawbridges, the tease
of the moat beneath. She stops at its banks. Her frock is on wrong but she can’t help herself, and what’s below knows her, knows her buttoning hands. Hello
she says back to the water you wouldn’t let me float would you? but the moat would like her to unroll the grass on the other side, to fasten it shut
like skin over a sore. She hesitates. Behind her
the chanting. She knows there is a boy in the wood who has dropped to his knees and drawn a circle
and is saying each of her secret names. Susanna
he says Silent Dog and White Scarf and she tightens hers to hear her pulse. Mend my wrapping coat he says I am so cold. The water begs, the boy begs her,
and she could pull a girl from the storm cellar, a twin, tornado-legged and frozen, from her hiding place
in the icebox, the place she learned her breath’s
real shape, a twin from the shaved-grass garden.
She could teach them how to mend, to wait for the final girl on the road, the one who will not answer.
How to wait for the answer. How to tell the two apart.
Quarter to nine and the air is circulating
with stories, handheld cameras reel,
the idea of a bomb reddening the inside of one building then another,
AM commute
egress twists white into an empty sky.
Next a stem of breath chalked with remainders, filaments of lightbulbs littering the air
and other headlines scrolled from space.
There are scenes, and there are scenes of bodies creating themselves
of dust that play and re- play (suspension of an image).
We read ourselves
into the action of everything falling,
the mouth an open switchblade, sound stitched to a tremor of surfaces, chirp of machines
going crazy and “a blip
without additional information.”
The digital eye of every clock upon wreckage and rising dust, each number illuminated against the next,
the eighth minute eighth hour:
first, it was a summer of bodies opened by mouths, sun calibrated to the distance between forefinger and thumb,
clockwork of lines trailing a lilt of limbs and then the mind, the mind
a chain link of Xs.
Long legs in the sand of somewhere else,
a still frame.
The body will always be running in the dream of its own dismemberment,
always in flight. 
This is the picture   (of the torso,

the hands,
the face) 
of someone falling

out of time.
Long curlicues of talk annotate the portions of a city bracketed by alarm,
the mind a thin history of misnomers: here, in the interim, it is spring, summer—
now a globe of filtered light,
a chronicle of minor adjustments,
signals that splay the spired star tips of nerves electrified and documentation
of the blank page.
We copied the morning in short paragraphs: sky lit by nothing,
remainder of sun, a syllable, the black tar on our roofs.
Then an implacable diamond of words formed in our mouths:
there were stories to be told,
a new grid of noise,
papers spooled from the ether
and all the while talk of aspirated mirages gauzing the shortage of words,
the thousand compartments of a columbarium, lit or unlit
storying a sun-filled rift in the atmosphere.
Words form backwards and are forgotten. The mind takes notes as an exile omitting all verbs,
confabulating a terminal of windows, neither coming, nor going,
each frame, a calendar day abridged—
mascaraed wick of an arm, shoe displacing a furrow,
smear of panic joining the heads of three people and a clutch of birds carved
from the clavicle of a building.
The mind cycles through its list of antonyms, filaments of lightbulbs flare in the afternoon,
then the bitmap of an image forming:
it’s always snowing in the mind, each of us in the ashen image of the other,
and the snow can burn
(harvested letters, records, data).
Birds mass in their departure (a word may be shaped like a bird). There’s a cue, the tree empties.
The communion was something you could taste: every mouth closed
On a clear day
and coated,
wet membrane, hollow
pressure of a tongue
held
is a form of punctuation,
a knot
that can never be undone.
Eighty-eight searchlights.
Headstone of a sky
written into the next frame
and every night peeling columns from a low ceiling of moisture. Halogen, a short history
of hauntings.
It seemed possible to remember, to profess faith in the subatomic magnification
of energy,
but there was only a window of diffuse and colorless light, mottling the insides of clouds.
Prayers,
advertised. The nights,
a controlled experiment in mourning.
Then,
the crystalline precision of sound netting us,
cornu spirals interlocking forever,
greased bar of a straight line, horizons layered like cities,
a vinculum over every number.
It starts out nothing and becomes nothing. It does nothing of its own accord. All the acts are performed for it. A thing dancing upon another thing.
It begins like a bird pulling its wing up over its young. Slowly dragging open the curtain when
you wake. The way I push your shirt up over your head.
Now, an open purse. You’re sure you could reach in and grab nearly anything out of it. A pen, a stick
of gum. Whatever you need. It’s yours.
The middle, the part where we can’t remember which way we started, where we will end. What part of this whole charade will be tainted next. An empty dinner plate. A face illuminated in a dark stairwell. A hole punched through
a paper, or, say, a wall.
This is when things begin to end. Draw up the sides, like a hammock. Soon it will close up the light inside itself.
The end is tricky because we all feel we’ve seen this
happen before. Drawing down the corners of your lips. The last sliver of an orange rotting on the kitchen table.
And now. We see nothing of it now. A blank board. A night lake you could walk across if it were cold enough. A table with nothing missing because nothing is there.
the ass makes its round clop clop clopping
the stone turns crushing rock extracted
gathered dust
bathed in quicksilver and piss
hands stained black blistered mix the slurry
until the amalgam falls
to the bottom and the wash
polluted is poured out upon the earth
and the ass keeps circling the stone keeps turning
the blistered hands keep mixing keep pouring out
keep riddling
the earth stained
keeps offering
The trapiche still spins clickety clack
a pulley and a diesel engine and the clack clack clack
of the weights and the stones as it turns crushing ore to dust
knocking stone against stone against weight
and the spinning merry-go-round
jostling jockeying shoulder against shoulder
click of the camera clack of the tongue
the trapiche still spins did he say that
it’s a lie it’s a lie it’s a lie
Every man is endowed by his Creator
With underground deposits of flammable fluid. The ancient streets of Baghdad
Were paved with tar.
With a phosphorescent light stick, a guard Sodomizes Mr. Waleed.
The Americans are drilling day and night
Through soil and rock, hoping to meet their Maker. Now I will rise and return their love.

I hear voices at the tunnel’s end:
“They flipped the switch.
It felt as if my eyes were being pushed out,"
As if they were extracting great quantities Of pitch and tar out of a stone.
“What becomes of all the young and old men?"
From the heat and pressure
Of geological time, they emerge, Naked, forced into a pyramid.

“I was tied to the radiator
And subjected to the continuous playing Of ‘By the Rivers of Babylon’ by Boney M.”
I want to stop thinking about this.
In the desert a body smells like dry grass.
“I gave you my body.
If you hadn't abused my love and trust
I never would have been photographed Giving the thumbs-up.”
A woman says to a satellite, “Allah, this baby is yours.”
My apertures open and close in the dark, Urge urge and urge, the procreant urge Of photography.
“Take full advantage of my love and trust. Step on my head while it lies in urine."
These distances always terminate In my receiver's previous location.
My servants ask me who I am.
I answer that I am an Iraqi Muslim.
Then they ask me, “What is the grass?” But I do not know the answer.
Then they ask me,
“Where is Osama bin Laden?”
And I say, I know where I am. I am everywhere.
My thumb, my eye, my saliva Surrounded by barbed wire.
I am the feeling of health, the full-noon trill, The song of a mouth held open,
The warmth of an interrogator’s hand.
I am the song of me
Rising from my bed of fumes.
I scan myself onto a magnetic disk
And fling it into space for the public good, Like the “I sing” of poets,
Like the “I declare” of kings.
If I blow on a charcoal stick and enliven an ember, A momentary, lurid light,
I might recognize the emptiness As well as the space I occupy.
Moonlight
Or frost on the ground: pearl gleam of finite deferrals.
How long have I kept the past hidden, tarp-covered,
Not on view,
as if awaiting some final restoration?
The horizon retreats. The distance remains constant, A dark distance where shadows are quarried.
A dragon of river mist lifts from the gorge. Moonlight. The past, like a poem, I’ve come to learn,
Does not change,
but around it language does.
The freight of ambiguity can be figured as The discrepancy between a and b,
As well as, but different from, a suffuses b.
Record the last cache of August daylight
As the dark hollow of the plucked raspberry, As willow-leaf shadow on her nipple.
That said, each stanza is, nonetheless, an island, Joined and separated by the depth and distance That surrounds, and in surrounding, defines.
One can sever the bridge cables and still The bridge stands, engineered to bear more Than the weight of its expanse.
The vacancy marked by the thorn-sharp skriek Of a red-winged blackbird’s territorial caw
Is an amalgam of rare and remote elements.
Record the quicksilver sliver of memory, All that remains of the past: granaries Collapsed beneath a bountiful harvest.
Although the fruit grows heavy and bright, we do not eat with the dead.
We do not eat of the dead:
their jewel brightness, ripe for the taking.
We leave the fruit of the dead:
it rots on the grave where it lands; we remember what feeds it.
Memories out of sequence, overlapping in the cold light of now:
false filter we peer through—winter’s slow-moving waters.
Survival has its price:
the syncopic moments piling one atop the other, the perpetual replay.
The scent of blood in falling snow. Animalic on the cold fabric of my jacket. And consequentially, the scent of his hair,
once damp frozen to points against my palm. So metal, so clean, sharper than any affection—
cut it away,
try not to break the skin,
stitch it wrong side to wrong side.
Sing, Goddess, sing of the rage of Achilles, the days of war
and black purposes. When the painter draws a line
he hears the battle between drawing and drawing, as the black waters of the Greeks move to the ships.
Pulling his thick crayon, he grabs hold of the shield he is drawing in Bassano in Teverina; he leans
his fisted palm over each smeared study. He waits, and salutes the long call of discipline. His waiting
is nearly a circle, wide as his arm, an explosion. Each day he draws ghosts, or he sits by his mind watching the sea.
The sea is white three quarters of the time, just white,
he says to himself. He scribbles the war.
Patroklos. Achilles. He repeats the names
in his stone studio until he can sketch them.
The painter doesn’t pace. His precision is only a line
of tragedy forming in the form of light. The gods all sat assembled.
At night he reads the war,
and in the morning when day’s white cuff presses down,
color trembles and nods, then lands on itself again.
He looks out the window at the slurry of the winter sea.
His hand touches the large canvas with the red language of dying; he rubs in nine years’ battle he fought into the scrawl
of the oils. A. A. A.: each letter loud and undisciplined.
Will he sleep tonight, after holding the red and red of the gods?
Using his darkest crayon, he draws a crescent curve for grief, nestles into the arm the white of loss, digging out
the rapturous first stroke of vengeance. His hands are warm, and the crayons he is holding
tell him how to draw the cycle.
Without slowing, he scribbles his theories
in alizarin and blue pigment, the theories which are tones and lines. Is he traveling or unraveling?
He is used to these lapses of certainty. He holds the pencil like a dagger. Erases and deciphers this battle in his hands.
He works the canvases together, fighting them, unrelenting. Space forgives the sound of the words he has read,
never a sound but the scratching of the tool in his hands.
The line chases, not moving away, until it has never stopped; space gathers at the corners.
The battle is fought again on the again. It will always be this way,
the rapturous names of the gods getting smaller. He pushes each letter away.
Outside his studio the night is naked, the dark music of fighting moves over
to the very last sentence of color,
a voluptuous white that harvests the drone of the sea,
a battle of where the beginning begins: what is unpainted, the myth of the gods,
what is liquid or heaven.
Up close, devastation: ten canvases with a trail of exertion.

The steps were cold—
an ancient cold. We huddled in lines that wound
through city streets. Stores boarded with ply, as empty as our traded-in gloves and shoes.
Mostly we cooperated, most
of the jostling happened behind. Our hearts, fixed forward, gave off
a blue affection. The scale tipped this way and that, in one pan clay, in the other a pyramid
of faceted gems. We were the eyes, we were weight shifted
foot to foot. This was a capital
moment. The mechanism, armed, wavered, springs twitched
to settle, mixed swords
and scales, fear and favor. What would never be ours hung in the balance.
The snow’s like boulders on this block, before dawn, one heavy-coated person walking in the road, a man coughing, two children waiting for the school bus, two houses with insulation strips and no siding,
two with blue tarps and no roof, two For Rent signs on this street of workers living behind what’s left, opulent façade of another century, the stained glass shining now lavender, yellow, blue, someone is up
in the subdivided houses, the black metal envelopes, mailboxes counting two four eight apartments,
four of the houses boarded up, three empty, and
on the last, plywood seals off the bottom windows.
But on the second floor, lights come on, someone is up in the half-condemned house. The snow counts up. The talk-show pundits say, Things are better! But here we see the bust after every boom that means our jobs and lives exploding, the dust settling like snow
on our shoulders, like cement around our feet.
At dawn the sky is chrome yellow. We turn over,
we say to each other, The storm is coming.
Thunder, purple, white, light, red. At the window
I listen for rain to make its room of sound, how once under the trailer roof clatter I was reading about the future, once I was under a tin porch roof, spatter, writing the spider lilies, now rain spouts like a turned-on faucet, I’m back in bed, the light- ning strikes next door, you hold me, you say I’ve got you, petting my arm, you quiver back into sleep, my company inside the storm that’s fading east,
the last thunder inside me, conversational rumble up from gut and lungs. My mouth wants to reply.
Outside I look for charred streaks, the strikes scorched down a tree trunk. Rain showers shake down from leaves in the wind onto the drenched folded cardboard someone slept on before rain fell onto the little room under the tree. The slick wet surface of paper. Douglass said, to long for progress without struggle is to ask for rain without thunder. Lightning blow, your eyelids and fingers trembled. The dream where you made rally placards, people were massing, that’s what you had the strength to do in your dream. Today the cardboard is unfolded under the tree in the sun, maybe the person using it was alone, or maybe two lay in each other’s arms during the uneasy night, wrapped in streaks of light.
Habit—the key in the ignition, and no, maybe never, thought about why what happens next. Turn down Gertrude, into Almond, sun into shadow under the over- pass, then the sun gnawing at my ear at the red light. The comfort of habit, not psychological. The pileated cackle every June in the old magnolia, rejoicing
the chambered seed cone has opened, the plump lick. What habit gives us, and when it fails. Tushabe says
there were two seasons, wet and dry, the farmers knew time out of time when to plant until now, the drought,
the weather has changed its habit. Or something else
has changed the mind of the climate. We were watching Norma Rae yesterday, holding hands, the mill hands reached out and turned each switch off. How hard to break the habit of work, obedience not to the machines, but
to those who own them. The hand reaching out to take its own, bringing the fragment, the red seed, delicious to the mouth.
Folding the letter and laying it down,
Daddy says Well, Baby, I’ve been called back up. Mama pauses, then puts my bowl of beans
in front of me. Jennifer eats and hums,
across from me on two telephone books.
Mama says Pray God you won’t see combat. Jennifer, stop singing at the table,
I hiss. Her humming’s driving me crazy.
She looks up from her bowl with dreaming eyes: Huh? Mama says My Darling, we’re going too. Stop singing! I’ll take a leave from law school,
he says. And you’ll take a leave from your job. We’ve been called up. Our leaves become feathers. With wings we wave goodbye to our cousins.
Our new house, Officers’ Quarters 42,
connects to other quarters, and mowed yards connecting to wheat fields and wilderness waiting to be explored by kids and dogs. Sometimes we don’t come in until we’re called by someone’s mom. They say Mom, not Mama. Hazel, Charlotte, Jeannie, Tommy and Charles: as soon as we hear the School’s Over bell
we flock together like migrating birds,
catching grasshoppers, gathering bouquets,
or just plain running into breathlessness.
I don’t know why Mama looked sad tonight while I was washing up, or why she said
Be careful: Don’t like them more than your own.
Somebody took a picture of a class
standing in line to get polio shots,
and published it in the Weekly Reader.
We stood like that today. And it did hurt.
Mrs. Liebel said we were Making History,
but all I did was sqwunch up my eyes and wince. Making History takes more than standing in line believing little white lies about pain.
Mama says First Negroes are History:
First Negro Telephone Operator,
First Negro Opera Singer At The Met,
First Negro Pilots, First Supreme Court Judge. That lady in Montgomery just became a First by sqwunching up her eyes and sitting there.
A pineapple is the perfect gift
to bring to a blind date.
A pineapple is like a blind date:
spiky and armored at first,
with the hope of sweetness inside.
A pineapple is the perfect housewarming gift. You don't have to wrap it,
it doesn't spill inside your car.
It comes in its own house.
A pineapple is the perfect birthday gift.
You might prefer a coconut,
that planet molten at the core,
but the pineapple has a better hairdo,
better wardrobe; it never
goes out of style.
Think of all those historic houses
with pineapple bolsters, pineapple finials, pineapples carved above lintels.
Such a sophisticated fruit:
every sailor wants one.
Look at dishwasher.
I admire instructions that start with the basics. The diagram
is like a cubist painting, showing all sides at once, each part
given a letter, so the machine
has an alphabet infestation.
I follow the letters into the maze. This is not a dishwasher.
It’s a garden of tall boxwoods,
open-air rooms leading one to the next and I am wandering,
unable to read the instructions
I hold in my right hand, following a line of towering bushes.
I am always flying out of my body at inopportune times. And where do I go? Something else
takes over, twin brain, deep brain, primitive.
The twin brain can’t read,
or follow directions. But it has rules. It has power, like an animal
whose business is survival,
the swarm of knowing, so I let go, give up the pointing alphabet,
for once just give up the alphabet.
Fog lay atop the single field like a balm, perfectly contained,
hovering just above
the long grass.
Perhaps descending from the sky,
or rising perhaps from the earth, in the field
fog connected the two,
the ground and the air,
sewed them together
in loose white stitches.
It looked medicinal,
the fog healing the field.
To your doctors
who live
by the body’s obliquity,
who make their living
by your swerving,
I raise these wisps of vapor,
indeterminate fog fixed and bounded by a slim rail fence,
like the tenuous knots
of abraded bandage, like a prayer, shapely
in its shapelessness.
It was nighttime,
just, the sun gone
and the last shreds of luster
leaching from the trees,
the pale pantheon
gathering in a field before dispersing.
Kind of Blue wafts from the boom box on the moss-covered deck into the tepid breeze of a rare November warmth.
The hip-hopper next door, khaki cargo pants hanging low as the electrical wires behind our homes, emphatically bops
his cornrowed head forever stuck to iPod headphones & sweeps dead leaves
of giant cedars from the concrete patio.
Two rowhouses down, original go-go, chockfull of congas & cowbells, shakes the block like beats from the back
of a souped-up ’74 Impala, rattling
aged windows & weak slat fences.
Mr. Wright fires up the grill one last time
this year. The smoky aroma of barbecued chicken & ribs stirs mouths of passersby to water. He shares the spoils with the Lees
as he has for thirty-six years. They laugh easily in spite of war, endangered generations of youth, prisons stuffed dark with skin,
the demise of music they once slow-dragged or hustled to, & faces changing from familiar neighbors—grandmothers
rearing grandchildren best they can,
World War II vets who flash tattered photos of younger selves in uniform, & Granddaddy
Charles who grows cotton in the front yard because it’s pretty—to the newcomers clinging to cell phones, walking mastiffs,
rollerblading, cycling, jogging,
who never look their new neighbors in the eye, never say hello, & ponder
a block that will someday mirror their skin. The Wrights down beers from the Lees’ icebox & sing to themselves “A change
is gonna come” in mumbled breaths. Chuck’s go-go holler becomes Aretha’s
I Ain’t Never Loved a Man, Bill’s Ain’t No
Sunshine, James’s Please, Please, Please, a rare time in music this whole
block remembers except the children—
hyper on bass-heavy rhythms, wanton materialism, gross braggadocios,
& stripping down of young women—
who’ll never know the art of dancing close & slow at basement rent parties under hazy red lights to Chaka Kahn’s
Sweet Thing, while all the broke-down furniture is piled outdoors to make room for get-down all-night grooving.races them, losing to herself every time: chased by the shades of her, even as she
of lamplight, the Bridge’s sole shadowcaster, she rides by herself through the puddles
When it is early or late enough,
where it glows like a glass pipette. From Canal, she enters the bikeway
empty open of the unmooned sky.
between the black rush of river, the of fragile incandescence suspended
from afar, bead the path into a filament
those anti-crash talismans, which, emit—flashflash of head- and tail-,
distinguishable only by what they
tires. By night, they are depersoned, fixies, suits on foldables with donut-sized brillo-haired hipsters on tricked-out
old men riding children’s bicycles, and varied as insects in the airstream:
By day, its traversers are numerous
in chainlink, diamond-netted. this passage of concrete is cloaked the auxiliary artery lashed to the Bridge,
Then, overnight,
new leaves, their newness
astonishing as a stranger’s trust. And again it seems
possible to live differently, my mind
veined with green as a blackbird chases his shadow
back and forth between the wires. Simplicity,
intention wedded perfectly to action, lines
of current, lines
of flight. The bird, the human
and what the human makes, all hierarchies washed out
beneath the leaves. Until I build them up again.
I have no choice:
I choose. All summer long,
I constellate the shadows as the slur of pollen falls.
Lane edged
with trees at first, and
squares of light that mean
this space is tended. Mean there is intention
here, hands and tools to keep intact.
Expect a tomorrow much like today.
Expect the pact to hold, the sea to stay
in place. Failure to expect: what we
call madness. For example to notice
those birds are not where they are
supposed to be. That disappearance
multiplies. Not only the ordinary
betrayals: we thought we were damned
to live
among traces.
We must live without them now.
It is the strangeness that consoles the oaks along the allée
in the sunlight that stuns all that moves this February morning. They keep their counsel and welcome back the songbirds
and meanwhile know the leaden light will live out its term,
even these peeping creatures once again growing mute.
We all are silent, walking townsfolk, infants in prams, along the cindered paths that follow the frozen river,
the speed skater in her long strides suspended
numb with promise, a statue on the rink in stop-time bent toward the future, aerodynamic arms clasped behind pewter-colored tights molding the thighs and buttocks above the sheer silver plinth.
This smelter’s silence my father would have recognized, raking aside a skim of crusty slag at the open hearth in his thick felt tunic and asbestos mittens,
a molten spark occasionally spitting out
fulvous as this low sun, turning dull as it cooled
into a worm upon the metal-studded gloves, winter or summer he, too, a man of stolid silence, trying to tell me something.
before you leave a place in your dreams it is best,
if you can, to put things back in order behind you: scrub the stain of dried milk from the marble corridor, comfort the girl weeping soundlessly on the low sofa,
try once more to decipher the strewn papers that before skittered from your grasp, look in the mirror again
to see if the nacreous swirl of the void is still there
or if a lifelike portrait of your mother has replaced it,
a charming young lady in low heels moving effortlessly through an otherwise jittery home movie, now fading, the cream-colored silk suit with pink piping at the lapels that for years she kept wrapped in glassine tissue paper disappeared somewhere perhaps your sister can recall
we were at home alone in a very big place and it wasn’t a dream
although everyone wanted it to be, or at least as far as they could see
no, it wasn’t, it wasn’t at all, and it was bigger than you can imagine
and empty although there was a sense of hundreds of others moving there in the night, in the walls, along the attic rafters, among the speckled insects the characters of a multicolored dream, of a raft, an ark, a doomed ocean liner, candles on the table, a string quartet, though none of us, as we said, were dreaming, no, none of us or at least none that we could see alone there in the dark, imagining others’ eyes in the way you do remembering a lover, a dead parent, the smoldering gaze of Dietrich in Der Blaue Engel singing “falling in love again.” you have to understand how big this was and how empty and you will when you remember, uncertain when the night would end never being certain if she could hear you, alone there then long after what you do not know, cannot recall, light so stark it made you blink,
grit of sand on your lips and nostrils, scent of cotton baking in the sun and nothing coming into focus, not even a snake stirring in the scrubby sage, the window fogged with mottled dust, unable to wet your mouth even after a drink of lukewarm water, waiting for what, for someone, or some time after all this when reverie, though not a dream, would be a fit name for it, for this place and time, that is, call it California or Tulsa, Antibes or Paradise, and the year nineteen sixty eight or two thousand and eleven, lucky numbers for someone somewhere if you could only get through to them somehow
Poppy-lick, the rivulet, sky-wet
and Kush-lipped, field-filed, red; redder yet than lips sequestered by the blood of drug, than joy caressed, than pinching fingers snug around the bulb, tighter than regret.
Poppy-lick, the drip-drop, blue-thick, gray-sweat, silver-sliver of a dream-state death threat.
Carry off your brothers in a jug;
splash them on the Panjshir graves you dug,
you dug—you thought you dug one bloody sunset.
Poppy-lick, the mistress, lover, kismet,
wallet-dry and purse-debt, Sufi pirouette, remembrance of passion-past, smoke-fug, deep-draught of red-bloat from sleeping fast, bedbug, wake-thirst and never-sate, this morning-met: Poppy.
With a feather in its arse and a jiggedy bounce, the whale, that tiny fish, creeps up,
his lip the hinge of hell. And a hook,
and a hook in the lip of the whale, and old Johnny, old Johnny remembers, remembers.
A hole in the ground. The first of the month.
A box of raspberries. Send the dog for the cream. Oh sorry, my master, the dog drank the cream, the doggedy dog, four feet up in the air.
Here at the table with the books stacked precariously we think of Kitty and the races on the moon.
Down the moonbeams skitter
the best of all the mice, and each
into the mouse pot glitters and thuds.
Apples will float or sink at the Kitty fair and what is real is all
this spinning in the air. No repeats.
On May 17, 2011, a cashier at a café says this means beautiful. I
do not know this. This is a word from a book I know. Wait, no. No,
it’s not now. I do not know where you got this. Maybe this means transformation. Maybe? No. Not transformation, but when you change. Maybe this means a density of information that has physics. Maybe
it just means entropy like in physics. Like the loss of something. Like energy.
An hour later an architecture student at a technical university says what this means, says this means the opposite is nice. The opposite is nice, or beautiful. Yes, the opposite is beautiful or nice.

Later, a woman next to me on a bus, carrying a child, says growth is nice. But I think there is something nicer than growth going on here.
During lunch the dean of the university says this means the state of change, or a something which changes. It’s reflexive. The whole thing means then that change is beautiful. It’s an important thing, change, more active. More like changing is beautiful, the change in motion, not just passive change, abstract, is beautiful.
May 18, 2011, at a botanical garden near the zoo, I am with the landscape architect who designed the garden. We are under a tree shipped from New Zealand to Berlin as a gecko scurries between us and a group of artists. He says if you write this with a capital letter then it’s subjective, which means that it means being or existing is great. But if you separate the words into two words, it means being here is great. I think it means the big kind of being, because they are together, but it must mean both somehow, big being here is great. It’s not playing correctly, the grammar is not by the rules. Big being is great, beautiful, nice, but it’s not playing correctly in the line.
May 18, 2011, two landscape architects waiting for a lecture say
order is nice. To order. Something ordered.
Later that night during a dinner and after a lecture, a Latin American architect who researches urban drift says this means this: To counterpart is beauty. To duplicate.
Material, material, this means material, like you know, material, just material. Material is beautiful says a woman who runs a research institute in Russia, but lives in Rotterdam, sitting next to me in Zürich at a French restaurant.
On May 19, 2011, a Turkish guy selling slices of pizza says this means energy is beautiful. Energy is energy. Energy is beautiful.
Later that day I am introducing myself to a group of thirty-one young artists and architects. We are sitting in a group together in a park saying where we come from and what possesses us to do what we do. I ask them to help me do the meaning of this one thing as an example of what I do, and they agree this means botanic is beautiful. Botanic like flowers, like trees, like plants live, like from all over, like to study living things from all over. Botanic is beautiful, very beautiful.
On May 20, 2011, a guy fishing for trout on a bridge in the center of the city says Sanskrit is nice, beautiful, like the writing, and nice can mean nice, like casual, or nice can mean beautiful, like beautiful beautiful beautiful.
Later, two giddy Swiss geezers laugh while waiting for the tram, say
this means the opposite is nice. But there’s another way, not only is the opposite of the thing nice, it’s also good for you.
To disappear is nice, a landscape architect says as we stand beside a stuffed owl in a large studio spread out over four cities.
The sausage vendor says it means if you think something wrong, it’s this, but not wrong like a mistake. It’s beautiful to think the wrong things. But why do you do this? Is this very important for your life? I have ideas he says I have ideas.
On the way to the university, I ask an ice-cream vendor if he speaks English after he has been talking to me in English. We laugh at my stupid question, then he tells me what this means. This means meaning is beautiful. But why is meaning beautiful? he asks me. And I feel licked.
On May 21, 2011, around the corner from Café Voltaire, close to a yarn store, an Indian man, after telling me what this means, says I like what this says; I really like what this says: truth is beautiful. But it could also mean reality is beautiful. It means something more philosophical, or a legal clarity of truth, not just big T truth, but something argued, or proven true, true because we proved it by talking about it.
This means the opposite is beautiful, but this also doesn’t mean that too, a gallerist in an empty gallery just killing time says, while curating a performance where one hundred miner’s hats are launched at the same time like fountains into the air.
Near the gate, a man in his late fifties working Information tells me
this means something is beautiful, this is beautiful. I don’t know this exactly, it’s floated. But I think this says the same thing.
“We war,” pricked the heir, skin-bent
on inch loss. “Morgue-and-Shoe!
Toss me a Glock!––yawn––Daisies or geishas?”
Bees click clogs for wagons.
In older war, veal cuts she licked.
Again hulled in bow tea, I tuck hair by the balding seltzer booker.
For sugar, wagons often dart.
Many grab knees to ward off love. Social lists mess scarves,
nick signs, nick art.
I insist in kin, sons. Tunics!
I insist kind bomb! I insist kind salt! I insist eyes in knees!
I creak forward, blink animal eye in man. Shots align the loom. Toss kin
knees. Hares’ eyes light the tomb.
I insist eyes in kin! Sons naked!
I insist kind bomb!
I insist eyes in knees, sons naked.
“Our kid was kissing
the bathroom mirror.” “No, no,” said the boy. “Don’t tell me,” said
the mother. “I’d recognize
those lip prints anywhere.” The boy tried to make
himself smaller by clenching all of his muscles. He crossed his thin arms over his belly to
hold his innards in.
“It wasn’t me,” he said.
The word me was barely audible and his mouth became as dry as a moth.
I thought it was a one-time deal: the kind of humiliation you forget so you can tie your shoelaces and eat something besides Froot Loops
for dinner. But then the technician took the bottle of Windex
and the roll of paper towels from a drawer, tearing off three more
than he actually needed, and said Again? and she, instead of asking him if he’d lift her up from her chair and wipe her clean, instead of extending
her unwholesome arms and letting him touch her like a child would touch a piece of bone in a museum, as if his hand might be withered
by this chance encounter with the imperfect corruption of age, screamed in the direction of the ceiling fan Don’t touch me
and wandered out of the waiting room with her handbag hanging open at her side.
Roast a chicken for 125 hours and you’ll get what her skin looked like.
Comrade from the land of the ailing contaminated confined unwell, we are all moving this way and we are moving forever.
longest living marrieds
the man say dont seem like it
but he say one of the last longest livings gone now it us he say we
the longest living marrieds now
whats your trick he say dont go to bed mad that aint a trick aint a trick to it
stay living stay married stay stay
and you done it a man call you
say now you the longest living marrieds
it hard he say married aint no hard married just staying but staying
aint not leaving to stay you got
to stay man drifting downriver on a log aint leaving that log but he aint stay my man river captain know every stuckup bit of land every eddy
my man stay that river so long times it like he that river married maybe river my man next longest living marrieds
he say you finish each other sentence
how he think that married how he think
I know what my man say man open
his mouth foolish crawl out every day married aint finishing sentences them two Chinese brothers joined at the heart finished they other sentence we seen them up the fair sitting joined walking joined one died right after the other cause they shared blood them boys had no choice they nothing like marrieds
how you do it he say times choose marriage each day some days choose each minute chose it this morning choosing it
right now choosing how he asked said theres many he could choose
and many would choose me I think Lord he going to do it right here atop the colored wheel at Seabreeze
he take my hand and the wheel go up
I see them Chinese brothers and think stuck
he say what you say I think he a river captain he come he go he already choose he choose river he say I choose you you my mountain flower
we top the wheel now I ask him ask right
he say you do me the honor and I think
just now no one know but me
the wheel break over the top stop
look out over Seabreeze
tallest I been since I left home see people I never see again I say yes
he say yes that wheel start down
he say seeing them joined boys good luck this time wheel go round dont stop
man today say tell everyone
your story I say we atop a wheel
and I seen it all he say Zelmyra
say yes I say yes
and the big wheel spin top the fair
I seen it all ocean mountain river swamp yes the wheel go round while you sit still
Oh Lord yes it most certainly
do yes it still do
My neighbor stands on a ladder high enough to serve tea
on her roof. It’s seven a.m.
and she’s seventy-three. She rakes down ice and snow, wrangling potential disasters before
I’m even awake. Months
from now, when my front steps have lost all definition,
I’ll end up sliding
over to her house for salt.
I’ll knock late for a casserole dish.
One night I’ll make seven trips
back and forth to thaw out my back door, her teapot steaming.
The day my mother was bowled over by the neighbor’s black and white miniature staked in the field was a day of clarity and a tidy loop
like that of an owl, or an ice rink, or hair being braided.
I found her in a quiet, violet gray at one end of the couch. No light was on her.
The years I spent in the mountains left me unable to recover her face. A sliver I could grasp at a time, phases of it like a moon’s,
but never the thing whole.
There is something we take from the violet hour because we need it, and everything we take resembles what we took before.
I thought it was maybe her own father’s death that left her subdued those hours normally kept for us, our supper, our pain. She said she tried to hug its neck, to bury her face in the mane.
And the whole time we fished, wishes
lined up the way shadows
refuse to. It ended up being the perfect time
for them to do this; we were all still
remembering ourselves as a family, and the light was as it is when you trust it will hold something,
good enough to know you may have had something but lost it. Certainty always stands closest
to no thing we have.

1
Awaiting test results, I dust
each studded fruit, each mini-masterpiece

of bead and sequin pierced by pins 
and nailed to shapes of orange, apple,

plum. I use an old Electrolux, attach 
the dusting brush, distract myself,

deep breathe. The apple’s crowned 
with a plastic molded leaf-and-stem

the exact opaque olive green
of my brother’s sack of army men,

the ones, when bored with battle strategy, 
we’d string up and dangle, man by man,

above a fire kindled between privet hedges 
until all poses melted. My brother’s brilliance:

making sound effects to match each burning 
liquid death. Inside, the aunts were bayoneting

plastic oranges with silver pins, while we, 
safe in a green thicket, marveled at the varied

shapes our torture and disfigurement 
could make. No two men died alike.

2
What were 
those women 
thinking, 
powdered, 
perfumed, 
girdled, 
thimbled,
punctuating 
private talk 
with tiny 
hammer taps, 
brows softly 
furrowed
as pink
polished thumbs 
bore fiercely 
down?
Admit. Admit. 
Just need
to fix
in place,
hold tight, 
secure, make 
beauty stay 
by making 
beauty hard 
and faceted, 
no corruption 
so no 
nourishment 
and nothing 
ever to be 
bitten into, 
sparkling 
wholes.

punctuating private talk with tiny hammer taps, brows softly furrowed
as pink
polished thumbs bore fiercely down?
Admit. Admit. Just need
to fix
in place,
hold tight, secure, make beauty stay by making beauty hard and faceted, no corruption so no nourishment and nothing ever to be bitten into, sparkling wholes.
3
The silver pins begin to gleam.
An unexpected shine that makes me think

of Saint Sebastian—arrows shot through flesh
the way the silver pierces ruby bead to shiny dish,

drives, spikes them into the form.
Impaled, Sebastian lived; that was his miracle.

Until they killed him more dependably: his body 
beaten, body dumped down a Roman privy shaft.

Held to the light, this jeweled apple beams. 
Turn it inside out: the world’s a globe of nails.

4
I line up rhinestoned
	peaches, purple beaded

grapes, the scarlet plum
	with darker scarlet cleft,

a ruby apple, gilded pear 
	along the shallow sill

of my sun-struck kitchen window 
	a chorus line of pastied

Vegas showgirls, sparkling
	beneath the cotton curtain,

and the ordinary kitchen sink,
	the shelves, the wooden floor

go dizzy, shine with jazz flash 
	colored star-flecks all slow

dancing to the ticking
	of the ordinary clock and still

the room fills up with how
	the telephone won’t ring.

The old wagon became a sexual being

reminding of its history as trees, the wood steamed
and giving way, the wood measured by hands, turned
on a lathe, the wood fitted and driven into place,
the axle under the breast still lithe, the tongue still reaching out for a team.

The sweet bright black flesh of earth 
was an ear we listened to

as it listened.
Are you speaking of us, we asked.

In it a scent of rope and garments, carob, the threshing machine.

We held the reins, the fences held the fields’ hands, 
in them the scent of eggshells, fish, the sea.

Leather stretched taut rubbed on the bit, 
the britchen, the bells.
The furrow rushed over
our feet, a wave of sepia milk,

in it the scent of ink and beaks,

the voice of the sky,
the voice of the ground, 
the voice of the sky,
the voice of the ground.

O raven, O blackbird, O crow,
we only accused you of what we also were.

The honey and the onions spoke:

I am wrapped in my own skin.
I am wrapped low down, around a branch of oak.

I rise up from underground, drawn by the sun. 
I was celebrated before they took the comb.

I cast a reddish, purplish hue.
I have been eaten by animals quickly, bursting with bees.

Drying on barn boards, you’d think I was a group of forgotten travelers. 
In those hexagons there is perfect memory.

Unwrapping me you might expect a center.
I am a tent built around the scent of a small queen’s body.

I am pages of water.
I connect the buckwheat blossoms to each other.

Yes, said the grass body,
I carry my psalm in your palm.

The logging scoot 
used in spring to drag 
woods to the mills:

its big wood thighs—pale in that sunlight 
that snuck through darkest branches— 
pinned together and chained up, the peavey 
driven in to rest there,

it told the story of body weight, 
dragging nights through mud,

an image we hitched ourselves to and pulled, 
an image that pulled us,
an image we hitched ourselves to and pulled, 
an image that pulled us.
Though the cord of chopped wood spoke two languages, 
one of silver maple trees, one of fire,

it was the language of the stove that saved us,

the iron house,
the ashes we carried from it,

that rocking chair.

The doors to the barn were never completely shut, propped
from swinging open by a board, the old wood sagging
and the hinges bent, a wreath of wind in the rafters. The sound
of snow on the roof said to the mouse, fox, or tramp who’d slipped in 
through those cracks and found grain and nested in the eaves;

the sound of snow
on the roof said to anyone who listened:

no one possesses the kingdom of dust.

A punt in the field quietly went to pieces,
a rowboat next to the grain silo,
one oar left, took on moss, letting go,
a dory tucked into the eaves of the barn
floated on the sun coming into the hay in the loft 
like bright green seawater,

though the only water for miles around 
was in the spring-fed trough
and in the spring itself.

The horses shifted their weight to different hooves, 
the cat knocked over a clay pot

to the gale of barn swallows.

Rows of old silken women
on the winter cornfield
smiled their two-toothed cobs,
they held brown flags, mauve and beige flags.

The train rushed past.
They said, You are that strong. The tassels moved in the wind, 
singing want

is a delicacy, always, further— 
Bear witness.
Apples prepare.
Windows lie open.
He grooms the strands of my hair,
does not know me,
or hear the pain inside my body, the slow tear.
Our faces, close in the dimness.
It is pleasure and pain and I do not know the difference.
I am fourteen, a boy, and the bed is a square of ripped moonlight. Afterward, the wing-tipped blades of his shoulders rise,
the bathroom door opens slowly inward.
I see my relief in the mirror,
turn to the windows—
a field of tall grass, the orchard’s breeze, and stars.
A fin alters the mood of the lake.
The moon becomes a loose stitch on the water.
I close my eyes. Imagine my body buckle
inside the rim of reeds.
My nerves ripple like the hooked jaw of a fish.
What is lies flat on the tongue:
A bruised apple is worthless.
A drop of blood ruins sheets.
I count backward until he falls asleep,
draws the covers, his back to me.
Moths bang the screen.
Moisture they cannot shake clings to them.
In the morning, they break in my hand.
I brush them off the sill, ride my bicycle home.
Years before you were gone, I buried your uniform
in a chest camouflaged as a scarab, its wings latched.
Now, I can’t find it anymore. I should have memorized the atomic number of sidewalks, the gender of doors
on Pahlavi Street, walked between news columns, read the vines scrawled on the brick wall.
But I don’t trust flat surfaces;
from a distance everything turns scenic.
I know the earth is round, and if we continue falling, the afternoon’s revolution never grows cold.
The yellow oaks are wounded;
their fruits surround them like shotgun shells.
I put one against my ear to hear the penance of the forest. I track the footprints on the blackboard’s plain,
round up the shadows peeled off branches. I must have been a great collector once.
In the cellar hides a clutch of bandaged boxes with open mouths, we recognize them by their exuviae.
Someone said they identified you by your blue socks
and porcelain inlays. The ants must have heard. They came in.
Their excuse is that they can’t rest in the compound light outside. The fig trees in the cabal stopped delivering fruits.
The terrace watching over the pond is getting smaller.
I’m going back today with my chemistry set devising a playground
for dew worms and Bedouin snails. Surely they can find you among weeds in the sandpit, the briary fleece of the hills.
Like a feather descending
in its back-and-forth motion,
slow twirl down to one
end of a balance, and that end begins to sink—
but so slowly that days pass,
an unscrolling of weather,
the view out the same window
over a series of months:
trees burst in lime-green flowers
so tiny that three or four buds
could rest on the tip of your thumb, and then come rainy days,
darker leaves, and brightness expanding like the yawning
of one just woken—
everything unfolding, changing.
And now you find it is
autumn, and somewhere
inside is a difference. A quiet, monumental thing, difference.
Some dream had long
seemed foundation wall
to a structure you’d hoped to build— a Jeffersonian grandness.
You’d imagined marble, imagined columns. But now it is you
who seem to find the structure
more trouble than it’s worth, you who might just, you decide, be
okay without so much grandiosity. You even surprise yourself
with that word, grandiosity,
with its undertone of mocking.
What was it? A word, a look
from a man that wasn’t—
you realized a moment too late— directed at you. A small, casual failure that added its name
like another entry on a long
petition. No one, not even you
heard the creaking sweep,
the rusted iron gate
of your will. Though afterward, at the window, you may
have wondered what bird dropped that feather—
though so long ago now there’s no telling what kind,
or on its way to what country.
Dry branches rasp a high violin whine,
a keening lean and hungry as the cat that spins the thin lines of its cries through the morning. Sun fires the tops of trees into a web of flames
I would cup my hands around
if I could reach the branch crests.
Each flat surface—the planar ground unwound from the trees’ femoral trunks, the dry backs
of my hands—collects light like ice,
and from the long-fingered branches
frost scripts its hard name against every window. Overhead the smoke of the day’s first planes chars pale scars. All the ground bone-brittle, prone to shatter, birds startling in short bleats
of flight, breaking fragmented from undergrowth and right now I would rise and walk
without stopping toward the first voice I heard.

The bee claws into touch-me-nots,
the mouth a flame against the orange of it. And the mind stops its minding.
The legs hold up the butt-end
to the flower. Why not stay?
the bee asks as the dusk comes.
Why not stay inside the orange mouth
above the fleabane, balling up
inside a horn of plenty. Mornings I find
such bees. Half in, half out.
The body in the mouth from which it drank. Morning night-damp still. I shake the bush
of touch-me-nots, I make a blaze of them against the cold. The bee holds fast, is drunk.
My friend says, I feel better knowing there’s a bridge just a mile away, and I understand what she means about last resorts,
about the call of the water, why it’s not the direction
she drives on nights when only the car’s engine and its wheels
over gravel will soothe the baby, finally, to sleep.

Sometimes, I stand outside myself watching. The boy says,
I want a peanut butter bar, which we don’t have, and I tell him this in the voice I usually reserve for company or home
movies, but this time I’m offering it generously, lovingly,
to make up for my lack of forethought at the store.

I use it five times, and when he says, for the sixth time, I want a peanut butter bar, I lean into his face, close enough to kiss, and feel the words We don’t have any fucking peanut butter bars press from between my teeth. And when he starts to cry,
I feel happy. I feel relief. When I say I understand why that woman

took a hatchet to the children and then herself,
I mean to scare you. I mean to scare myself. There is so much we don’t have enough of. There is so much they want.
You've had plenty of time to perfect your slouch over the molded moss-back of plastic chairs, folding yourself rendshadowed into the arms of your hoodie like a necklace of weathertorn bones dropped by some careless angel.

Time is not what concerns you.

It hovers like your dry swallowed pulse in the yawn of pharmacy counters lined by last year's frosted tinsel,
the vacant hope only adults cling to with their high-pitched snapdragon lips and the sour aftertaste of regret.

Pity is only one part nausea. The rest is mirror, or
rather the chalk outline of its missing shards. I know how it follows you, with its ripper stealth and whole tone footsteps, the way daybreak chases a sundial gnomon toward eyelash.

It oak rings your face with its echo, slips only stale apologies onto your finger.

So when you tell me it's pointless,
how can I argue with someone who learned to write their epitaph before their name?

And when you wide-angle this world, comb cloudburst to find Jacob's Ladder descending into a lover's quarrel of sewer grates, when you capture the emulsion of its stagnant puddle water and speak the mothertongue of ashtrays, as if no other language could spin silk strong enough to hold you,

This is how life revolving doors into unblinking cell phone lights, the stiff rash of hospital sheets and so many crumpled Dixie cups of time you did not ask for.

Dark charms the anchor in its house

of water, and what type of bottom
does it drag, for what type of work, for you,

with your need to stay in roughly the same place

for a night, with your questions of how much to let out
and how well your windlass works

and how you feel sometimes hauling 
200 foot of chain by hand in the dark,

wondering what in your life sent you

here, where the world exists as much 
below you as above, where you are

as much the chain as the chain.
Flies wake themselves from the end we believe we’ve witnessed

and buzz winter out of their bone. They live again

and for what? To blink against the window over

and over, the tirade of their want a reminder of what lives in me

and, therefore, my son, in you. This glissando ligature that 
	belongs to the mouth

and the ear. But more so to water, for it is all

and. We bathe in it, carried on the backs of ghosts

and gods. How gently it lifts

and drowns, while something in us wakes

and, to the glass we do not know is there, takes us full force 
	onward, glistening with hum

and furthermore.
We can no longer stand in the clearing, in the naked woods, Letting the Oregon mist seep through our clothes—
Our father, under his green afghan, is summoning Hubbard, Blue Spirits, as though to make us face ourselves (Swollen-eyed, ill-shaven) in the plastic slips of his records. Ashbery said, “We live in the sigh of our present”—
But we can no longer even believe in time: we are kneeling In our bedroom, thumbing through album covers;
At the same moment, we are slogging through delphiniums To see our father, silhouetted, practicing Hsing I,
On a wooden bridge. Ah, here it is, Blue Spirits. Our father Lifting one liver-spotted hand as the needle falls
Into the groove, as the wide leaves flush too soon, too soon. Can we turn back later, after he has died, to live
With silence and black coffee, to amble over the stone path In our sockfeet, our threadbare robe, considering
Our next unpredictable gesture, like hacking up firewood On a floor of mirrors? The question is ridiculous—
We can no longer leave this house, this music; we will live Beside him, on this folding chair, reading Auden.
Even in Poros, years later, grating lemon over grilled squid, We will prop him up to watch reruns of Bonanza. Meanwhile, we are listening to Hubbard, whose music fills This house and this house alone, though we hear,
Under a sun-reddened parasol, for example, faint overtones That make us close our eyes. Our father is dying—
Nothing stopping it. Yet here he is, for the moment, patting The green afghan, his once-heroic legs, standing
Moreover in an abandoned farmhouse: the sound of a horn Lost among the rooms, the nothingness of rooms,
And we can no longer find it for him, our father: he is gone.

how quick the plummet : moon-sharp
the flint-sparked air : our river crackling
on the full extreme of the tide : how pristine 
this burden : snow coiled like a widow’s shawl 
about the shoulders of the world : how

numbly we face this whiteness : its weather-worn 
scars : our fading trajectories : like scavenging 
deer : and into it all this rodent-thought
creeps its way out of troubled sleep :
a crosshatch of tunnels : vascular runs

where hunger follows blindly on hunger : 
gnaws every tender tendrilling : brutal
and indifferent : like beauty : like this night’s 
shimmered desolations : like a body : blanketed 
yet beneath : so nakedly vulnerable :

how inexorable these silent turnings : as one
from a window : back toward the darkened room :
and returning : the thought : of you : downed in sleep : 
as the tide of a sudden snaps the solid mask of things :: 
how quick the widdershins flesh tinders into flame.

Atascadero Lake’s face is a graveyard of names.
An aluminum boat loafs dumbly upon her cheek: a blemish.

Weeds grow out of the trunk of a junked Cadillac. By a clot of bodies— Water, car, human—this is my body worn down.

			I urge

Like a farm boy over-rubbing cob corn in butter 
For rough sex with China or Germany

In the bucket of a tractor, but I don’t want to.
						And I am a man.
I am a man with breasts who loves a woman

With her head shaved. The sun skids away on a boat trailer. 
Bats draw circles of black on the mouth.

I stand for the length of a cigarette outside 
The country of my sex.
The day was too bright at the abandoned café 
scoured clean by April wind as you held my hand

almost lovingly and said, Maybe we should see other 
people, and suddenly there they were, absentminded

in their mismatched clothes, all around us, the people 
we had been unable to see until that point

because we had been so involved in seeing one another. 
But then your words conjured them from the very air,

these other people we so clearly needed to begin seeing 
if we didn’t want to keep fooling ourselves, which was

another phrase you used, and I suddenly understood 
why I sometimes felt oddly wooden, like a poorly hinged

door when I leaned in to kiss you—it had to be that 
elderly woman with the permanently puckered mouth

and cardigan laced with cat hair who stood like a shadow 
behind your right shoulder, fiercely glaring and happy

to finally be making eye contact with me after so many 
futile attempts to serve as your matronly avenger.

Why she was holding an enormous scythe I cannot say, 
any more than I could pronounce the surname of the

Estonian mechanic who stood so patiently beside her, 
hefting a lightly oiled wrench in one grimy hand.

I rose in what I hoped was a dignified manner and strode 
out through the gathering crowd, shaking hands with

the blacksmith sporting muttonchops and a svelte man 
in suede boots and a remarkably slimming goatskin vest,

when it occurred to me that the fluttery pain near my heart 
was not sadness but relief at no longer being so utterly alone.
You kept saying 
I was frigid

but when you 
finally passed out

I took off my sweater 
and made a pillow 
for you
(knitting needles chatter)
. . . and she never draws her curtains shut
of an evening!

(knitting needles chatter)

Christ almighty, I can’t be bothered 
to look over there . . .

(knitting needles chatter)

Me neither!

(knitting needles chatter)

. . . but the light’s always burning.
what is the impulse
	tell me something
lies, more often than not
I started out wanting truth, got 
caught up in bedsheets, tangles of 
fireworks are exploding
they sound like bombs
	make a shelter
out of words (that is not the impulse)
or maybe it is     to construct
a thing more protective
than beautiful     they are crackling
across the sidewalk, popping
their small red bodies against the concrete
	at first, I thought North Korea
I started out attacking
a problem of intent, but got back somehow to form, structure
being a choice I wanted to nail down
a man who used the word casual
as definition, though it meant
he was tearing out the heads
with the back of a hammer
I wanted to wrench up any loose verbs
	just wanted to talk
it was true, back then, or it seemed true 
but listen: firecrackers pattering
in the distance     we are being
orchestrated        first violin in a symphony 
of self-pity        wires strung across the sky
at appropriate tautness, plucked, sing 
little telephone songs, digital signals 
he pulled out all the connections
this is not a violin
it is explosions
little red papers, charred at the edges 
noise for a new beginning
	(I don’t want to be casual) 
noise for a blueprint
pour it into small containers, let it harden 
I am harder when I do not allow
for beauty           she is such a casual bitch
she tears up hammers with her teeth
spits them out, desiccated red nails
they clatter against the sidewalk
in the distance hands are exploding uncertain applause

Dear Herman I am good here. 
Camels walk about my sandy 
bones. Also trees of licorice, 
Kate Moss, and a wet corner
of the world that I cannot name 
called my cunt. Herman, why 
are you so called? Such a name 
belongs only to old gray tires. 
When they spoke to me
I could not hear over the roar
of Herman, Herman, Herman— 
their leather leaves now roasting
in the fire, their voices 
now bleating at the blackness
that sheathes the slept-away day.
I trialed and traded carefully
cut curtains and long
delight-filled pisses on the side
of the country road for
a plumb fuck from you:
we shaking car window,
we traveling in the grille
of open smiles. Herman.
My spitting crater. I smoke
out the grasshoppers here
in the hammock—flat
on my broken back—my neck 
enthrottled in the tender fist
clamp of the sun. I saw
one shadowy person here
in this snow Herman and
she spoke of you
with a red word or two
and I saw my tangle of whiteness— 
that was slippered onto me
by these streets and cemetery
eyes. Here the birds two-step 
rather than fly. Here Angela
Davis laughs in my float-
about face, my fist
held high. Here the wetness
will not come forth
in the cavern—the fleas 
are drowning the pears 
are waiting for their 
silver green dive.
In the slash of rain is a lamb 
strung apart through a mess 
of barbed wire.

And I saw it. 
No.
I see her.
Red, wet guts, 
and white.

The dogs not startled, hanging 
barely at bay.

There is,
as you know, already nothing 
to be done.

I am hiding. 
From my father. 
Up the mountain. 
I am hidden
and the cries 
overcome me.

No way to cut open 
and run.    We all

stumble:    out
holding our dear
guts in our hands. And always

the teeth
that near and near.

And always the watchers 
who do nothing.

Nothing now 
to be done.
We’d been sitting I don’t know 
how long, candles having that 
effect on time, when you leant

across & said, What the country 
needs is a servant class.
			Words 
that pushed me back in my seat.
No, you said, I mean an actual

class like a school, where we’d 
all learn to serve. There’d be 
whole semesters devoted to

waiting your turn or bowing or 
scrubbing a patch of red carpet. 
People would be graded on

not asking about their grades. 
What do you think?
			I thought 
we’d been here quite a while
without seeing a menu. Then

I remembered how late it was, 
we were in a barn, the table 
between us a bed of straw.

I thought you said you love 
the coal train’s horn
	the loneliest monk 
playing piano  Such distinct
sounds   I had to wonder how 
you knew to love them

In the beginning was the whir 
I thought you said & the whir 
was good

Didn’t you say     each verse 
should end on a pyramid
			Now 
the crowds are coming home
Cross our eyes & dot our lines 
I could swear you said the time 
was wow
	the time handsome
Hark that horn    the monk’s 
lonely fingers    Doesn’t it just 
break your harp
		None of us 
will be re-embered
Free alas  you said  free alas
Tuesday
you were falling
wetly falling
wetly Tuesday
Tuesday you were falling 
you were falling wetly

and you heard those horns
and those horns were gold like gold horns 
and those horns you gold were falling wetly

and the boy who helped with helped arms
gold horns falling wetly and you saw the boy with gold wetly arms

who without gold without horns was without wetly falling gold 
	fell with you
	Walking through the withered 
garden, I was snatched up

	to the fourth heaven? By a fireball 

with talons? Up a shaft of molten light

	breaking through the clouds?

		How to tell 
	of being watched, prodded,

		watched on a cold table?
	Were those wings or 
your three-fingered hands, webbed,

		brushing against each of my vertebrae? 
			“Don’t ask questions,” you said.
				Lemon scent. 
			Terror—
		then then and and . . .
			Then the orgasm: for once,
					a plateau stretching
		for hours, not my usual spike
	and descent into drowsy shame. Your wet almond-eyes,
were they goggles? Your forehead to mine, 
	my eyelids were gone?
		You told me—what was me?— 
	“Many have come in my name
saying, I’ll take you Home.”
	Your body, the mantis of it,
		wasn’t a gloryland.
	Still, I said, “Save us.” 

And I found myself back in the garden,
the soil cracked and burned
	around me, the old fig tree
gone. From the water pump, 
two lizards were watching me?
		I pinched my nose 

	to stop the bleeding.
A dead man talks through my mouth. His guttural bass joins the high chatter of my grandmother and aunt whose words cough chimney smoke. Here comes the child I lost before she breathed and a man who trills the names of birds: star, star, starling, he chips his way through my teeth. Mother may I cut out my tongue. The saddest noise, the sweetest noise. Please, please, she keens.
Let the man in velvet be velvet. Let me not mar that perfect dream. Let the words not be particulate and full of bite. Let the worms not feast. Let the oily slip of their flesh know salt. Let the salt know each of their names. Let their rigorous muscles rigorously unthread. Let each of their coils wring each of their necks. Let suffocation be slow. Let their kingdom stop churning, let their kingdom be still. And my father whole again.
We bow our heads and burn. Heat scalding the back of our necks, singeing our crowns. The sun opens over us. The sun wants to burn us into the ground. Scent of soil, glittering, cloying, sick with goodbyes. We swelter, wither, prayer stuck in our parched mouths. Birds descend, declaim their Tunes—piercing us with bright cries. Cardinals streak the day with blood. We follow our sad shadows, swallow our tongues. We are done. We are done. We are done.
It didn’t care what happened, came
and went. The past it took me back to dressed differently, had fresher faces.
A hill rose steeply between two houses
that, except for one, no one lived in.
The street was paved with unmowed grass. How can a thing be so exact
and patched together out of scrap,
pieces of wind, and bric-a-brac?
A few of which, it’s true, had clung
to one another once, but not
much better than the flung water
dream resembles, if not is.
I found her in the house alone,
and when I tried to talk as though
the past might be forgotten, she
touched something, smiled, and turned away. As did the dream, which came too close
to how things had been to survive.
1
City of rivers
Witnessing its dissolution Years later he would say
Among buried fragments
Pieces of sculpture
Lost melancholy clearness of space
A bed. Washbasin. Desk and chair. His room that winter, drafts
Piled in drifts, sounds of the stones Settling into their own traces.
There is an emptiness now
That touches all things. If you are quiet You can almost hear it
The barn, alone in the ploughed fields. First winter snow sifting down.
2
Not to illustrate
The thing itself, but to illustrate The impossibility of illustration
Ornaments on the archivolt
Lanterns hanging over the water at night The statue of the lion
Lifted over the square, St. Theodore Said to have stood there
Staring across the Lido
When the piazza was just a scrub
Of grassy plain
Lapped by water, unable to support a rafter, a stone.
Now lavished upon walls
Whose foundations are beaten by the sea
This morning
It is the furthest thing away.
3
At night, from the smoking ruins Of the city, on rafts
No one would miss them If they drowned
Tonight, each house
Becomes an island. The snow outside Its sea. The red house
And the yellow house, the port With its ships
4
In Room 42 at the Grand Hotel He wrote the opening
To his life’s work
The greatest thing
Is to see something, and to tell What one saw
And to see clearly Is poetry
White lines
Stenciled against
The black bark of trees, sun
Falling in patches, gleams Over the dusty snow.
So the world
For a moment, mirrors My grief.
It does not make anything easier.
5
Simple and tender Effort to recover
Voice bent on saving Something it is unable to save
Pathless, comfortless, infirm
Voice unwilling to accept
What rises beneath its own utterance
Silence
Can I say it now,
That she did not always Lead a happy life?
O world, Canals of light rivering
Through the broken arms of trees,
There is a spot
On the other side of darkness That will not wash away
In this season the world is composed
of absence: black, which is the color
of no-light, and white, which is the color
of blank. By world I mean this snow,
these woods, this bleak sky, this mute roar, which is the afterlife of sound.
By absence I mean abstraction, this black brook as diagonal gash, these slim
trees as lines, vertical, monotonous, impossibly interchangeable. By abstraction I mean meaning, I mean human longing,
I mean loneliness accreting as quiet
on quiet, as white on bluish white.
Rain in the gutters, rain in the sea. A man stands at an intersection, his red umbrella broken by wind,
and everything seems temporarily permanent, a color of moment and weather.
There’s hope maybe in this,
or in watching plump orange koi
swimming at local Japanese gardens. I watch their slow, hibernating circles, as if x equals x,
as if from a certain distance lily pads are also stones and a child leaning toward the water’s edge,
searching for frogs,
is a strand of cattail bent to the tilt of its lean.
I can go a relatively short distance
and find other versioned localities—
grocery checkout line, jicama and sprouts,
or the fox-glow of an afternoon, its near privacy opening,
expanding into June. Once while looking out a train window,
I saw a woman standing in a grassy lot. The train had stalled, another stop, small towns in Illinois,
and she was combing her hair—
there, where her back turned at an angle toward the tracks,
where the curve of her hair met the curve
of her arm lifting,
and the wing of the comb
summered at the tip of dusk. What do I think when I feel it?
When something’s very near, when glass breaks in the sink or on the floor—
maybe that’s the crux of it, resurfaced again, an old table. Maybe that’s proximity, released.
These lights I turn off at night, in the morning they’re all turned on. I’ve forgotten all my bravery.
Once beyond the field behind my house I found an abandoned well covered in old planks,
a blanket of moss and pine mulch. I could
not see to water but inhaled the rot
and wet and thought it might go down forever, curve into a belly like the long plumed throat of a loon. Stone after stone I dropped into the earth, and listened.
No splash, no thud, no clack and clatter.
Amid the pines and calls of birds, only the low
long breathing of a boy, the swallowing of stones.
Stripped of its cutout clothes the paper doll stammers
its insecurities. The indifferent child throws
its crinkled body who-knows-
where. From some forgotten corner it clamors to uncrumple itself. It hammers
its paper fists against the walls, but the blows
are futile. One would suppose
the child would hear the paper cries,
recognize the naked woes.
But he doesn’t. He lies
on the bed and coughs and cuts out paper tears to paste in the corner of his eyes.
The doll, who hates to hear the boy sad, rips off its own ears.
No less eagerly did the second jet that morning vanish into pillars of fire and smoke,
no more silently did global warming
strike, or avian flu, or all of Lake
Geneva, WI, get swept up by the rapture—
oh wait, that last one hasn’t happened yet,
but mark my words: In vain we tried to capture our elusive lives, the Doomsday Clock reset.
Bin Ladens in the dark caves of your afghans, beware: Don’t think I can’t unstitch you here. (Or “uncrochet”—is that a word?) The hands
of time will find you like a drone (to mix
my metaphors), bust your bunker, fix
your wagon: There’s no nostalgia for next year.
With scissors & Samson, see. With columns, see, see also. With gunpowder, my liege.
With rusted nail heads, see. With ball bearings, see. With broken razors & razor wire, page.
With darts, seized. & screws, see. & with shrapnel. With pipe casings, seamed. C4. See rage.
On foot, page. By explosive belt, see. Satchel charge, see. And also see. By car & by cage.
By submarine, sea. In the flesh, see. By mule, page. By baby carriage. By bicycle, see. By plane.
With shard & with shell. Innovations of projectile. Asymmetrical, viz. edged.
For disambiguation, see Mother of Satan. Cf. skin to kin.

The latest on the road from nowhere is your going
and coming out the end of it, somewhere near Ithaka. Cavafy said, do not seek riches in Ithaka, for once
you get there, Ithaka will only be Ithaka, and you
will be the man who went on the road to Ithaka,
who survived his own desire for Ithaka and found himself at the other end of desire, still alive, somehow,
and capable of making the little fog breaths.
On the road, I wanted Ithaka and its Cyclops. I wanted, somehow, to be defeated by the road. Instead I am the road defeating the Cyclops and Ithaka, defeating most noble desire itself. Alone with this wanting nothing but the road.
One of us asked what we could expect
from whatever might come next, but the person
with the loupe wasn’t there, so we walked the sidewalks home, swept the stairs of our entries,
and waited. Later, someone thought to see
whether a building was still standing,
and while we nearly agreed it was,
the person with the loupe was needed to confirm—
we could not be accurate to the same degree
as the person with the loupe—how much the wind
had eroded the building, the wear
from pigeons’ feet, whether the brick
could stand up to whatever time was left.
We should ask the person with the loupe.
The person with the loupe is always invited.
The person with the loupe squints
from so much looking through.
The person with the loupe prefers stillness in order
to achieve accuracy. This makes it difficult
to keep up on things. The person with the loupe
is still working on last year, says
Each calendar day has a square the size
of all the others. But the days, we recall,
seemed otherwise. Some shifted long while others
shadowed fast. Nevertheless, says the person with the loupe. Therefore, we answer back. The person
with the loupe gets the front seat. And is looking at something we cannot see from here. We are very far
away. We have always been very far away.
The keeper’s a liar. He tells me:
“Steer away!”
Next I find
he himself hasn't
steered away.
He's steered ho.
Or whatever he's likely to call it being that he’s
a counterfeit seaman. It’s his wife
who draws
all the ships.
Dazzling as a sunflower, she thinks it's funny
to shut off the light
at the worst moments.
He lets her.
Thus, all the sinking and giggling. I ask him why he lets her.
He shrugs,
then strikes a match and bids me stare into the flame
until it burns
his thumb and finger.
Smoke wisps upward.
“See?” he demands.
We can excuse the apprehension 
over places with names
like Reactor Field, can push

back against tales of mutant 
neon squirrels, but a horse— 
a perfect horse—no, we fall

down here. One of the workers 
tells me it was buried in ’72. 
Four decades in the ground

and it looks like it could trot
over and lick my hand. Perhaps
this has nothing to do with the radio-

activity used at this test facility. 
Perhaps this was merely a horse 
saint—some whinnying martyr.

That makes it a relic. That makes 
this holy ground. But more likely 
something smaller than the microbes

that eat the dead is eating the microbes 
that eat the dead. One decay in the way 
of another. I wonder if these suits

provide enough distance, or if we, 
too, are becoming permanent. Toy 
people to ride this toy steed.

The order is given to bury
it again. Maybe this is taxidermy. 
Maybe we’re already the museum.
Her hair at midnight shines
like the butcher’s block. Margarete 
wipes the light from her forehead.

Who beheaded the century? 
Windows invite
the stars for supper.

War situates the split tongue
in the cellar. Margarete tucks half 
into her apron, the other—still

breathing—flaps on the kitchen floor. 
The horrors of metamorphosis—carry 
something, carry meaning. Margarete

carries her boulder lips like a goddess. 
And the knife, like exile, leaves
a gash in the psalm of bread.
Tonight we are cigarette, bullet 
cheeks. A house stocked with beans,

babies. Dried leaves motorcycle 
in our lungs. Tongue-told I am

your dog of noise. The forest knows:
when in god, grow ash.

But we grow caterpillars in the head, 
smoke a mouth full of life and hot

waiting. We are the bread
and the flour. In this metal house

we ripen, ripen. The first god 
was the first human down.
Hail mauling the deck. Jeannette a clutch 
of broken notes pitched

against a sky, lit by ice.

By aurora red so sinister, the whole 
ship wrapped in its gauze,

a city on fire.

We were prism-led before the pack. 
Now our days are dull. Dull

and bludgeoning, the snow

robing every spar and rope, snow 
neither one thing nor the other.

Jail gray. Gales broiling.

We tilt northwest, past Wrangel. 
The top of the world

scalped—razor cut

and some mornings extravagantly clear. 
We move in every direction

we never meant to.

So clear, my voice booms.
So clear, why don’t you hear me.
Repose of fog, static wreathing leaden 
blocks of downtown, the skyline dribbles 
halfway up a husky-necked corvine tank: 
black onyx, glass slats pierce the grisaille 
of Chicago, midmorning.

Months beyond the topping out, beyond 
Watergate and black hole theory, the city 
demurs, still raises its eyes for the source 
of such shadow: entire avenues knuckle 
under glacial chill,

midtown walks now more terse, more 
crouched. The American Dream staked 
this titan—one hundred ten stories 
staggering after the screech in sales, the 
blurt into heaven

so clouds divide: dirk of ash spotted with 
rhinestone sweat. All this from catalogs
of saddles and wallpaper swatches, from 
three years of railing a hole wide as a grave- 
yard (and as dug up)

into South Wacker. Till one tar stalk finally 
distends: Graham’s prediction of the ’80s, 
the ’90s, etc.—the glossed hearse blacker 
than gravity, spate of steel and aluminum 
skin that rises with

the confidence of the elected, oil-slicked 
javelin ramming right into heaven as if only 
to announce the vacancy. More wind
from Chicago, we hear New Yorkers spit,
and Porkopolites roll

their eyes, pour every blue chip onto their 
Reds. The workers the worst: declaring 
offices cold, oppressive, and the lobby
a curdling mire. True, the wind would slice
windows at their centers,

and pedestrians were lost in the pother
of a fallen girder. Beyond a certain floor 
you can see the toilet water tremor, hear 
the coffee slosh. Only a few brownbaggers 
dot the nine-barreled

base at lunch, but scores of tourists pad in, 
cameras bumping their chests like second hearts. 
It’s their twenty minutes on deck (guessing at 
Michigan, waving to an uncle in Lansing)
that make the renovations

worth it, the ghosted lower levels okay. 
So Illinois floods with coruscating excess. 
So we bow our heads under the wave
of it, thinking excess to be inaccessible, 
but of course it is—

That’s capitalism: records always broken, 
trophies gleaming and rusting almost at once; 
this record’s wraith fluting along the highest 
fused beam, tapping along to the antennal 
ruby blink.
If I could move my hands and snap—
all the Marx, all the cell phone towers
built to look like trees,
all the Charons and rivers of dead.
The minotaur roams the island hunting Ariadne.
There’s a place upstate
we walked in August fog,
across slopes scarred with red men, spartan and metal, like transformers.
She sees what she wants, in clouds, financial markets, and press releases, she sees the eye of heaven in a one.
And me, I rode full tilt.
If I could move my hands and bless—
all the Heraclitus, all the slow shifts
of rose across the blue UN, all the Persephones and Hermes and Thoths.
Fat chance, with this phone.
But still here’s something:
the rust man at 23rd St.
has all this paperwork to get through. Towers slide into water, tessellating black;
satellites burn the street.
Whatever it takes to kill the mechanical bull.
take 1
Dirt sleeves skinned from the drought and June roared road print tracks across the wine
flush scoring up the sky. Downfield, cattle fume toward feed. Horseflies posted on barbed-wire line zero over ditches. What doesn’t jump, limps. Leaving them wilted and itching in their gold,
the evening haze dries wheat tops to cramps
by the row. Every sweet girl’s married, and the old highschoolers roam lots where nothing clean happens. Now one turns and says Just because there’s no one chasing us down doesn’t mean
we’ll ever get away. There’s always loss
here, where you’ll never pat the vest pocket
of your yellow jacket for a match and strike out.
take 2
Moms, dirt fisted, clutch their faith. The steeple shades grassy-kneed pastors. Our mud and banks, our children, crumble like tipsy hymns. Still,
the cornbread, the bulls, the dead won’t collapse. Schoolkids skull the geese; farmhands, the lamb. Burned prairies gristle in the distance, seeds
our neighbor’s poverty boasts. Pellets,
owl to mouse and bone, have all gone hearse bait. Because, downfield, the old girl and her drought- cattle dusted the road where haze married
the lots, loss sleeves in the skinned-cork skywilt. A match strikes out of line and dies barbed.
Just when no one’s pointing you out,
you pocket up. You’ll never get to love this town.
Horse flanks jack like pistons, coal-hard, shock-strutting, swaybacked on both sides. Shot in the parts that count, the daisy flare of pickups rodeo-park themselves in the field the Methodist church owns and rents out. The last
call’s called twice a night. Straw mops the blood.
We never hesitate to shed our blood,
to sell out to the dust’s cough. Men of the hard line. Men who spin themselves in the last lunge of a bull and don’t catch, who shoot
over horns until every one of God’s
good graces descends in a blaze of Ford
high beams and fog lamps, blaring like semis
the interstate shoves up the gray stretch of blood- flow toward home. Before the jump, the spirit moving underneath and inside that broken, hard- ass shell treats the beast the sweetest. Shit,
go deep enough and everyone has the same last
thought tripping off the cliff before that last, good crash of the soul: it’s not the ride,
the prize or the glory, but the buzz in the chute, when it’s just us and the rush of blood-
lust that comes from wrangling a beast so hard and pure it feels like you’re dry-humping God.
We stand off while they snore like demons, white-lipped and frothing, and pray the last thing we see on earth won’t be hoofed or hard. We pray we’ll see pillows we’ve cheeked and ride a good woman in noon hay. Our blood
spills out like water from a pastor’s dunk-chute.
Give us the next bronco. Give us the shot
and the question of blood. Some say they see Jesus and rarely lie. Puddles where bull piss and blood mingle spell out our fortunes in drools. Outlast,
we whisper over boilermakers. Outlast the ride
and the sun’s ass over the cattle, and the hard-
pan rising like Lazarus, like shoots of sorghum stock, like the kicks that last until the trail bleeds home. Then we break off hard. Then we can’t ride back.
We shared an after-dinner mint, and if
we only shared it—so that I took half
and you placed underneath your tongue’s moist lift the other—and we sat there, muted, stiff
and sated in the kind of pleasure that’s a pleasure because it’s sticky and simple, then to
say I shared a dinner mint with you
would wrap up the whole experience together
quite nicely. What that would miss, though,
is how the plastic crinkled, how the crumbs
stuck to the callus on your thumb became
the crumbs my tongue’s tip sizzled with. And, no, we didn’t kiss, or even move our palms
so they touched, but left, and quietly walked home.
Not everything without order is unruly. You’ve let your hair become a wild land
left to what will be, the Missouri wind
in June, thunderstorm season. Kimberly, when we drove to the coast of Mississippi
in your Toyota eating red licorice, I planned to give you my mother’s ring. I resigned myself to root in your earth like an oak tree.
Who knows what knowledge was laid bare by those muddy waters. I sleep with men. You knew, but waited—such patience!—
and I thank you. That yellowed night, the air shifted course. Imminent storms settled in, covered us in hail, froze a part of us in ice.
Above me, my mother sews a blue dress 
for Brad, the only drag queen in our town. 
She’s bent before her work as I caress

the yards of silk charmeuse gathered round 
her feet. The ceiling fan whirs, and sequins— 
silver, chartreuse—fly about us, flutter down,

stick in my curly hair. Mother tousles them 
free, and quick, begins to sew again.
At the earliest minute of morning,
the jury still out on the toehold of dawn,
I sat banqueting with high school friends,
faces playing musical chairs
in a silent hall. Faces clear as watermarks
blooming in basement-boxed photographs, as though
their familiar outlines had stepped into peripheral vision
and taken a seat. I drew closer to their table, sat drawing blanks as the sun with its foot in the door of my window,
no longer a battered panache above snow,
stepped lightly on the crust of what I knew
could not be, as my cousin and I had stepped on
untrodden wastes of white fields, trying to leave
no trace, testing if the world would bear our weight.
Next, my cousin (my dead cousin, Cory) knocked on the door
of that peopled hall, seemingly unaware he’d died.
Stepped in and dropped his scuffed guitar case
on the featureless floor, turning his thumb-smudge
of a face to mine. But just then, daybreak’s first beak snapped wide (it would have been outside,
but felt closer) and through a draft-crack that scrawny cry, like a bird’s, found the ear not pressed to the pillow
and entering that open door nearly slammed another
on my more-than-dreamed cousin
who was just then showing us his open palms, his clean shirt. Determined to stay, I ate on, and before we’d risen
he rose and unsnapped his case, removing
a steel slide guitar that flashed bright as glare from hoods
of oncoming traffic, bright as castings from the ego’s prism. It was not from the vast ventriloquism
of memory that his hands pumped music
to flood the far corners of the steadily emptying hall.
It was not from the selfish mix tapes of grief
that he stole the inspiration animating his homemade bottleneck slide, a dove in flight
above snares of taut steel strings. Slowly he played but one song: a bluegrass arrangement that made
a temple of the empty hall and wake-proof relics
of his pasty hands, leaving me something to take away of sleep’s faded papier-mâché.
My father appears at my doorstep
he wears the tire he curled in when crossing the border
It is raining
The tire’s rubber the rain
un espejo
& I can see the weight of my dream pulling down
on the soft flesh of my lids I want to apologize
for not being fluent in tire for worn tread
No mires hacia atrás
his speech pocked
a pumice stone
but I catch some strands
Nunca mires hacia atrás
he’s recycled this line
from my first mass
in Reynosa
He begins to peel himself from the tire
Without the tire He says
like an old water hose that has been too long embedded
in dry ground
he is a pale twig with severed stubs
Siempre seré llanta
He hands me the deflated tire
un costal of river muck
Quieres que la tire
& I know he means no
when brows roll off the cliff
of his large forehead his frown & mustache
dismantle onto his bare chest
My shoulders
	begin to unbuckle
my spine arcs
	like a C
		against the tire's inner belly
I fold my knees
	surrender one leg at a time
		to the dark lips of tire
1
My father stirring sugar in a glass of tea and I at his bedside, asking
little questions that fit inside
the big ones I didn’t dare ask:
he might have figured out he was dying.
2
I’m dying. Not to worry: not any time soon, I hope. But just so the two of you know.
Should I burn the journals?
3
Such a quiet man, my father. As a child I learned to read the blanks between the words. More blanks than words.
What was he taking with him
into his death?
I sat there day after day translating his unquiet eyes.
4
What a narrow aperture between parent and child, cramped as a mail slot.
It’s a wonder anything gets through.
5
My father woke from agitated sleep. Cossacks slashing and burning again, banging at the door.
In the terrified silence of the hospital room I heard him crying for his mother.
6
I saved a picture one of you made at six: black hair bristling, the face bright green, legs planted apart like stanchions,
and what a belly! A fiery furnace.
“That’s what you look like when you’re angry.”
You were right about that fire.
I burned a lot of things in secret.
7
But night after night, I recorded the unabridged
version of the day,
black ink on blue-lined paper.
8
I wanted to save the two of you
from the misery that filled our house. Even smoke-blind,
I saw your serious faces asking.
It was you who saved me.
Would it help you
to know the scope of my confusions?
The journals are full of secrets
but maybe you know them without my telling.
The key to the safe is under the sugar bowl.
This is a mountain made of hands.
My hands, my father’s hands, my sister’s hands.
We keep placing one on top of another and we are building something that loses its base and is simply grief
rising into time.
Windswept, this radio broken open with its stations one on top the other
though what you hear
is its dust, bleeding
the way this rag, half doll
half straw, half dirt scrapes till a darkness oozes from your fingertips
bent over, garbled—
she can’t tell it’s you
from far away, listening for her.
For the particle of dark matter whistling through you right now, the moon hides the same emptiness as your bones. It leaves you without a sound, the way the upside-down five-towered silhouette of St. Charles’ church disappears from the reflecting pool. Two men row out on another pool
beneath the earth, beneath the neutrino detector, a sea mine the size of a building: a metal cage a thousand times larger than the one that held the heart of St. Lawrence.
Felt the breath go out of the dead, we say, when a piano variation in blue goes through us. Felt the wind go out of the stars. What would we call something that touches what we touch?
Sometimes a plan, sometimes
a tender star bursts
from the terrible bedding
night has left cascading all about the rugged surface of Greek myth. You will never be
lonely again, sighs the polis
of the spectrum, disembarking from the little ships
the autumn leaves level
into history’s maw. I can’t
shop in this blue
supermarket, you complained, hugging yourself a little
more tightly. And it was true: one bird, then two—
robins, maybe—adrift
on the glass precipice the sea was then making
out of all our durable goods.
It felt like a giant
radio, you said, ascending
and descending.
We were quiet, then, for a time. I wanted to walk there,
but both of us had our hands full: strontium, iridium,
little fossil patterns
in the anthracite, reciting Keats.
How to give yourself an exorcism: walk into a house that isn’t yours
in the middle of the night and take in that warm accrual of scents—
bread, baby powder, fire, wet cotton—
but don’t touch a thing. As you climb
the steps, avoiding boards that might squeal, tell yourself you are just there to learn
what it is to live here, not to disturb
the sleeping bodies. As you move
your hand toward a doorknob, try
to tell if the tremor you feel as you grasp it
comes from your own loneliness
or is a devil donning your skin like regalia as he licks along your nerves
and whispers what’s next?
No, I didn’t touch them. Need
is murder on the veins—I feel weak like grease is coursing through me.
I saw the woman roll over in her bed,
clumsily, not awake, and it was so private,
so unconscious, that I flinched
and slipped back to the barn. Now
I am sick in the rotted mortar of this horse stall.
But to have been up the narrow steps,
to have seen her hair, matted and moonlit. . . . The longer I lie here, as a new storm routs
the rasping acres of dry leaves,
as sluggish thunder opens its North throat and spotty rain erects its ghosts,
the more I feel I am getting,
like a fever, my second wind.
1
This building is frail. Does it bear saying that it has something of me in it?
Years ago I stepped off a train without my friend.
I’d thought she was behind me but, looking back,
saw her in the side corridor on her knees, hands at her throat, red face draining to blue. It was a foreign country
and the train’s next stop was another city.
I ran alongside until the platform ended, then just stood there, watching the distance between us grow.
There’s a saying in an obscure language, seven words whose meaning has never been fully translated because the sense derives from the gaps between the words, chasms plummeting with regret that life can only ever contain itself.
2
I wish I could live again. Not this life, no, but life itself bears repeating.
Imagine these granite blocks standing lonely
and loyally in the night, recalling the cinch of belts,
the acts of levitation that lifted them to their places,
the hands and polishing tools that touched them
with so much care. They wait in the dark for day to come.
On the walls beside the bank of elevators perch the corporate symbols in their brushed steel splendor, as alive and silent as owls.
3
She’ll be from Pennsylvania. We’ll meet in Bruges or Brussels, American backpackers forming a fast friendship around what they call brutal honesty. There’ll be no irresistible physical attraction, just that fervent spark of connectivity that leads to endless conversation. Since we’ll both be headed toward the same city we’ll have decided to catch the train together. She’ll hoist her backpack, smile, say “Shall we?”—and step up into the passenger car. I’ll follow. We’ll have yet to exchange information. I’ll know only her first name . . .
which reminds me of a sociology experiment done somewhere in California. A happily married man, as they say, well known in his small town, agreed to be seen walking hand in hand each day for a week with a woman who wasn’t his wife. The social scientists wanted to test the community’s tolerance for an open display of infidelity. The parameters were strict: three walks per day at fifteen minutes each. The man’s wife was in full cooperation; in fact, she was the lead sociologist who’d designed the study. In order to clear everything
up, a full disclosure would be run in the local newspaper at the end of the experiment. The hand-holding couple fell in love, of course. The restrictions placed on their meetings led to an irresistible fusion of anticipation and intimacy. On the third walk of their third day together the man professed his love. On the fourth day the team of sociologists were in their usual places on the walking route, cameras and recorders ready to capture the townspeople’s responses. The couple failed to appear and never were seen again . . .
which, finally, makes me wonder what you think of them, these buildings. Do you ever imagine them at night? The elevator cars silent and still, suspended high in their shafts from cables no bigger than wrists, each link as breakable as a finger hooked inside a belt loop. Their I-beams wedded with bolts slid into place long ago, their stones sated lovers resting atop each other, their windows framed tears. Trains climbing toward clouds, bubbles closeting sacred spaces, fingers reaching through concrete—these buildings, fleeting as the grass of the field and as frail.

From afar it looks like the bus is stranded
by a field, the tourists mulling about with cameras

and binoculars, waiting for the replacement bus 
to take them into town. But actually this is

the place they want to be, empty field only 
to empty minds. They gather in stillness

and listen for a special birdsong, or the creak 
of a cricket, and train their lenses on where

they think it came from, the wind stirring up 
fuzzy seeds from weeds that spring here,

combing then uncombing sprigs
and whipping blooms, a moth cartwheeling

irreparably in the jostle, falling
to waiting beetles, lizards, and ants.

They too are on the watch for what feeds them. T
hey too do not believe in escape.

Like snow in early spring though it’s only New Year’s Eve the snow
	this morning after shoveling became the wet dark of street and driveway
as well as snow-buds living like blossoms on our weeping beech
	whose bare branches quicken in that cold hold while this ghastlight
scarifies the void-stretched limbs of the great plane tree and jays and 	sparrows keep chattering and it’s apt that this last day (of a year with its
usual storm-clouds and blood-mist and gust after sweeping gust
	of thunderlight) should show on the Times’ front page a picture
of the latest face to be made a thing of the past as Pakistan and its rattled 	nonplussed neighbours make the sign of fire and we sign off
as if it could burn anything away as if there could be (given even this 
	mild blue-and-white day) any true new beginning in the world we’ve made
and each day walk about as on our native ground expecting everything.
From hurt the heart unwords itself.
Goes down to dark. Sits silent.
No breaks, I’d thought, were working there. Then roar. Then seafoam blast:
a wound was waiting. Feeds to grow. Now alters, rends. That one long strand,
like faith, curves out uncalmed, thinned to a breath—just so at once I’m done,
I’m lost. Yes, white the waves that scar the shore. Yes, cold the roiling deep.
Langston drops all his books except Leaves of Grass into New York harbor, so that
the two poets lie down together in the cramped hold of the ship, wrapped in the hammock
of language—song of themselves spooning
in the middle of the ocean. Uncle Walt whispers
to Langston out on the blue, cajoles, welcomes him— stretching vocal cords, straining body: ship, men, hunger.
Langston touches and is touched, ship sheen of the other, skin the question, skin the answer. No land, but music.
When his talent soared 
beyond Tallis, his master,
William was seventeen.

His consort cast the viol
to oppose the human reed, 
an unheard-of violation.

When he discovered sex, 
his married voices 
descended to heaven plain.

His motet in five parts
was new across all creation. 
Stone chapels stunned.

At his Mass, his rapt Queen 
stayed her lethal hand.


A woman I know friends a person she just met, 
because, whatever, she can always click delete,

even as the halo of her circle grows.
Love selects. The heart valves of attention close.

But the world wide web goes on, its arteries 
deep in the noosphere we never get to see.

All across the airport, travelers tap the shadows 
of their fingertips, of friends they do not know.

The seer and the seen, each a burning mirror 
of the other, a lone god in search of a believer.

They know: long ago, the universe fell to pieces. 
You over there, me here. A name for that, for this.

A name for the nameless god of the whole.
Is it the same with you, I ask my liquid crystal,

my search engine as it tears into the past. 
History is out there. So said the early priests

as they looked up at the sky’s shattered pieces
and saw their ancient fathers, still alive, still passing.

Tell me, is the clarified face of God no face
or each. The soul feathers her own nesting place.

To love the whole is easy, but the sum of the parts, 
where do you put them. At the end of day, when I put

my screen to sleep, my dark face floats to the surface. 
I see what my pillow sees, the ghost it friends.

Long ago, I cried out on my swing for the mother
who did not come. Oh, she heard me. She was somewhere.

She knew something I did not, that now and then 
a boy needs a mother’s absence to hear his own

in silence, to sit a while in the sun and listen.
Dear sun, dear shadow, laid against the still horizon.
1
In last night’s dream I was preparing myself
to travel over the Tappan Zee Bridge on a moped at midnight in the sluicing rain.
I would have to steer by means of a contraption that was, more or less, a shoelace,
and the bridge was not, as during my lucid hours,
a long cantilever span over a broad river
but a viperish snarl of tarmac and iron grates, twisting, coiling,
exits merging into on-ramps,
cars caroming from the left, from the right, howling like an onslaught of wasps.
I filled my tank with gasoline
and imagined home, wherever it might be, imagined my narrow tires—
how they would grip hopelessly at the metal road, slide from lane to lane among the furious wasps as I wielded my impotent steering-thread.
But I knew I had no choice: I had to cross this bridge because my mother was watching me fill the gas tank and I could not let her know I was afraid.
2
Awake now, I am embarrassed by my own transparency. In the barn I load a feeder with hay
as the goat snorts, flitting her elven ears
and pointedly glaring at the grain bin.
Hay is not what she wants, though it’s what’s good for her— what keeps her four busy stomachs
in churning, belching, clockwork order. Grain is what makes her fat,
but her greed is shameless and irresistible,
so I dole out a handful of sweet feed,
letting the sticky collation of oats, pellets, cracked corn slide through the fingers of my glove
onto her charging, grasping, prehensile tongue.
I wonder how it feels to delight in voracity
instead of coaxing it into harness, year in, year out—
don’t drink one more glass, don’t eat one more bowl, don’t reread one more novel, don’t say
I’ll open that violin case on some rosier morning—
never wondering how two people invent a necessity or why a simple litany of breaths and exhalations becomes fear instead of sleep.
3
If I say,
I want to talk about the nature of fear,
you might assume that I have something precise to say.
But I have nothing precise to say.
I think that fear is not precise.
It is a weight, a stench, a twinge in the bowels that will not be vanquished.
Yet though fear may not be precise, it is very simple.
I am afraid to drive over bridges so I dream of driving over them. I am afraid of showing my fear to my mother
so I dream of showing her my fear.
I was afraid of Mr. Kowalski, and when, on a January night, his wife telephoned our house to tell me he had died,
I was appalled at my relief.
Never again would I have to sit on the bench under the dingy quilted window shade
in that house smelling of cabbage and my own weary dismay, waiting for him to appear from some distant recess,
wearing his shorts and brown socks and plastic sandals,
ready to thrust me a few steps further
toward the future he had laid out for me.
I was his last violin student; I was his only choice.
He didn’t seem to notice that I was the wrong choice, or, perhaps, like me, he was afraid to admit that I was. That’s how fear works, after all.
4
Let me tell you about Mr. Kowalski.
By the age of ten—a black-haired gnome, dour as a judge— he was soloing with the Warsaw Philharmonic;
he was playing Paganini. Imagine it: Paganini! If I had been his teacher, watching his fingers scramble knowingly among the accidentals,
I would have felt, sitting on my crimson chair in the hushed room, as if I had fed him Machiavelli instead of music.
Such devilment in the small grip of a child:
of course it was egregious, but prodigies,
like pinheads, sell tickets. The year was 1921.
Soon he traveled to Paris to study under the great Thibaud. Events transpired. By the year 1982 it did not occur to me to imagine Mr. Kowalski as a prodigy.
As a young man,
he was a popular performer on Polskie Radio. Listeners from all over Eastern Europe
sat next to their radiograms, knitting or smoking, enthralled by the echo of something magnificent yet fleeting, phrases too tender, too brief to explain.
Because his father had been a regimental conductor, Mr. Kowalski understood the rules of advancement. In his spare time he composed popular songs
and plotted his career.
One must attract the attention of an arrogant master
and then a greater arrogant master,
and again a greater, and again a greater,
until one becomes the arrogant master oneself.
In person Mr. Kowalski favored the Leopold Auer stance so popular in Russian imperial orchestras
during the 1880s—left arm stiffly, nobly poised,
like a stop-motion ballerina’s,
fingers arching rigidly over fingerboard and bow. He was accustomed to the routine
of bloody fingertips and dusty dinner jackets,
of second-class rail travel and creaking stage floors, of dismal audition rooms and vaporous reviews.
For all I know, he looked forward to retiring to America and becoming a short old man in brown socks.
But perhaps the crackle and hiss of the transmission
softened the formal tension; perhaps his radio listeners imagined a young man in soft shoes,
in a birch forest, in a patch of sunlight after rain.
5
I don’t know.
I never heard Mr. Kowalski play anything on the violin except for snatches of études and scale exercises.
His tone was harsh and thick,
as if it were climbing slowly, hand over hand,
up through the muddy dregs of an abandoned well.
Lest you conclude that there was something erotic about studying the violin:
there was not.
Yet when he put his shaking hands on me
to correct my posture, yanking my left elbow and wrist into imperious formation, crunching my fingers
into archways, I understood the protocols
of obedience. In that darkened house,
I threw back my head and dropped my eyes.
6
In 1939 the Germans arrested Mr. Kowalski in Węgrów. He managed to escape.
His wife told me this is how it happened:
An admirer said,
You are too great an artist to die. I will take your place.
On the run, clutching his violin case,
Mr. Kowalski forged his way to Brest-Litovsk, where he met the Russian violinist Miron Polyakin.
Great violinists were everywhere in those days. I have seen the photograph
of Polyakin’s letter to the Moscow Conservatory
recommending Mr. Kowalski’s admittance.
It is brown and tattered and seems to have been written on graph paper.
So Mr. Kowalski went to Moscow.
In the meantime
the art lovers of Węgrów were exterminated.
7
Playing the violin saved my life
could be a bumper sticker.
One night I may glimpse it on a passing car
while dream-driving a moped over the Tappan Zee Bridge. Not that it applies to me.
In Mr. Kowalski’s place, I would have died.
That’s what happens to talented children who don’t practice their scales.
If one is not greedy about art,
one is nothing.
I used to sit in Mr. Kowalski’s foyer imagining that our lesson was already over,
that I was stepping back into the sunlight as it gleamed on the tidy sidewalks
and his neighbors’ little square garden plots
overflowing with grape hyacinths and pink narcissi.
My mother would be reading Virginia Woolf in the park, and I would announce, I had a good lesson today!
We would idle on the bench like best friends; we would chatter about prom dresses and cats and nineteenth-century novels. The violin would wait in the car.
8
Muscle memory is what wakes me up at midnight—
I find my left hand arched around my right wrist, fingers held high and wide, fingertips pressed squarely
into the docile tendons, tapping out,
with exactitude, the opening of a Bach partita. Underneath strains my left thumb,
poised for the subtle shift to second position, then back to first. Muscle memory is what drove my boyfriend crazy
because every time we held hands I accidentally started
fingering arpeggios into his palm;
I didn’t even notice; he had to yank his hand away before I understood I had one more thing to apologize for.
Muscle memory is the habit of performance.
The body refuses to dismount from its high wire. Even after the Nazis invaded Soviet-held Poland,
Mr. Kowalski was traveling through the provinces—
rosining his bow, tuning his strings, donning his dinner jacket. Why didn’t he stay in Moscow,
ensconced behind the conservatory walls? When the Gestapo arrested him in Lvov,
they’d had just about enough of such behavior.
But en route to execution, he attacked his guard and escaped. Did he strangle the man
with his strong, flexible, obedient hands?
And what had they done to his violin? What had they done
to his hands?
No doubt muscle memory kept Mr. Kowalski awake
during the twenty months he lived under a Ukrainian pigsty. Great violinists were everywhere in those days.
9
In the course of my life I have mucked out sheep sheds and stanchion gutters and dog yards and loose stalls and maternity pens and calf hutches and litter boxes
and buck barns and henhouses and pigsties.
Each genus of manure has its own particular stench, and, when well mixed with fresh air, some varieties—
horse droppings, say—can trigger a farmhand nostalgia. But pig manure is foul, whether fresh or aged,
though, given time, even mild-mannered goat pellets
will transform into a choking miasma
of dust, sodden rot, maggots, and ammonia. Therefore, today, after much procrastinating,
I fear I must break down and clean my goat barn. By “much procrastinating”
I mean one month. By “goat barn”
I mean the droppings of one goat mingled with a quantity of dry hay. By “fear” I mean nothing comparable
to the state of mind of a thirty-year-old strangler of Nazis who spent six hundred days under a Ukrainian pigsty without a violin.
10
Imagine the rest of his life
as the plaintive, fragile, vaguely muddled coda
which a genius composer’s kindhearted but mediocre executor
decides to append to the maestro’s gargantuan final symphony. As a reporter for the Jerusalem Post sighed,
“Today, thin spread are the God-gifted Jewish violinists
who formerly grew like mushrooms from the soil.
With Kowalski, Eastern Europe, once an inexhaustible reservoir, has delivered to us one of the last pearls.”
Somehow he acquired another violin, managed to stride across an Austrian stage, bow to the darkened audience,
bring his instrument to his throat,
arch his steel-sprung fingers,
and play not one but two nearly impossible concertos.
11
So did I hate playing the violin?
No.
It was one of the sounds of my body.
The hands aligned; the clock struck; at that instant I was fluent
in music and words.
I was swift. I was facile. I was vain.
Fear grew inside me, imperceptibly.
Practice became the loneliest hole in the day.
My automaton fingers plugged invisible dikes—
G, A, B, C, D, E, F sharp, G, A, B, C, D, E, F sharp— three octaves up, three octaves down,
now the melodic minor, now the harmonic minor,
now in chromatics, and by thirds, and by minor thirds . . . and the automaton fingers marched on and onward.
What endured was pure intonation: I could not abide a slovenly pitch. Though I knew I was not the angel,
I always heard the angel’s voice.
In this
Mr. Kowalski and I were very much alike.
12
The body refuses to dismount from its high wire. Perched on a piano bench, small and square-kneed in his shorts and plastic sandals,
Mr. Kowalski sipped at his glass of hot tea and announced, When you grow up,
we will drink cognac together,
and you will marry my son,
and you will play the concertos.
He said this not once but once a week.
At the music stand I opened a Beethoven romance. The year was 1982. Lifting a violin to my throat,
I threw back my head and dropped my eyes.
13
A weight, a stench, a twinge in the bowels— a dream, a reproach—
an obligation—
a dynasty unclaimed—
a muddle—
What did they do to his hands?
And what of the peasants who fed the pigs? What of the mushrooms that grew from the soil, the listeners resting beside their radiograms,
the young man in soft shoes in a birch forest,
the woman in the park, reading Virginia Woolf?— a dream, a reproach, an obligation,
a greed that will not be vanquished,
a viperish snarl of tarmac and iron grates— and meanwhile this hunger that must be fed.
An admirer said,
You are too great an artist to die. I will take your place.
You will marry my arrogance, we will drink cognac together, as if I had fed you music
instead of dust, sodden rot, maggots, and ammonia. The stars shriek, a sharp bow lacerates the dark. You must cross this bridge you are afraid to cross.
on drying racks tobacco leaves swim wind turns the pages of the book
we can only read in the rough translation of my soon-to-be brother-in-law
& this is the brother of my soon-to-be brother-in-law, inhaling through the straw
of his cigarette: holds it between ring & middle fingers, palm up: the unseen
& inaccessible sea caresses our strange faces— blind & we wait for our lines to be read
& this is the cemetery, where the father of his father’s father’s father’s father’s
father’s father’s father’s father’s father’s
buried, bodies marked by broken stone incisors
among neighbors we sip sage tea, maramia— named after the mother of God—for sage slaked her
desert tongue & now a cousin comes, footfalls white explosions of dust, from the mouth
of that abandoned quarry, its Jurassic cranes & rusted conveyers hauling nothing now
& our family will ask so many questions we will be called The Question Factory
& you my future brother will write your answers with my slowly disappearing hand
The Question Factory asks: what is a dunum? Answer: slowly disappearing land
The Question Factory asks: what is that line on your skull? Answer: a failed poem
by one who tries to write over everything already written over
The Question Factory: why do you smile?
because I still have my teeth
where are the doll’s missing eyes?
in the back of my mind I believe
in what?
I believe I hear a song
why do you laugh?
because I still have my tongue
there is a song, & yet I hear no singing
consider the olive: it gnarls as it grows into itself / a veritable thicket / it throws
up obstacles to the light to reach the light / a crooked path in the air
while beneath our sight it wrestles the rock wrests water from whatever trickles
beneath / it doesn’t worry it looks like hell refuses to straighten for anyone
each spring offers itself sweet to be eaten first brambles / then olives
because there is a word for love in this tongue that entwines two people as one
& there is a word for love in this tongue that nests in the chambers of the heart
& a word for love in this tongue that wanders
the earth, for love in this tongue in which you lose
yourself in this tongue & a word that carries sorrow within its vowels & a word for love
that exudes from your pores & a word for love that shares its root with falling
something larger than a wave hovers
& buoys us in its wake, large as the sun as it breaks
into hills as if coaxed by the singers
to hold another’s shoulder or hand off our hands
to another & sway our branches & stamp the dear earth so hard
it feels we are lifting
from its trembling chest though the wedding
photos will be ruined when the pitiless enters the darkroom unbidden
having been warned to tell the truth and nothing but the truth or else
I shall be subjected to penal action I, the undersigned, do hereby swear
the sun-cured page of each tobacco leaf waits to be crushed & burned into lungs
each olive tree’s thousand eyes ripen into sight
& the pomegranates of Toura are planets neither mouth nor fence can fit around
behold my beloved beyond the wall within my sight beyond
my touch
he standeth behind the wall
he looketh forth, shewing himself through the lattice
beyond the wall her family held a feast for her
I stay here & wait at the gate until my bride arrives
you my sister you my brother
outside the walls / in the wind
if Aristophanes was right & we walk the world
in search of, a split- infinitive of to love, if two
outside the walls / in the wind
should find in each other more than mirror, then we should sing
outside the walls / in the wind
you my sister you my brother that tree & stone may answer
outside the walls / in the wind & let our eccho ring
1
I crawled all morning on my hands and knees Searching for what was lost—beneath a chair, Behind the out-of-tune piano. Please,
I prayed to Entropy, let it be there—
Some vital Lego brick or puzzle piece
(A child bereft is hiccoughing despair),
A ball, a doll’s leg popped out of its socket, Or treasures fallen through a holey pocket.
2
Amazing what webbed shadows can conceal— A three-wheeled Matchbox car, or half a brace Of socks or shoes. Oblivion will steal Promiscuously—lost without a trace, Microscopic bits of Playmobil,
The back-up set of house keys. You misplace Your temper and your wits, till you exhaust All patience with the hours it has cost.
3
I thought too of that parable, the other—
Not the one men preach of the lost sheep,
The lesser known one, on the housewife’s bother Over a missing coin: how she must sweep
The house to find it. No doubt, she was a mother, I think, and laugh, and then I want to weep:
The hours drained as women rearrange
The furniture in search of small, lost change.
4
“Tidy up your room,” I told my son,
“That way, it’s easier to look.” (It’s true.)
He made an effort, a half-hearted one
Abandoned after just a block or two.
“It isn’t fair,” he said, “it isn’t fun,
I never do what I would like to do,
But you, you always do just what you want.” Which plucked a string, as though a cosmic taunt.
5
I paused. “Is that what you think, then,” I said. (Sometimes he seemed less seven-year-old boy Than teenager.) “That making you go to bed
Or washing dishes is something I enjoy,
And that I’ve nothing better to do instead Of hunting for a crappy plastic toy?” Raised voices, tears, apologies all round, And yet the crucial piece was never found.
6
That night I was still seeking in my dreams,
Still groping after fragments and the maimed,
Just as in dreams a seamstress stitches seams, Or politician spins truth unashamed,
Or loping through remembered fields and streams, The hound pursues the scent that can’t be named, Her paws a-twitch, though heavily she lies,
And dogsbody the body does not rise,
7
Or as a poet stalks a skittish rhyme
Behind her lidded eyes, beneath the mask
Of sleep—because the mind has no free time
But keeps at night to its diurnal task
And pushes the stone as high as it can climb Before it trochees down again. Don’t ask
The mind to rest, though someday it must cease; In life, only the flesh has any peace.
8
It seemed I searched, though, in a dusty place Beneath a black sky thrilled with stars, ground strewn With stones whose utter shade seemed to erase
The land’s gleam (like a tarnished silver spoon);
A figure neared, with adumbrated face,
Who said, “This is the valley on the moon
Where everything misplaced on earth accrues,
And here all things are gathered that you lose.”
9
The moon? Yet I did not dispute the claim.
She seemed familiar—hard to tell among
Such alien surroundings. All the same,
A word seemed out of reach, tip of my tongue, Close-clustered consonants and vowels, a name. Beneath her hood I glimpsed a face not young But elegant, refined as it grew older.
My name she knew, although I had not told her.
10
Now that my eyes had focused in the dark
I saw that what seemed mountains, ridges, hills All hemmed around us, flinging down their stark Chill silhouettes, were overflowing landfills, Huge heaps of congeries. And I could mark
Here was a mound of keys or socks or pills (Those were the things that I could recognize), Like bombed-out cities black against the skies.
11
Somehow it brought to mind the vestibule
Jumbled with hats, umbrellas, backpacks, totes, Scarves, gym shoes, that they keep at my son’s school Behind the lunchroom: bins of winter coats, Hairbands, sunglasses stacked up on a stool—
Each thing spoke volumes or quipped anecdotes— Lorn, makeless gloves; lunchboxes starting to mottle. (I’d come to seek an awol water bottle.)
12
“Look there,” she said, and gestured to the keys, “Those are the halls to which we can’t return— The rooms where we once sat on others’ knees, Grandparents’ houses, loving, spare, and stern, Tree houses where we whispered to the trees Gauche secrets, virgin bedrooms where we’d burn, Love’s first apartments. As we shut each door,
It locks: we cannot enter anymore.”
13
There was a mound that loomed above our heads, A skein of dusty strands large as a barn.
“Are these,” I asked, “the sum of hair one sheds In life, or all the rips one has to darn?”
She laughed and said, “Those are the frayed, lost threads Of conversations, arguments, the yarn
Of thought and logic’s clews we’d thought we’d spun Only to find they’d somehow come undone.”
14
Then there was sunk, among the hills, a bowl,
A wide, shallow depression, in which “O’s”
Or ciphers gathered, thin, and black as coal, Like washers of black iron. I asked, “And those?” “They mark our absences—it’s through the hole Of lapsed attention that the moment goes.”
I thought of those assemblies with repentance Where I had mocked the prizes of attendance.
15
“And that?” I pointed to a pyramid
Of papers, ever threatening to tumble.
It shifted—sheaves of pages suddenly slid
And settled again. I stepped back from the jumble, Thinking we might be buried there amid
An avalanche of foolscap—a hushed rumble Shuffled its menace. I whispered, “Then are those The poems lost, or pages of sure prose—
16
“Maybe even something that would sell
(A book about a young aspiring warlock?)—
That disappeared when something broke the spell, When toddler learned to work the study door-lock, Or the telephone brayed bad news—or the front bell Portended importunity from Porlock?”
“The poems,” she said, “that perish at the brink
Of being, are not so many as you think,
17
“Nor yet so great. No, no, these are the letters We meant to write and didn’t—all the unsaid Begrudged congratulations to our betters, Condolences we owed the lately dead,
Love notes unsent—in love, we all are debtors— Gratitude to teachers who penned in red Corrections to our ignorant defenses,
Apologies kept close like confidences.”
18
A vague, headachy cloud among the towers
Rose, heaped of dusky down as from black swans. “Those are,” she said, “Insomnia’s desperate hours, Lost sleep: countdown of clocks, the impotent yawns; The teething cries, sweet drowsiness that sours,
The night feedings that soldier into dawns.”
I watched as creatures, etiolated, pale,
Weighed bales of feathers in a brazen scale.
19
What were the creatures doing? She explained, “For every hour that we lose of sleep,
Another hour of wakefulness is gained;
There is a tally that we have to keep.” “Unbearable minutes!” She saw that I was pained. “Perhaps,” she said, “but sometimes in the deep Of night, reflections come we cannot parse—
To consider means to contemplate the stars.”
20
Skittering round us, skirls of silver sand
Would swarm and arch into a ridge or dune,
And then disperse, as if an unseen hand
Swept them away (there was no wind), then soon Accumulate elsewhere, a sarabande
Of form and entropy, a restive swoon
Of particles, forever in a welter,
Like starling murmurations seeking shelter.
21
“The sands of Time.” (I didn’t have to speak;
She answered straightaway with some disdain.) “With scything hands you hasten through the week Clockwise, while widdershins, the fair hours drain. Haste,” she declared, “is Violence, in Greek.”
Then she bore on in silence once again.
“Why won’t they rest?” I asked in puzzlement. “Minutes are not lost,” she said, “but spent.”
22
Nearby, a glint of vitreous splinters, foiled
With silver, bristled in a jagged mass.
“This is a woman’s loveliness that’s spoiled
With age,” she said, “and tears, and days that pass— Her raiment that is creased, thread-worn, and soiled. Here, seek that vanished beauty in this glass.”
And gave me a reflection where I sought her— Nothing at first—but then I saw my daughter—
23
Eyes brown, not blue; the hair, not straight, but curled. “Not truly lost,” she laughed, at my surprise.
“Some things fetch up on the bright shores of the world Once more, under a slightly different guise;
Meanwhile, they are not lost, but somehow furled Back into the heart of things from which they rise.” And saying this, she turned, and did not wait,
But something nearby made me hesitate,
24
I could not make it out at first: a pile
Of bone chips, ivory splinters? Like a sleuth,
I sneaked a handful, following the while,
But stopped short when I realized the truth,
And let them fall, and dropped my neutral smile: Each keen point was a tiny human tooth.
I looked back over my shoulder for a glimpse And gasped to see a thousand small, grey imps
25
Go scampering up the hill, with wrinkled wings
Leathern like bats, with backs hunched up to carry,
Slung over their shoulders, sacks bulged with grim things— More teeth, I thought—remains you ought to bury.
My guide observed me watch their scurryings.
“But don’t you recognize a real tooth fairy?
Each baby tooth, deciduous but bright,
Stands for a childhood rooted in delight,
26
“But those that come here stained, starting to rot, Are childhoods that are eaten up with sorrow, Eroded by the acids of their lot
And others’ sins they are compelled to borrow.” “So many!” I exclaimed, as fairies brought
More chatterings of teeth. “Yes, and tomorrow, It never stops. Each childhood is outgrown For sharper permanence. Even your own”
27
(Children, she meant) “cannot stay as they are. Already, your son’s childhood is consigned,” She held up six fine milk teeth in a jar— “Already he is leaving it behind,
Striding forth as light strides from a star;
Though the star itself blow out, inert and blind, The light strides on, and reaches other eyes
That in some distant time scan these same skies.”
28
At last our path came to a spring whose gleam Provoked my thirst. Two cups of battered zinc Hung from a pair of hooks there: one had “Dream” Inscribed upon it; on the other, “Think.”
But when I dipped each cup’s lip to the stream, Immediately it began to sink.
When both had vanished, she said, “Do not wet Your lips here with the waters of Forget.”
29
Not water, exactly, I knew as I drew near it—
It was a liquid, true, but more like gin
Though smelling of aniseed—some cold, clear spirit Water turns cloudy. “Many are taken in,
Some poets seek it, thinking that they fear it, The reflectionless fountain of Oblivion,
By sex, by pills, by leap of doubt, by gas,
Or at the bottom of a tilting glass.
30
“But you, you must remember, and return.”
Now I saw clearly skin of alabaster,
Her moon-washed hair, a gaze one could discern
As gunmetal grey—and then at last I asked her,
“Who are you? Are you she who learned to master The art of losing? Or she who used to burn
With sweetbitter eros? She who did dying well,
The beekeeper’s waspish daughter? Amherst’s belle?”
31
“Don’t you know? But everyone who loses
Has prayed and laid an offering at my shrine— Though each who knows me calls me as she chooses, My name’s Mnemosyne; I am divine.
I am,” she said, “the Mother of the Muses—
Imagine, you have two, but I have nine!
More even than that—for all the arts that be,
All sciences too, are born of Memory.”
32
It made me smile to picture her at her loom With a gaggle of teen-aged daughters at her feet: No-nonsense Clio, Melpomene garbed in gloom, Graceful Euterpe, Terpsichore, who won’t eat, Thalia, laughing—Polyhymnia in her room
With prayers to chant—Urania taking a seat
At the telescope, Erato fine-tuning her fiddle, Calliope starting her story in the middle.
33
She led the way now through a garden of musks From dark, fanged flowers—incarnadine, maroon. We came upon two gates: one made of tusks
Of prehistoric elephants, one hewn
From massive, savage horns. All round, the husks And bones of great extinctions had been strewn.
“Here we must pass,” she said, “but not together.
You pass through one; I shall pass through the other.”
34
Then something began to happen. I felt her arm On mine, we seemed to travel, standing still,
I saw a light. Had someone come to harm?
I heard a distant siren, pulsing, shrill—
But then I recognized the old alarm
Harping on its monitory trill—
It’s Dawn again, come with her golden rule Like a shepherd’s crook, to harry us to school.
35
There are lunches to make, I thought, and tried to find Some paperwork from last week I’d mislaid
(Due back, no doubt, today, dated and signed), Instead, unearthed a bill we hadn’t paid,
Located shoes, a scarf, a change of mind:
I tried to put aside mistakes I’d made,
To live in the sublunary, the swift,
Deep present, through which falling bodies sift.
36
I saw the aorist moment as it went—
The light on my children’s hair, my face in the glass Neither old nor young; but bare, intelligent.
I was a sieve—I felt the moment pass
Right through me, currency as it was spent,
That bright, loose change, like falling leaves, that mass Of decadent gold leaf, now turning brown—
I could not keep it; I could write it down.
1
In the hot bedroom half a mile from the border
I opened David’s Catullus, the last lines of number sixty-three,
women mutilating themselves before a god, red pen marks
translating the Latin: Drive other people crazy. Drive other people mad.
We’d just come from mountains that were green for the first time in months, as happens here in August, and the sun was going down
over the cottonwoods, Border Patrol trucks parked on the hills
as we drove up Grand Avenue and turned on Crawford by the liquor store, where teenage girls were standing, and where one,
in a pink tank top that looked like silk, lifted her right hand to her left shoulder to pull up the strap that had been falling down.
There could be poems in which he does not appear,
my teacher said. She meant the man we found. She meant,
I think, go back to the world again. But there are things with holes in them— like the stone foundation where a house had been, where my sister and I played when we were children, a house that must have burned,
though we never discussed it. Wild geese taking off from the lake.
Sister taking off her clothes. It was cold, and I think she wanted to see
how far she could go without minding, as at the end of the day, from indoors, it can look like it’s already gotten dark, but if you’ve been outside all day
you know this is the bluest part, deer putting their faces to the ground
to eat at the beginning of winter. No one could tell me how they knew to do that. Or the bald eagles coming back, why they came back
not in Maine’s far north but central Maine,
along the coast where people live, where I worked one fall
at a farm, and where I lived, thirty miles from the farm,
with a woman who sometimes filled the house with lilacs in glass jars.
In the evening, when she broke the jars one by one against the kitchen wall, smell of lilacs, smell of beer, her hands didn’t shake,
since the moon came in from the field outside, since beyond the field
were pines, then another field, we were alone, we could be anything there—
In the morning she’d wake me, light coming in through the green glass bottle by the window by the bed, and I’d watch through the window
as she’d go out to the field, unstringing the electric fencing
for the sheep we kept. Some days she’d bring in basil
I’d planted in the yard, and how could I tell the difference
between the smell of basil, the sound of her voice slurred though it was still morning,
and what the voice was saying, something about beauty, something about
what we’d be, those days in September, when she’d pull me down on the kitchen table.
Later she’d go into her room. If I put my ear to the door
I could almost hear a sound coming out, like ocean stored
in the curve of a shell, her raincoat over the window
to keep out the light, the apple tree in the yard, its delicate branches, in a certain light it appeared almost intact—

2
In June, walking all week from Sásabe to Tucson with fifty others who’d come because people are dying in this desert, people were dying as we walked, I made a list of things I’d tried that spring in exchange for which the man we found might not have died, such as not sleeping, such as lighting candles at specific times, such as praying. And this walk, carrying a plywood cross through the desert as the others did, each cross bearing in permanent marker the name of someone lost, though most, like mine, said desconocido, which means unknown.
If I tried hard enough, while I walked with the cross, I could begin to pretend that in another minute he’d walk toward us, Elias. And then, surely, he would walk past us, since what would I say if I saw him like that, light catching in the thin grass west of the highway. Gel combed in his hair. A tattoo, maybe, on his left shoulder, of a rose. And a name printed under the rose, the ink so faded to green that I couldn’t read it, and neither could he, since he just saw what it used to be and not what it was becoming, something closer to the shape his mouth made of trying not to express pain, at seventeen, when he rolled back the sleeve of his blue and white school uniform and a man bent over him with a needle and ink. On the wall over both of them Elias watched a page torn from a magazine, photograph of apple trees in the orchards of Washington State, where a girl wore a tin ring the man with the needle had given her.
3
The phone call came the second week of September, a man named Andrés, calling from Washington, calling to say his sister was missing, left behind two weeks ago in the desert west of Tucson, from a small town in Guatemala, twenty-two years old, ninety pounds—
Sarah was the one who took the call.
Sarah, who’d turned to me last spring, her calm face, her voice saying, I want you to know, the doctor went out to where you found the man, she found other bones, she thinks they’re from another body—Sarah’s an RN, she knows things about the body—who’d said, weeks before that, there’s no space in ordinary life for grief, which is what people say, only her face was a calm I wanted to put on, her long arm around me in her green windbreaker.
In September, after she took the call, I stood with her in the gravel parking lot.
The afternoon sun came down around us, and we discussed going that day or the next to look, though we didn’t say the girl’s name was Santa which means saint, at home on my desk a letter from my teacher, a bowl of oranges, a chair by the window where I’d go to wait, since we weren’t saying it had been two weeks already, we weren’t asking at what point do you lose your name—what Sarah said was, let’s go in the morning.
So in the morning we drove out to Ironwood, the others who had come to help following in the jeep behind us, to Nation land west of 86, the place Andrés had described, which was also the place Sarah had found the other girl, who’d come from the same town Santa came from, who’d been coming, in a pink sweatshirt, to surprise her fiancé in Oregon.
He’d called and asked Sarah to look, so she did, and she found the girl in Ironwood, in a shallow dip of sand under a tree.
She has very long hair, the fiancé had said, and she did, Sarah was saying, she did have long hair.
Then we were walking under the power lines, looking for a trail on the land running flat and hard to the mountains west of us, past the thin dirt roads rutted next to mobile homes rotting out, the dust of their walls held together with formaldehyde, but only just.
Imagine living in a place like that, the windows like windows a child would draw, the child watching you get up every morning, prepare meals out of habit, as people who live in shadows must sometimes touch their foreheads out of habit, to make sure they are still there, and later their grandchildren notice it, one hand like a flicker at the forehead.
4
There’s no secret to this. You look for a trail and then follow it,
though you have to know what to look for, and then try not to lose track of it,
when the sun, in the middle of the day,
begins to make things move around, when everything begins
to look like a trail, and the wind and even your own steps might be voices.
I wanted to ask Sarah if you get used to it, after a while,
the backpacks left under the trees in the wash. The empty gallon jugs.
Cotton shirts hung in mesquite trees, the fabric getting so soft and thin
you could almost see through it if you were to look.
But I didn’t know how to ask, and we kept walking, two weeks since the girl was lost,
two weeks of Andrés sitting at some card table in Washington State
while it rained in the orchards around him, praying, maybe, and maybe fingering some light blue hair ribbon he was abstracting to all women,
if his sister was a woman, he was realizing then that she was,
though he used to know it in a different way when they both were children,
when they’d play the kind of game children play
though sometimes they’d go further and he’d forget it was her he was moving over under the cedar trees at the edge of town, the roots of the trees
painted with lime to protect them. Then he was calling us from Washington and we were stopping, we were standing in the thin shade of the power lines: his sister had called, she was already detained, she was already
sent back to Guatemala, and Sarah said into the cell phone,
thank god she’s safe.
My teacher who sent me back to the world, it’s October. Out walking last night after the first rain in weeks,
I saw three nylon jack-o’-lanterns swaying in the wind in someone’s yard. Fall here isn’t like fall at home—
no lake, no geese taking off from the lake, no swallows in the trees. Coming up to Annie’s house last night after the rain,
I opened the screen door without knocking,
washed glasses in the kitchen, waited for her to come back from the desert and put her arms around me. They’d found another man who died.
Today wasn’t like before, she said. Today I felt strong, I knew what to do, her voice getting high and thin in the night.
And I did what I knew how to do, though I didn’t know I’d learned it,
brought sheets out of the closet, made a bed for her on the couch on the back porch,
pulled a mattress close and lay down on it.
After a while she lay down, too. And after a while I turned off the light, left the two white vigil candles burning. Then I pulled a blanket over her, which is what they’d done for the man they found that morning.
5
I saw them when I got there at first light, the eagles, in the stand of pines
at the foot of a hill, settling into the shape of a crown in the branches. I’d left when it was still dark, the woman asleep in the wide white bed,
I’d scraped frost off the windshield, driven out past the blueberry fields toward the farm to work with the others, killing the turkeys John had raised.
The week before Thanksgiving. We pulled rubber gloves over our coat sleeves,
used our hands to break the ice in the tubs in the driveway, where we’d put the birds we’d killed the day before—
you’ve got to stop the heat fast, John said, or they’ll go bad— it was up to us if they went bad or not. We pulled the feathers
out with knives, gutted them, bagged them,
weighed them in the shop. And when our hands got too cold
to hold the knives, we beat them on our legs and started again, though later we’d wake and find they’d gone numb while we slept.
We worked until there was no more light. And before we drove home
in the freezing dark, the rain turning slowly to snow in the road, we swept what was left, what we didn’t need,
down the drain in the center of the floor in the shop,
so it ran to the trees where the eagles were waiting for a river running toward them filled with food.
6
Strung out like one who bolts behind an unbroken ox
Catullus writes. Where did I imagine I’d find you?
When she doesn’t tell me what she sees when she stays up at night, my teacher, I think it’s out of kindness. But later I think
maybe I didn’t ask the question right, since maybe,
after so much practice, you start to see it just as well by day—
not the way his face was not a face, the man we found,
but how, at the end of the walk through the desert in June,
we came down from the West into the city, to a park,
and people were waiting for us, clapping. And then it was time
to put the crosses down, lean them
together against a tree, and mine went with them.

“The leaves were green,” his song begins, 
“when the students gathered in Timisoara.” 
In fact, they came in bare December.

As rough and strong as rope, his voice 
gathers them with the dead of other
songs that begin the same way, rising 
from singing’s soil of leaves and slaughter.

One after another the scarlet informants: birds out of season,
a certain and stuttering progress. Was it a bird I said it was the voice
	in the door.

The eye of your fellow citizen, who lives with you in the same country.
The end of the century says, What will happen to you will make 1938
	seem like a dream

Leave your children with their grandparents 
Leave your houses unlocked

The century makes a high wind blow straight through everything. 
Bright red birds are moving up and down the stems outside.

Do not come within two meters of a window 
Do not look for your child

In this country a century is a place no one can inhabit. 
Dead zone around the secret core.

You are falling asleep in panic 
You are waking up in panic

The marvelous thing is how their tiny feet can grip, even while swaying. Someone is whispering about you nearby.

The century walks by, holding something in its hands. 
You have to see. You cannot go out and touch.

We went on a journey to the water and collected river stones. 
When the man on the corner asked what I collect I said I buy gold. 
All around the world I see the ice melting one glacier at a time.
I grew up around a lot of fake people if you know what I mean.
My mornings always begin with two cups of coffee and a pancake.

The Poet of Schools looked about him. 
There was no one to ask.
Daily, he went about his work,
taking water he’d drawn
from the pump, carrying it 
to a well, pouring it down. 
He pumped water from
the earth, he poured it back. 
It had tasted sweet at first, 
it tasted sweet now.
The clearer all this became,
the more steadily he pumped, 
the more willing he was to pour.

The 8th Grade Class
is like a plate spinning on a pole’s tip. 
Or a freshet after rain, on a hillside— 
what wasn’t is now the rush downhill. 
It’s a flock of grackles in April
at 3rd Avenue & 96th Street,
big mouths for their size mouthing off. 
Or harbor seals, whiskered faces 
staring at shapes ashore,
that duck under, then come up again 
in the surf off Coast Guard Beach.
As if to peek.
The sea is empty when they’re gone.

The morning after the day on which the school’s beloved French teacher died in the building, a girl from his Creative Writing class stopped by.
It was first thing. He said, “Hi! What’s up?”
She said, “I just wanted to see if you were here,” and looked at him. And fled. He had that sense, that she had run away. And then he had the sense of what it meant to be another’s teacher, which was what he was.

A suit approaches the Poet of Schools: “You must measure here, now, that which you think you are about. I have for you in which insert results.”
The poet of schools holds up one paw. “Numbers?” “Yes there are categories and this the test of measure is
Best Practice.” The hair on Coyote’s back stands up. His howl has cadence,
its lines break. Controlling disclosure and disguised as an English teacher,
he will be underestimated, every time.

Empty of car rows, every evening this
Lot where the kids come, coiling their concave,
Oiled as the ball bearings blazing beneath.
Outside the arcade where Altered Beast plays
They’re grinding the firecurb. Rise from your grave!
The Olde English, bag-bound, burns in their throats with Cadged cigarettes purged from dads’ dresser drawers.
The kids talk the trickhorde from tic-tac to tailstall,
From Ollie to frontside, from 50 to Five-0,
Christ airs and crailgrabs, creepers and cavemen.
The company sponsors, the skatepros and skateshops,
And stickers, and kickturns, and Christian Hosoi. Switchflip to shove it, suede in the grip tape,
Shinscars and scabbed shanks, boardshorts and shortbolts, Then bored of the wordspin, somebody stands.
His duct tape and shoe goo grab at the grip tape,
The black asphalt pulls at his urethane wheels.
First: parking block boneless (the boys on the bench grin) Then an Ollie grab old-school (juked for a joke).
They half-time a handclap, he halfcabs to heelflip.
A quick double kickflip, cruised to a crailgrab
And everyone stands now, stunned into silence
By his kneepoem of long limb, of liftoff, of loftspin.
He shrugs and just shoves off, slack-shunting the blacktop. Cool is a cold nod, a casual Coke-swig
And back to the trick talk, the tips for good tailstalls,
The tales of how Tony Hawk toeflipped down ten stairs
Or nailed a 900. It’s only the last trick,
Eclipsed the next evening by any of them.

Rodney King, rehab star, dies his dunce’s death
and my husband’s voice is a dotted line, language crunched up by grief. Meaning, tonight, recovery means nothing, drinks sucked in like air, words lithe and loose, some woman’s mark on his neck. And briefly,
I send curses to the whole city of Los Angeles
and all of its bodies that broke the body
of that anonymous drunk, turning his name
into the symbol that would come to haunt
the dry lips of the only firefly left in the dark field
of my chest. And because I know once his voice climbs to the top floor of his throat and the barkeep
rolls up her sleeves and his eyes are so heavy
with blood and regret they don’t respond to light
that he will spend his night with wings
drowned by whiskey. Body lit, then not, then
blacked out somewhere along the summer landscape,
I know this will be the final time—locksmith en route. I’ve come to know there is not always a way to keep
a blank space where words should be, a blank face amid turmoil; that there is not, in fact,
any way to avoid what must come, to say
to the thing buzzing there: No,
not this time.

Give God no dead 
	with their brains
busted out, no black shotguns beside them

empty. Not the boy’s suicide 
	explained as accident,
not his grief manifold
	in his family’s tongues

taken out of their mouths 
	by the power of
all that pain unloading. 
	The body quits.

The spirit does. No one knows 
	what to say except, faintly, 
There, there. Let what joins us
	not be lamentation only.

Every tether we tie to that 
	shotgun blast renders us
split open. We see 
	the evidence of it

& cannot be blameless: 
	casing intricate, green
on the boy’s bedroom floor 
	& as memorable now

as the souvenir kept
	from some scenic island,
smooth shell thick with buck- 
	shot meant to penetrate

flesh of an animal
	or a dangerous man.
Not a child, Lord, no,
we say, prophesying.

Give us today
	no miracle of rain
to fill our emptiness 
	except him, Lord,

that shattered boy, 
	back in our fold
still praying earnestly for rain 
	as we do, with his head

buried deep in his hands— 
	or raised to the sky
as the water strikes him: slick 
	mouth open, drinking.

What did the twin towers stand for?
This is a week after 9/11, at the Middle Eastern grocery store. The proprietor tenses. I don’t know.
The cop is standing at the counter. He drops a bag of cashews on the scale, his hand on the bag, weighing it down. He asks again. You don’t know what the twin towers stood for?
I don’t know.
It is silent for a good long while. The proprietor looks away. No charge for the cashews.
That must have been the answer, the cop is pleased. That bag of cashews is something to behold.

1
Remember the keyboard? asks my wife. She’s holding one in her hand. Now there’s a packrat. I’m not so bad.
I offer my opinion that the packrat is the one who buys it. I was only looking. She’s mad at me now.
Who wants to get some chocolate ice cream? I call out. Chocolate! Chocolate ice cream! Hey,“the only emperor is the emperor of ice cream.”
She ignores me and pokes at a cell phone.
2
What’s that you’re watching, son?
Of Mice and Men, he says. American Lit.
I watch some with him. . . . They’ve changed the meaning there. It bothers me more than it should. This business of not printing books anymore, of letting them interview their parents in place of a history core. Hey! That’s not how it goes!
He looks alarmed.
It’s okay, says my wife. It’s just a movie.
3
Applause.
I turn it down, and we listen to the rain instead.
The President strides on. He has chosen George C. Scott as his avatar today, our flag behind him with its 39 stars. He’s playing Patton.
I think we’re going to war, she whispers.
Not yet, I say. I minimize the screen so it no longer covers the entire wall.
He’d use his own image for something like that.

Hey, fancy-schmanzy, my uncle says. The ears of corn are wrapped in foil, the famous black and gold, known throughout the world, that proclaims them non-GM. You’ve come up in the world. Get you a steak next. I tell him we’ll get steaks for two, true organic, and oranges fresh from the tree. We b.s. like this while he sets the water boiling and lays our GM meat on the grill. All-Fruit’s not the same, he tells me. It just tastes sweet. It’s stupid, but I really do like hearing all about those days, the farm our family owned. The stuff they did as kids I’d never let my kids do now, hell, they’d take them from me.
In the condos across the street, a police drone flits from floor to floor, a blue orb sampling conversations, taking video. A green orb turns and drops: it’s spotted someone wasting. We watch the evening show. Must be some good flying weather. My uncle turns the meat. A drone the size of a kid’s balloon bumps against our balcony. It’s translucent, soft, you can see its hollow core. This one’s a sniffer, trolling for illicit drugs, certain phero- mones—anger, fear—for referral to a blue orb; scanning for trace elements from explosives, for referral to a black orb, I suppose. But those were good times, man, those were the days.

So the girl, San Jie, says we’re having dog for dinner. I’m like OK. When in Rome. It smells good on the stove anyway. Scott’s toking up and I join him. The kid, Fan Fan, is in the corner. Julia with her big eyes is going back & forth. San Jie brings out about 9 dishes followed by the dog on this orange platter. The head is on and all. It’s like an adolescent dog. Fan Fan comes, Julia sways her hips, we all sit down and start. It’s my first dog. I rip off the ear with chopsticks . . . well, try. I suck at chopsticks. San Jie pulls out the white eye for herself. And the kid, Fan Fan, starts bawling. “You killed Jimmy! You killed Jimmy!” His hand holding chopsticks in midair wilts like a flower. His face starts pouring from all its holes. San Jie says, “You didn’t take care of him.” She eats the white eyeball. Julia pulls the dog’s spongy tongue from its baked mouth and holds it to Fan Fan’s lips. “Here, eat Jimmy’s tongue and he’ll be with you forever.” And the crying kid eats it.

Whatever got me (a huzzah from spring) finally left my throat
to jump into my left eye, now red and suppurating like a gorgon’s.
I would lift a glass in your direction but I’d have to wash the glass.
Admit impediment. The kids are home, with all their mysteries
and possibilities and old resistances. Love and sex in the air—
tears in the wings. With the thought that not everything
has to get away from us, we should manage family life again.
My old mother wants a man’s arm to help her from the car. Oh, come on, I say, you don’t weigh more than a bag of feed. Indignantly,
she puts her hand in mine. The doorknobs in her house give arthritis,
if you don’t already have it; the shower, by turns, freezes and scalds
the unwary. Do you share with me this sense, that as ground warms
the world fills again with soldiers? And how strange it is our own
are hidden? Their voices on the radio sound with exhaustion.
I read obsessively about the farmers. Seed savers, believing
in another season. One carries water in a battered pot, ducking
as she runs because the seeds, the seeds must go in, quickly,
even into cratered ground, or famine will be the next year’s crop. Photograph: beekeepers meet under a small tent in the heat of the day. The beekeeper, who trusts his bees with bare arms, has a guard
and the guard a Kalashnikov. Think of it: guns, they say, like corpses, store well in vats of honey. And the bees, without borders, pollinate.
As the grass rises, we begin our slaughter. Old hens
head to the stock pot. The hands learn again where organs lie. Twin rosy cushions of lung, yellow fat’s heavy curtain, the green cup of bile. Body as system: the whole multicolored rope of the guts frees
and pulls forth, crop to vent. (What am I doing, you ask. Learning. Having learned, I practice my skill.) Again the hand goes in.
Now I harvest embryos: brilliant orange stand-alone yolks, in series. Ever smaller. And now I scrape the beaded surface of the ovary itself. Sometimes the finished egg, its shell veiled in membrane, waits
at the terminus of the oviduct. So which do we love, dear friend, death or life? The excited pullet in the barnyard is running with a three-foot entrail streamer in her beak, the happy cannibal. I say, let’s hear it
for the orchestra of sparrows nesting under every eave.

He asks, Is it even? In his hands, the frame, sure 
as he held me that morning. That bed was a box

where we could hear each other breathe, mouths reddening 
despite winter. We carry a grave to the low houses, sealed

and poured into. A feeling stays put there, lies alone to itself. 
Our bodies sometimes align. Said and skin, open and close.

Mostly we age, botch and buckle, make difficulty 
where there doesn’t have to be any.

He stands on a chair, ready, and I follow his 
heels on the edge like I did into sheets.

I imagine he falls: I’d brace the back of his head
against the hardwood floor and hurt myself. I could heal,

sewn in silver and bone, but would my body be able to cross us? 
I used to believe in shelter, the dead

and what’s too late sharing the same tone. 
He uses a blue ribbon to align the nails.

I pace the floor with worn voices for what is still undone. 
I say, Move your right hand south.

This room is a box we can leave, but I can’t see through his body: 
Where we don’t touch. Where we do. Salt and flank.

The threshold to together is between our legs, a split
for heat, where we know what we cannot in the low houses.

Can I go to him again? It is both I miss you
and I miss you altogether. The pull to keep, to keep.

I look at the cemetery through the window. 
He asks, Are you minding the headstones?

I read the white wall behind him: No then Yes. 
After the climb, how do we stay here in pause

above the low houses, the ones we walk over and do not acknowledge, 
stone above marl? Nowhere else to go but down, the fallen in clay.

He asks, Will you hand me the hammer?
I keep the nails in my mouth, hold my breath as he hits,

hoping for no plaster pocket, a crack in the ice. 
In his hands, the frame, a matted sky, four lines

in shadow and glass, each spine a ladder from the quiet. 
The wire indents the beds of his fingers, where

I am used to resting, a strain for two bodies 
in one house. Control and pitch. Old voices

still tangle in my hair: in my left ear, I hear timing, 
and in my right, No one can fix this but me.

This box is a room for the living.
I make sure to touch their hair in the coffins, what was always dead.

Sometimes how hard we try doesn’t matter.
The pine has to fall. It will be made into a house for men to carry.

The needles are weak, know only how to burn. 
Once I asked why they placed a penny on a grave,

not touching the other pennies. They said a woman is not allowed 
to be a pallbearer. In his hands, the frame, an inside

dimension for touch and tame, comprehending as line does form.
A force. Meeting my eye over his shorn shoulder, he asks,

What about now? Do not look away like you are used to.
For once led, an unfurling iris, I do not flinch.

Now I say, Come closer, I have lost count of the lines in your lips. 
My chest to his: an amplifier and a low chord.

I want what everyone does, so taken
with touch and fingers that taste. Contain, try and try.

Fail. Wait. A lopsided gait. He says, Nevermind, love.
No one will notice but us. Crooked, I get it a little wrong.

All afternoon on the oyster farm 
a great egret watched me work 
hoisting bags of oysters
out of the shallow water
onto the dock to sort.

It was dark of the moon, tide lower
than I’d ever seen it, exposing rocks,
a pile of culch I’d dumped at the edge of the marsh, 
mud speckled with dead slipper shells,
crabs that could be hibernating.

Oysters, sealed tight, holding
their mouthful of saltwater in deep cups 
polished smooth inside by flesh,
passed through my gloved fingers, 
sorting for market.

I wasn’t thinking about thresholds,
how often we cross without knowing,
doors opening and closing
without a creak or click as the latch catches 
and we wonder what side we are on now.

My body had taken over: bend, hoist, 
dump, sort, back into the old bag
to grow another winter underwater, 
or into a wider mesh
strung on a line close to shore for market.

I broke apart the fused ones,
pulled the beards off mussels
and tossed them overboard,
rescued small crabs who clung or froze, 
imagining then I couldn’t see them.

Minnows thrashed in my palms,
a surge of pure light and muscle.
When I released them back to the muddy water 
through my cold fingers
joy flashed like quicksilver.

I wasn’t thinking about thresholds,
I was on my hands and knees
pushing oyster bags through six inches of water, 
sucked down when I tried to stand,
forced to crawl, cursing and laughing.

The egret, who had not moved in hours, 
took a few elegant steps, rippling the calm.

Sitting up, kneeling in my waders, 
waist-deep in mud,
I closed my eyes,
not because I knew what was coming, 
but to see in the dark as well.

The white feathers of the egret so fine and smooth. 
The marsh, golden in mid-December.

It was the day before our darkness made itself known, 
that which we’d say about after,
There are no words for.
Crow call in the east answered by one at my back, 
Prepare to be emptied.

The death of innocence is one way to learn
how to love. In the dark, I pray for another, 
pure as white feathers, a breath
passing with ease through my body,
turned to the low sun moving across the marsh.

1
All night the sound of water
in a ditch. No dreams to speak of.

Not the cannon shells
across the canyon or their routine
sound. Snow

pulled from the mountain like a sleeve
torn from a shoulder.

We inoculate our son. In the needle,
the same virus we hope his body will defeat.

2
In my father’s dream
it is the ditch that wakes him,

	All night the sound of water
	in a ditch. No dreams to speak of

voices coming from the lawn.
Outside, men stand with their arms uncrossed,

	not the cannon shells
	across the canyon or their routine

men who ask him for his boots. 
When he slips them from his feet

	sound. Snow
	pulled from the mountain

he sees water spilling from the tops, 
water running from the porch

	torn from a shoulder.
	We inoculate our son. In the needle

and gutter, water where the ditch had been, 
the mountains all made low.

	the same virus we hope his body 
	will defeat


3
I woke, waited
barefoot by my window

	In my father’s dream 
	it is the ditch

until the cannon shook my roof again, 
sent the smallest avalanche

	coming from the lawn. 
	Outside

it had not meant to 
barreling from my shingles.

	his boots.
	When he slips them from his feet

In the dream
I saw men standing where the ditch had been,

	water spilling from the tops, 
	running

then only half
their bodies stranded in the snow.

	where the ditch had been, 
	the mountains all made low

4
When they said it was a boy
hiked farther than the others on the mountain,

	Woke, waited
	barefoot by my window

stumbled on the live round
in the grass and pine needles where the shell

	shook my roof again 
	the smallest avalanche

struck in winter,
I dreamed I also picked the metal from the brush

	had not meant to 
	barreling.

to see it better,
knew its risk by weight alone,

	In the dream
	I saw men standing

ran the shell back quickly 
to my father.

	then only half
	their bodies stranded in the snow

5
When they said it was a boy
hiked farther than the others on the mountain,

stumbled on the live round
in the grass and pine needles where the shell

struck in winter,
I dreamed I also picked the metal from the brush

to see it better,
knew its risk by weight alone,

ran the shell back quickly 
to my father

1
Say it was a horse. 
That the horse watched 
the three-ton van

roll until it stopped 
where their bodies 
stopped. That the horse

unlike a horse waited 
until he stood. Say it was 
the horse he followed

in the desert. Say it was 
the desert, the sagebrush 
that kept the horse. Say

it was the trail he left 
the patrolmen followed. 
That they never found

the horse. That he covered 
the horse tracks in
the desert with his own.

2
The sergeant doesn’t find the wreckage first. When he asks the survivors how many cars passed in the desert three hours before morning they tell him they remember only one, that someone moved the bodies from the road and drove away. In their language they say this road is a river nothing gathers. The sergeant asks to see their driver and one points to the desert. The rest point to the woman he reached for, a hole the body left passing through the windshield.

3
Son,
in Spanish you do not agree, you must be in agreement, estar de acuerdo.
Two people may agree or disagree, like we do,
but they must also be in one
or the other.
If you mistake cuerdo for
cuerda
you will have said rope
or cord,
though both words divide and bind some older form of
agreement.
As a boy I saw
a model of the spinal cord,
how the nerves run down, divide us behind.
They named it cauda equina— horse tail—bu

4
In his dream the sergeant takes a shovel to the river to hold the river back. He is told he will find nothing, to keep nothing he finds. The sergeant stands in the river until his feet freeze, until they lose their hold, until it is the shovel itself he holds to keep from slipping under. The river is choked with debris. It is a bird nest, finally, that passes, convincing him. Inside he sees small branches woven, then string, then needles, clothing, then hair. He untangles the nest to braid a rope.

5
Say the three names
he gave the
sergeant were true. Say
the names of the
eight bodies pulled from the wreckage became
the numbers they first labeled them by. Say the eighth is no longer
nameless. Say they still tie ropes to the caskets of immigrants they find
in the desert. That a rope saves time should someone come looking.
Say they bury the ropes for the dead to climb back. Say their names.

6
Son, do not mistake cabello with
caballo
hair with horse,
that caballero, though gentleman, meant
horseman.
You’ve heard the Spanish conquered Mexico
on their horses.
You’ve heard the conquered could not tell
the man from horse
and ask me,
How do we know
the conquered knew?
They listened. The horses never spoke.

If we excavate we return to this hidden thing— police chief, townspeople constructing
parade floats bound by fire cord.
In this one Henry Smith is hanging,
his eye sockets singed by oil-slicked blaze. Plate glass, silver salts. The pop of flashbulb
after picnic jubilee—straw-hatted men pose with a trophy of cooling ashes.
The sneer with incisors captured in sepia tones. Teeth and bones in children’s pockets.
And tied upside a poplar tree, Mary Turner, twisted, skin-slouched, knife-slit,
with a vacated cavity between her hipbones. This past—toxic voiceless paper—
hush and hushed.

Wake-up calls come as ghosts
whose death wounds, fresh along their flanks, are little monsters, open enough to show
they are full of nothing inside.
These phantoms mean to announce
the city under attack, the insidious tricks
it fell for, how it even feasted its own demise and rang with song and bedpost-banged walls and now sleeps more deeply than its dead. There is no pain like knowing the polis
is doomed. And so the shades
pontificate to terrify, convinced that terror can’t fail to get the dreamers on the move. The great end of any dream is
the self-assurance none of it was real,
and the closing of eyes once again
to the hum of hallway ice machines,
distant and discrete from the burning walls.

To quiet the mind into nothingness
is not the task. To keep the mind quiet
on a single thing, or perhaps a string
of single things, to think not of the thought
but just to think, intimate with the unknown— what maintenance of the heart
that takes, what unaccustomedly narrow
points must stay pinned. As if a meteor sails through the awful silence of outer space, but then the daily offering must be drawn from the purse always, always the elbows or knees
get sore. The eyestrings
must be held taut with that which has no eyes, which grants the wherewithal to ask
before it tenders any yield.

Not far from here a meadow marks the line
of the longest sun and brightest time human arrangement of such things allows—
a map to the meadow informs every bedside drawer. Its eagles dart close as prairie moths,
grasshoppers fly ahead of footsteps
with the hum and herald of rotary phones,
and trees wave in the light like crowds at concerts who wanted the lawn tickets they got
for the amphitheater’s show, would not wish
for anything else. A beautiful place
to die, the underworld rising up
through golden grains and purple-tipped spears
and weeds that sprout their own billowy cosmos
for heads and bloodred sumac buds sculpted
by wind—to see the grim one coming through all that, to claim not a wife but the love or despair
of one life. To be there
to be told however it went down it’s done,
in the meadow with its manifold vantages of hours over there, where they’ve already happened,
and that way, where they are still, or about to be.


Time seemed a rift we’d wandered into,
the moon drifting over ghostly mine dumps, the sun
surfacing slow-motion on a young woman emerging, dream-
or dagga-languid, from her home, her body sheathed in cream-colored
shift and sweater, lifting her arms, pressing palms together, stretching to her left— as a dancer might release tension, standing in the wings before an entrance— while behind, along the beige-brushed wall, her shadow, like the cast hand
of a sundial, passed, and whether it was jet lag, or a trick of optics,
appeared to move more quickly than she, as if ticking off
a calculus: charts; proofs; actuarial tables; the virus
was everywhere; already it was late June,
the shortest day of winter.

dampness, 
much.

So deeply did
I want to believe. And yet I know

when you go back to 
your guestbook,

beside my name you will see only 
my yellow star. How

I loved you. And no word is coming. 
We walk above

the bodies of the dead, and I hear
the coarseness, and no word is coming.

Now eyebright, and 
now arnica,

sun’s segmented mimic, 
and after our walk

I leave space for allowance,
for disappointment. Un-delayed.

The fire-funeral
of language burns slow, our days

like apple cores hang low on 
weakened trees, a wish

to leave you with the knowledge 
that you too

wear the black coat
and the death’s-head, you too

there in your hut, 
hand-in-hand with the poet.Like any good son, I pull my father out 
of the water, drag him by his hair

through sand, his knuckles carving a trail 
the waves rush in to erase. Because the city

beyond the shore is no longer
where he left it. Because the bombed

cathedral is now a cathedral
of trees. I kneel beside him to see how far

I might sink. Do you know who I am,
ba? But the answer never comes. The answer

is the bullet hole in his back, brimming 
with seawater. He is so still I think

he could be anyone’s father, found 
the way a green bottle might appear

at a boy’s feet containing a year 
he has never touched. I touch

his ears. No use. The neck’s 
bruising. I turn him over. To face

it. The cathedral in his sea-black eyes. 
The face not mine but one I will wear

to kiss all my lovers goodnight: 
the way I seal my father’s lips

with my own and begin
the faithful work of drowning.

Days I hunted the mend where earth 
had torn. Dowsed with my forked heart 
for her slow river of tears.

Went home, looked under the bed.
In the stalled closet, leafed through her sleeves 
for landmarks. Even laid myself down

on the thatched field
listening for the thud-thud of his dark 
headboard against the wall.

Counted months by moon phase. 
Left the stove and washing. Turned 
the garden graveward. Stacked wood.

Until there she was in my kitchen, 
taller than before,
a basket of wash on her hip.

It was hours of scrubbing and rinsing, hours 
of pinning bleached petals of slip and lament 
on the line before I asked, Where?

And it was hours
before her deep-water reply: Mom,
Mom. It’s not the kind of place you can point to.

I no longer know how I came to be here. 
She claimed me? He returned me?

There was a great rending, more light 
than I’m used to now. Then everyone

pretending I’ve never been anywhere 
else. Here at the sink, tasting summer

in my mother’s kitchen, washing plates 
until their painted edges fade.

But I’ve taken on the green 
of his river. I’m listening

for the whine of his dog
wanting my hand on its warm belly,

for the long hall of his walk 
coming up behind.

There are children now, open-mouthed 
and spindling toward light,

a tree we planted together
that fruits in red, debts that sound

somehow familiar. A deal I struck once: 
the way I left off watering,

hoping growing things 
would know to dig

for what they needed 
deeper, down.

If pain is enough, all stories are ghost stories. 
The same man splits wood with an adze
and heavy hammer to loose whatever’s bound: 
the woman, the incident, the dog, that damn dog 
the meadow and does lured
every spring before he dragged her
snarling back to camp. And now he’s haunted 
by the water dish in the breakfast nook,
the leash. He still calls. He leaves messages.

Come calling, come hauling the sickle
and scythe. Bring a short knife on your
belt and a light in your hand. When the sun 
quits and the heat flees on the night breeze,

we will swing and gather, twine together 
stalks, and cough. Wet breath foaming in
the corners of our songs. Our strokes are even 
and tight. Glistening, listening to the night

birds, the cricket trills, we whistle our way 
uphill. The children in their beds rise and
fall like these fields. I hear winter in daybreak 
echoing from not far enough. Gather, gather.

Spin One
I am acting like a wall with one portico 
adorned by a cockatrice and subtle 
lichens. She swings and I crumble. Then

she stands over me. I act like a man;
she acts like the state. Her knee sinks into 
my throat. I pretend she is choking me, or

I am choking, or I see something startling 
in the sky. She cocks her head back, 
mouths the song of sirens.

Spin Two
I am doing a rather obvious tree; she, too, 
is creating a simple impression: thick fog 
rolling over low hills. I’m part of an orchard.

She fills me, and then rifle reports and marching 
and clanking. At my base, I hold my toes
just right to represent a memorial plaque, to imply

what happened here has sunk deep, has rolled itself 
up in the rocky soil. And she is moss, so green
and dense and always facing north.

Spin Three
With the score tied, and the other couple on 
the couch, she arches into a rainbow over 
my creeping vines. I send tendrils into skulls,

and statues of skulls. In a second she’ll be thin rain 
beading in the same hollow eye my bloom
presses through. My hand, down below, resembles

a group of sitting men, pulsing, chanting, clucking. 
Her hands become their hands and the shadows
of their hands. My eyes, the ritual, the bees.

The Final Spin
Now we are winning. She is a red brick house 
braced tight against the prairie that was
my back. I breathe hard and the wind shrieks

through the tall grass. Then I am someone digging 
and she is someone dragging another someone 
toward the new ditch. The dead one’s eyes bulge

red and its lips seem more cracked than possible.
The skin is all rise and fall, pock and peak. I am now 
the ditch and I welcome the dead. I have so much room.


Let me give back to God 
his jacket, his locket,
his thin slippers, 
sunglint, sleetspit, stars. 
And here’s my cracked, 
my sullen, unstrung 
guitar, hung like a rabbit 
in the butcher’s window, 
a hole in the belly
where a song should be. 
Emptiness only
emptiness can see—
Let this be my prayer.
Does anything belong to me?

With great fear, with great love,
Maybe what
I invited him to drink with me.
I want is the line
The small white cups, the green leaf tips
to drop endlessly. Maybe
Opening in the water. Perhaps he too
what I want is to go
opened, the particles of ash carried away
Sounding, to measure
by the current. Perhaps he did not come, and I
the fathomless. To fathom.
drank alone, his cup untouched,
Maybe the thing
reverence and fear my making.
that moves us can never
Unexpectedly, ungently, they come
be seen,
Upon me. My mother's dreams. My own
must always be uncertain,
confusions in the dark. And to send him back,
the almost
to say goodbye, too awkward, too difficult.
but not quite grasped,
I should have broken the cup I offered,
weightless,
should have let my fingers loosen.
the fingers loosening.

there is awakening’s winter hour
this and that friend––like the light of daytime
in Verlaine’s “la neige incertaine”
there is impoverishment––the warmth of suffering:

and also––“Sueur de sang”––
everything easy––like rare snow––inadvertent: 
	between one thought and another:

and neighboring 
comprised into being:
sufficient this remembrance––

of that light in the darkness

for the non-necessity of a thing for paper 
you are troubled with each day more often:

tear the paper: “I cannot distinguish myself”: 

how inadequate the pencil!––

then who will peck from within 
a destitute thing?––

and who will begin to speak?

When we turned and descended 
the hill that morning, our jeans 
and sneakers dew-drenched, 
the grass and knee-high
weed trees parting 
with our sliding steps,

we saw the mist drifting among 
the sycamores below, following 
the long, thin finger
of the current, the carvings
of field and slope, water and rock.

Imagine the earth having been dark 
since the beginning and then
the arm of the sun brushing
away the night. And our fear,
once suspended in the cornerless air, 
gone too.

And finally this, the gray cloth 
lifting, revealing
the green tongues of the corn, 
the lumbering, drooping figures 
of the cows, and the barn leaning 
toward us, into the light.

Sirens
approach like you walking toward me in my bed 
of dreams and then move on
to the fire.

Dry
lakes and assimilating washes fool no desert 
thing. Either in memory or wait,
they lie.

a seam down through
strata of red rock ganglia of meaning
nerves exposed
the trail worn soft by mules and dotted
with shit the pebbles
treacherous switchbacks sharp and steep glare
worse than burns first
on this cheek then that as you start to dream
the river below shaded
by big-tooth aspens water from the glacier
your shoulders ache
to float in the currents traces of word-feeling
that drift and brush
against your legs cold mouths open
as if to nibble or to kiss

So friend, you bring me to this unassuming field, 
day-glo brands on the sheep, wire gates my girth

barely lets me slip through, an afterthought of 
rubble at the entrance, sunlight angled to look in,

our eyes adjusting to nightfall under guardian 
stone-shapes so like the lives we imagine it took

to lift granite to canopy, my fingers now wanting 
to pry them apart, unlock the mute interleavings,

to peel away mica from quartz, find a fleck that 
holds the light, ask it about the dark workings

of metal, the mineral veins we shape into blades,
the soft tissue we lay open, the blood we let fall.

Thus lines of force that pass through us 
leading to fields and cities: muddy fingers,
a tailor’s needle and thread, an invisible line 
that slips through my fingers like water, leads 
me down to the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, 
the city of narrow, well-worn paths, dark stairs 
and rotundas loud with pilgrims and prayer, 
the beadle’s stick leading his own to this altar, 
to gold icons, their sad faces. Priests in black, 
Ethiopian Copts, squat outside in a corner by 
a charcoal fire, a heat-treasure, as it is winter, 
the day short, and a wind has come up from 
the desert. There is a wood-smell from fibers
of the planet, a fire with little light but reason 
for a prayer, and smoke that rises like incense.

scripta minoa
his hands grip its invisible horns
to leap the furious eye of our desire to kill and be killed
over our origins in strewn rubble of children bewildered and wards locked over medicines of shock and sledge the therapies of iron hammers over the never to be forgotten even in the striking down
over the unsaid word the venom coiled inside over rump and pelt and dust
his feet land
touch
so that we do not forget what we do here

Route 9
I am pretty sure that I would have died here
	maybe here in the rain that comes down to pick at
the red clay hardness of a long snake-road upward, 
	and I am pretty sure I would have killed here,
or wanted to, or had to, or tried to, or didn’t mean to, 
with no god, and few others, to forgive me.

Joss
As I bow so that I and the burning sticks bow,
	and my spine, my complex, pliable inner organs
bow with me, each filled with a sorrow I hardly
	know I have but which the honeyed, musky scent
calls out, a sorrow that curls and rises like a dragon 
	before which all I am bows, and then bows again.

Batteries
Double A’s die on the road heading west, near rubber 
	tree plantings the Swedes donated to bring back
the land, miles of trees in rows so straight my camera 
	orders me to change the batteries, but I let the cells rest,
and they recharge for more, one or two at a time so we
	can get through the rows of graves, acres limed by them.

Dug In
Mist holding to the trees as if it didn’t want to leave, 
	stones engraved with provinces the dead came from,
my legs unsteady on the wet gravel, mind wandering
	to what the nights were like, what lights shone across
the valley, what smoke wisps would rise over the trees, 
	what low clangs, or whispers I wouldn’t understand.

Combat Base
Practically nothing there, a sandbag bunker restored,
	plus a one-room museum on stilts, into which we walk 
empty handed, no straps over the shoulder, no mirror lens
	to zoom and widen, nothing to hide the face with, 
nothing to see with but retina, cones, and rods, the wires 
	to the brain cells running for cover, huddled, shaking.

Museum Pieces
Still I love the web belt, its brass eyelets and cloth 
	strong enough to hang a pair of canteens on,
a bayonet, first aid pack, ammo pouches and holster, 
	the thick fiber in the bottom of the display case,
this durable gear, the stained canvas of jungle boots, 
	a green helmet cover that belonged to someone.

Quang Tri River
Next day coming down from Lao Bao, you tell me
	you would sometimes swim here, the snipers asleep,
old farmers and women working the fields, river children 
	eager to bathe with you, your body given to this cold
mountain stream, sweat falling away, pure flesh left, 
	your open hands, your fingers, your mother’s own.

Xenophon, 401 BC
The soldiers straddled thorn hedges
to sneak a taste. Along the Black Sea,
the honeycombs rose like marmalade jars.
Laurel, scorched oleander, and honey,
that yellow voltage. I tried a drop myself.
Some tasted ambrosia.
Some heard prophetic hymns.
Some cringed at tremors blooming again,
youth in their chests, windshorn Eridanus,
then in the sky, an atomized sun.
And me, I got nothing.
Just another lonesome breeze
freezing my ribs until my muscles
stopped moving. Finally I spat it out.
Like that, my men snapped forward,
purging everything. They purged the honey,
the oleanders, the olives. They purged the suppers 
from all the nights they’d ever pined.
They purged the junipers, the stars,
the salt and seaweed. They purged the ocean,
the canker, the long fortnights
spent far away—the Kurdistan mountains
unlike any hillock back home. Imagine:
a field of grown men on all fours.
Armored men in full panoply.
Even through all of this, I fell asleep
half-hoping for a vision, insight, anything.
I would have taken intoxication,
even gagging. As I led these young men
through the waning terrain, the only
prayer I dared was rid us of our collective needs. 
Socrates once asked me, if all memories
are theaters, then what can we make
of the shadow scenes, the ones that lurk,
unseen and unexplained? The question came back 
when I saw the dew blind them.
And then at dawn they rose like revenants.

Pompey, 67 BC
It was swarm season—of honey and carnage:
one moment men scavenged, the next they were carrion

under an orange sky. It was swarm season
and before you could count to ten, quivers raked,

stars aimed, a thousand twigs rustled, fell. 
Honey and carnage, divesting us of reflex.

It was swarm season. In the sweltering evening, blood 
was scented, pure delphinium. Honey and carnage:

Delphi once prophesied, The man who eats meli chloron 
can speak only truth. Whose sentence was this,

the pleasure of green honey? Ribs flashed,
tongues wagging, sliced off, churning, stumps for speech.

It was swarm season—over before anyone
could bray. But a few mouths were open in surprise.

Howl forever if you must, but it will never be music.
Make deaf monkeys out of everyone.

	Father, you leave us without explaining but I heard 
	the rumors saying you can heal or fatten the wound 
	on your knees with the clot of a stranger’s country.

Sepals crown this city of sloughing light.

	Maroon us here in the flying city.
	If your heart is a stunt man fishing for ice then mine 
	is a cold ingot gilded to the stairs.

Sorrel, sorrow, spumes of science furl
over your reddening sclera. Your breath 
beneath the ochre. What troubles make you?

	The kind of father I want will dig a hole through 
	the floor of his home to find a deeper womb for me.

Ask the earth what it will feed you. 
The truth is a pyrrhic purring—listen 
on the airbus with crackling ears.

	Father, I thought you were a revolutionary! Every day 
	you were gone, I anticipated my own journey to the west. 
	I was the Monkey Princess. Every day I sketched
	a different charcoal portrait of you.

Here is the lesion on your couch, the tomb,
the television. Take what is abandoned,
thresh the silver from the dross. When the water 
crosses the dam, be ready and on your knees.

	It is not a life if your neck is (is not) soaped with sweat.

Set your watch back, the rain is beginning.

I leaned into the dinghy’s oars, pulling through the brightness, Indian summer brightness, mute and clear

	as if earlier,

the portable radio in the lobster shack had not buzzed with news 
and the lobsterman in his Red Sox cap and faded t-shirt, 
painting his buoys as he did every September,
had not beckoned me inside.
Something terrible

	has happened, he said.

I moved closer to the words until we were complicit 
in the salt-pocked windows, the torn green shade, 
the swag of shocking pink buoys, the radio 
repeating itself as island light spilled through
the narrow door, the silence we kept

until he returned to his work
and I walked down the path to the beach
where rowboats shouldered each other,
trash smoldered in metal drums, and gulls feasted 
on corncobs and lobster shells.

Between Herring Gut and Smutty Nose
rocks cinched the harbor. The ferry blasted its horn 
nearing Pemaquid Point. I needed somewhere

to settle the fear that rose with each stretch of oars, 
threading me like light through strands of water.

But when I climbed the wooden steps to everything abandoned, 
signal house, keeper’s dwelling, boathouse, and bell,
gone too was the sense that anything can keep us.

Because there was nothing to hold I crouched low. 
Under my palms lichen’s rust clung to stone.

So much said to me of how
they were let loose on the Ford Fairlane
how he was tossed the keys and his older brother my uncle lugged over the whole of their grandfather’s tool chest
in a wheelbarrow for them to pick over and tear to hell
the engine bay and all its tickings stripped down
to metal and gasket all on a whim for no reason at all
or maybe the old man witnessed that hint of distance
and grudge between brothers even then no hope
hands fumbled and dismembered air cleaner from carburetor distributor coils from the block as if they tried to understand how each bit worked or just loved the coming apart
and when every stitch of upholstery was split
the faceplates and knobs off without a scratch
a whisper what if there was the trace of hope my father
finally happy to have traded Allen wrenches and drivers
without bruised knuckles without fingers dug under collarbones to drag him around the den finally almost there
at the heart of it looking to drop the dismantled motor
when the old man called them off worried about
crushed toes the car nearly down to its framework
but there was his brother my uncle turning away from it
staring at the Phillips in his hand hauling the tools
back to the shop and the young one my father left
palming the keys to something that wouldn’t go anywhere.

A girl marries a jaguar
so that she can get all the meat she wants.
No need to make a song and dance of it, she says to her family.
The jaguar comes to live with the Indians.
For a time the girl’s family becomes friendly with the new couple. As long as you know how to walk into a room properly, that is all
that matters,
the father tells his daughter.
Soon a grandmother feels mistrust.
Run your kitchen like a ship, she tells her granddaughter, then resorts to witchcraft and kills her.
The family becomes very frightened of the jaguar, expecting him to take revenge.
You will remember me in years to come, says the jaguar and goes off incensed by murder.
About hypothermia they say,
You’re not dead until you’re warm and dead.
The mind goes first.
Then you can’t fill the gap.
Don’t be tractable, Lévi-Strauss says. Be reckless.
The sound of roaring comes from farther and farther away—

Miscegenation (from Nuremberg, U.S. nigger-lover “slavemaster” + mischling “soldier”) is the living death of an old guitarist.
As in:
1769: King Cotton comes with bolls of citron for a woman
in trouble. He cadenzas wench to the tune of muddy water mandolins. Cornbread burns in the big house, and cedar plumes fuck angrily on swollen magnolias. A blade through fertile Cush means whips for whimpers. Slender, brown fingers clutch at something once known to be true. Her eyes, rapidly Nile-flooded, search for the quartered hymen of the Gold Coast. So this is marriage, she thinks, seeing her cream coffee zygote ripped from the belly of azure moons to citizenship. Gabonese elders tongue the mandolin’s whispers along front teeth. Cuts and bleeds, this infernal hurricane.
As in:
1949: James Arthur Baldwin had a dream last night that he was dead, hanging from a bridge. In death, dangling naked by the neck, Baldwin feels an icy overture on the tips of his toes. An avalanche of Parisian light . . . and kneeling upon an embankment, Baldwin sees his noosed body dancing luridly with the reflection of a white man in a delta below . . . music cresting his penis.
Buoyant as the smell of the sea, Baldwin plunges nation-first into the night-long twitch of a lyre. At dawn, he puts midnighted hands to the sun glare of his white reflection and plays the bridge on the bed.

As in:
2008: We the people, in order to form a more perfect union . . . the President begins. He stops. The sounds of mandolins and lyres cling to the roof of his mouth. This isn’t supposed to happen now. His advisors and speech writers have worked tirelessly for four hundred years to iron out the overture of history. But the President hollers his mother’s name and mulatto bone rolls on
a lightning streak to the radio of a Chevy four decades prior. On a Honolulu highway, an African and a white woman shift gears, songs into rhythm.

We are farther post-Christian and richer entropic, 
make more of our movements and less of our masses.

We matter as physics. Our matter’s less ethics. 
Without them we’re moral as moons and we orbit

no center. We make a mathematics
that roots in a stillness less stable than zero.

We matter as ether, no-telos our telos,
and stake your ascendance with flags of our absence.

And I am the downed tree 
and the thriving sorrel,

the calcite logarithmic spiral shell,
and the gum creature

oozing and perishing inside. 
My live corpse feeds

the frothing ever breeding; 
my multiplying

petrifies.

I suppose the body to be nothing 
but a statue or machine: lungs 
like bellows, blood flowing

as in a hydraulic system, tubes 
and membranes not unlike
a church organ. Memory, sleep,

hunger, pain—all can be accounted 
for mechanically, like the movements 
in a clock. I look out my window

and what do I see but hats and coats 
covering ghosts: simulated humans, 
moving only by springs?

The fever burned
through everything,
left only her body,
tinged blue, hands
folded cold. Her father 
measures the circumference 
of her head, the span
of her arms. He fingers 
each groove of her spine, 
traces onto onion paper 
the map of her veins. 
Holding her hair away 
from the nape, he cuts 
close to the scalp, removes 
her pineal gland, her soul, 
planning to plant it
in her new body. But first
he sews her slack mouth shut, 
makes sure the mask
of her face looks right.
Already he can’t recall
the way the moon flashed
in her eyes, but remembers 
the day she was born,
her skin soft and warm.

Descartes was traveling with his daughter,
but no one else had seen her. In the storm-dark of his cabin, 
they pried the lid off the box marked fragile,
found the girl encased: black curls nesting
on smocked shoulders. In lantern light her lips
blazed copper. She cocked her head
when they reached for her,
their wedding bands ringing
against her metal arms.

Liberticide optimized in an age
of glint democracy—a pretty line
for a pretty time continuously engaged— 
the King’s flag flown above the sign

of the dove—our hawkish Queens keening 
the horn on a third front—one occupation 
blunts another and another—meaning 
gummed in purple doublings, set to stun

dialogue to silence—to recession
from attention to what matters, dies—will, 
individual, broken by the extension
of hope and its perhaps inevitable

dilution—interest dipped, tinted, rinsed, and fenced, 
looped and linked like a tarnished chain reaction.

All said and done, for every foot
of majesty in the humpback breaching, 
there’s forty of proglottid adding
to the strobila of the tapeworm,

miles on end of herring-, screw-, 
round-worms, cyclospora, giardia, 
trichinia, liver flukes, and kissing bugs. 
Hookworm larvae wisp in the blood.

There’s also the cone plant’s stemless 
perennial lumps noshing on leaf litter; 
clionaid sponges boring into shell
and rendering a filigreed brittle lace

that’s the minute version of pock- 
marks a Colt AR-15 will bore on walls 
of captured towns, Mogadishu, Kabul. 
In sarcoma’s seeming sexual itch

you can hear something like music 
arguing, in its very logic, its own end, 
hear suspended subdominants, nonchord 
tones disperse in serial, aleatoric, micro-

tonal effervescences fizzing everywhere 
in the body of sound, the close-grained 
spruce of Cremonas, the alveolar whirl 
of woodwind. A tonal catastrophe,

history, arrhythmic cells, superfetation, 
ambush, hold up, what lymphoma does. 
And look at the land and sea, captives 
to a guest that’s armed and dangerous.

We walk to the edge of town: there
just beyond the wall we see clouds
of crows and ravens, also buzzards 
teetering down to pick apart the flesh 
that peeks from every flapping shirttail.

See that belly pale as risen dough? 
The dark oaks creak with the dead 
weight that hangs from their limbs— 
ropes taut with bodies barely turning.

We gather on the wall, idly and in pairs, 
looking out across the charred fields
and the smoking timbers of a farmhouse.

By noon, the hum of flies will lull our ears 
into dreaming orchards thick with bees,
but now in the chill of morning it is mostly 
the scrape and croak of birds just starting in.

Someone has knotted an enemy banner
to the tail of an ass to drag the muddy lanes. 
But the ass stands rooted in a ditch, 
shredding weeds with a ripping sound.

Up on the wall, a woman works the crowd, 
making the rounds with a steaming sack of corn. 
People buy a roasted ear for warmth,
holding it snug inside their hands for a long while 
before peeling back the damp husk.

Afterward, the most noteworthy change was children
born with polyhedral eyes. This gave many pause.
As always, authorities claimed it was correlative not causal but the willingness to assume risk was sharply diminished.

With all anomalies there is a desire for elimination.
For instance, the landowner who dispatched a rodent
using the rim of a metal bucket. Don’t let the softly angled
voice dissuade you. The speaker himself has killed in this manner.

With children, we know the ancillary symptoms persisted.
The smell of certain cheeses caused distress. Also,
coarse hair grew on finger-backs to the second knuckle.
This became a primary mode of identification: a commonplace

on market days to see women flipping over young hands
like pale crabs, for inspection. There! What did I tell you? Voices triumphant but wrapped in the grimy foil of fear.
Once accommodations were made such public acts grew rare.

Now it is only the uninitiated, the moronic, and ironically
the hopelessly young who need schooling in the new decorum. So which of these are you, that you persist with your questions?

Stick to your knitting. Nobel physicists 
should know that. Not my lot. Even Fermi 
began a betting pool, offering odds
our gadget will ignite the atmosphere,
wipe out the world—or just incinerate
New Mexico. A joke, to smooth frayed nerves, 
says Oppenheimer. Calculated humor’s 
smart—in smallish doses; helps your men 
defy their fears. But this? Frivolity’s
the danger here, not death. Safe in their lab, 
they hazard nothing. Headaches. Writer’s cramp. 
And yet the scuttlebutt these longhairs flog— 
that my incompetence once killed a man.
I’d like to see these know-it-alls make hay
with World War I stock blasting caps, fuse cord, 
and TNT.
	Midwinter in Vermont:
Winooski’s foot-thick ice floes throttling
the pontoon bridge my commandant had built 
all wrong. My orders: clear the ice. All wrong. 
We cut three-minute fuses, hard to light
or know if they were lit. The cold. The wind. 
And Littlefield beside me when the block 
exploded in his hand. Tore off his arm.
I knew at once he wouldn’t live. I woke
next morning in the hospital, too doped
to mourn, his bone shards lodged like shrapnel 
in my left forefinger knuckle.
			Gossip. Spite. 
These coddled scholars strut their ignorance.
The bungling’s theirs. My competence is all
that keeps their precious keisters in one piece.
I cleared them Triple A priority
when Ike and Mac both thank their stars for less. 
If they knew what explosives really do
they’d shut their traps for good and tight.
					Last night 
I called the governor—another duck lined up. 
Shocked silence crackled back along the wire
when I said, “Martial law may be required.” 
Then anger when I wouldn’t tell him why.

And now the weathermen are dithering
amid the hubbub at base camp. Hubbard
and Holzman, rattled by their failed forecasts,
flip-flop and bicker. Distant thunder bombs
the mountains. Experts second-guess themselves
to death. No guts. No choice but to dismiss
the both of them and make my own predictions.
I’ve trusted general knowledge all my life.
“The devil catch an idle man, he’ll find
him work.” My parents kept me busy, warned
against the vice of foreigners, the sloth
of other races. They were right. The whores
in St. Supplice thronged every corner, clutched
my sleeve and fawned. No wonder France succumbed, 
attacked by Huns. Venereal and pompous.
Even the Mona Lisa proved as ugly
as I thought she would. I wouldn’t bet on God’s 
forbearance. We have marred his work past bearing.

But Armageddon is our least concern.
This bomb’s more likely to go belly-up.
And what would Fermi care? It’s all some great 
experiment to him. If Trinity’s
a bust, it will have proved the world is safe 
from atom bombs. He’s not the one they’ll hold 
accountable for all those wasted billions.
All those years. Me, I’ll grow old and lean
as Rayburn, Barkley, Bridges pick my bones
in claustrophobic subcommittee rooms.

Six Schrafft’s if it’s a dud. Indulgent, but
my right hand knows what’s what: to Mrs. O
my gut’s a favorite tease, yet for this trip
she tucked an extra box of crunchies, creams,
and cordials in my kit, and didn’t smirk.
The extra pounds won’t nudge scales weighted down 
by history. By failure. Fat will be
least of my burdens.
				Face down on a tarp
gone slick with drizzle’s neither comfortable
nor dignified. But if it’s good enough
for Harvard’s president. . . . Our feet aim straight 
at Zero, like twin compasses. Ten miles.
And if that’s not enough, whoever’s left
will raise a statue, one day, in our names.

It only takes one soaked electric tie,
one short, and half the world’s plutonium
is scattered to the wind—and still no proof
this darn thing works. Each hour we delay 
increases risk. Each hour, dozens die,
while Truman, twiddling his thumbs at Potsdam, 
waits for word of what we’ve wrought. I put
my head down, pray, and wait for it.
Now. This.

Beyond the bullfrog
A lunatic living in mud,
Never attempting to seduce 
Anything, dissenting or otherwise. 
When you approach
Like an atomic cloud
It knows the consequences;
It detects you by using
A submarine periscope,
Which is, invariably,
Looking for psychotic pitfalls
And faults that lurk
In the crevices of human waters.

Hold the camera like this, one might see 
	curvature,
				bright smudge

a meteor crushed against
	the atmosphere, and beneath

the dust slick of a country
	where they bow each morning
and pray toward their own dark centers

	for something like
			a dark center.
Lower now, a woman walking a street 
turns her body into a storm of nails,
					a debris field
a string of men my brother trained and loved 
enter geared up, swearing
			this goes on forever
like this space where the planet hangs— 
blue fluke, cosmic Tilt-a-Whirl, Wonder
	Wheel--
		O Wary Eyed,
O Weary Armed, we are floating on the rim
of an aperture
		slowly closing.
You, who is
		not a thing, but a way of seeing,
	and the drone of the nothing blessing
of saying so--
				See us.

In Europe for a week from Tokyo, two days Paris, two days Naples, leave from Rome
“How often do you think about it?”
“Every day, I think of it every day, I’m Japanese”
For many years here after Vesuvius exploded in AD 79 everyone must have thought of it every day
Not as close as Table Mountain to Cape Town but as dominant Cliff and caldera
Vesuvius closer than Fuji to Fukushima, to Tokyo, to Hiroshima, Nagasaki, to Nanjing, to Auschwitz, to Bergen-Belsen, to Verdun, to Wounded Knee, My Lai, Cambodia, to Kigali and the Virungas
Pangas slashing, Little Boy|Fat Man on their way down Zyklon B and Kalashnikovs
“Life is indefinite”—2012 graffiti near the Naples airport repeated near the Duomo
Immensely comfortable on the Duomo’s wide marble steps as if sprawled there in the early 1600s listening to the deep richness of a dulciana coming from the nave
Stability of space
Regretfully ignorant and so only haphazardly imagining, inferring, what has gone on in this place
Temples before the Christian era back to the beginning of Naples and before that the Duomo’s site was probably a Neolithic ceremonial site
The past wrapped with the present inexorably
In the terms of the ancients
Since what to them had passed was not in the past
They lived with multiple pasts as real to them as their present
The Lucanians, Ionians, and other Greeks, in what was to be Rome’s and our Campania
Cumae, one of the many Ionian city-states, founded Neapolis around AD 600, the time of Sappho and Alkman
The images always there, a laughing 2012 woman’s luxurious dark auburn hair open to her hips in the sun, its hint of Grecian curls, the sea nearby within its constant horizon
Via del Duomo in Naples stretching straight through the city down from the hills and Via Foria to the sea
Alkman’s Fish in the salt deep of the violet sea, / And long-winged birds Via dei Tribunali around the corner, the spine of Roman Neapolis
The three decumani of Roman Neapolis still the heart of the Centro Storico Streets surveyor-straight like all Roman viae
Much of Via dei Tribunali still paved with the large, polygonal blocks of black basalt
The Romans called them saxum quadratum, the summa crusta crowned for drainage
There as Romans laid them and slick when wet
Basalt in Campania, stone of the region everywhere across the empire, and imagine carts, wagons, and chariots having bumpy transit
But their road maintenance was sound, the concrete filler gone now between the flush blocks that made Roman viae smooth
On Via dei Tribunali in the Baroque chapel of an orphanage, a flaring, dramatically topsy-turvy Caravaggio, his Le sette opere di Misericordia from 1607, three meters high
The angel’s threatening gray wings the quintessence of severe Baroque Christianity
The seven acts of mercy, charity, and grace graphically instructive beyond doubt
It must have been a vicious, dagger-wielding world that Caravaggio implies
Guttering candles, doors kicked in, clerical dictates, arbitrary fate
The vividly baroque Naples of that huge painting endures
“SPOILT” graffiti in spring 2012 on Via del Duomo and other places around the city in that peculiarly British form
Transitory anarchism, right there next to the “SPOILT,” the old anarchist encircled “A”
The anarchic always around in Italy, Spartacus up to Sacco-Vanzetti through to the Brigatti-Rossi and this century’s garbage strikes, Nicola Sacco came to Massachusetts from behind Foggia in Naples’ Apulian hinterland
As Boston once was to New York, Naples has been to Rome
Giambattisa Vico, 1668–1744, perhaps the first modern historian, was a Napolitano
La scienza nuova
Vico’s history of human societies and human institutions, not that of royalty and clerics
The common, inevitable rituals of marriage, burial, abstract belief
Specific experience not transcendent and repeating only in context
Like objects from the deep past, a hand ax, a Clovis point, a Jomon shard
In the regularity of the matter-of-fact, someone last handled it, chipped at or chucked it away, while sitting on a boulder or a log
Brushing away flies, favoring a sore toe, enjoying watching a fast-moving sky, they put it down and walked away
One object of an infinite number of objects handled, abandoned, and left to time
For the chipper, potter, or passerby in that instant in the past, handling it was a single concern or task in a normal day
And now and then such things formed by humans turn up to allow definitive archaeological insights into the deep history of that place, that particular past
As most things we handle are abandoned, pulped, burned, recycled, buried in landfills, like random objects that turned up in the ash rubble of Tower Two, down the line random objects of ours will turn up
A broken mug discarded, the farmer’s fractured clevis or broken tractor part, a dead cell phone, a beer can, thrown out like the Paleolithic chipper, the North American flintman and the ancient Japanese potter discarded what they had in hand
And so will Vico’s continuities be enhanced
It does not end
Great Naples goes on
Its bay with Vesuvius behind is a theater site of humankind Whatever Fukushimas and ends of empires are ahead
Here he comes, guiding his orphans through the streets, No, keeping them in the dark, leading them on
With their picnic satchels and stories
Of spruces and reaching the sun on foot,
The brilliant pedant, the hater of shouting,
Of slapping, of red pen, here failing his castoffs
By joining them, doctor of that madness,
All of Warsaw rapt with his lesson
Of how to walk, that last field trip, the parade
To the station. The soldiers would let him
Jump the fence like a truant. But he repeats
Their careless mistake of caring, donning
His boots in August and holding hands even
As he tutors them, so patient, like teaching
The teachers arithmetic, three miles times one child Times two hundred and all of them know
How to borrow from zero, the balance kept,
The left foot raised and the right planted, then Again the reverse, and from there Treblinka,
The same as learning the polka, the life cycle
Of the mayfly, how to breathe or hold their breath.

1
Under gnarled cedars the pencil company spared a century ago, along my barrier island’s
northern marsh, an anole—
its pinkish throat-fan scarred and
about furled—chewed a wasp in its toothlessness,
citronella warned the skeeters not to land,
oyster shells were heaped as trash.
And you, Minotaur, reclined there on my seventies couch. Flatly I said the word “father,” asked
you to free-associate:
breeding me sasquatch
if u can’t be a pious boy I won’t see u
hack away cocoon

“—STOP IT!—a dream in which your poppa flies.” Blue seeds were falling on us from the trees. You, of all beings, were about to cry.
my poppa was a stupid tiny horse in too tiny of a cage he sat on a lettuce bed like a friggin sphinx where his mane shoulda been were AIDS ribbons shrimp tails

“put ur hand through the bars” he said “push the water
bowl closer to my mouf” it psyched me out my arms wouldn’t move I couldn’t talk or gulp “it’ll all be ok” he said all girly “fire up the stove and grease a pan I’ll lay
three eggies and roll em toward—”
His hands suddenly reddened and cracked
like my mother’s. Dad’s mustache crept across his face.
To the inkblot I held up, he said those bones r ur hips when u were a baby and he traced
them with his uh his moist—
“That’s quite enough,” I said and hastily closed my notebook. “Our session is over.”
but u wanna be my matador? he asked, sitting up. “I wouldn’t hurt a patient, ever;
once you’re healed, be my friend.” He bit his lip with his front molars—brown, rotting—and growled,
un-possible! In his rage he would’ve gnawed at his face if he could have, at the mussel shells
stuck to his shaggy chest, circling his tattoos: a sparrow, a finned H-bomb, and a bluebell all orbiting a purple star within a horseshoe.
“Please?”—though a man,
I spoke in a boy’s voice, not a shrink’s. Carpenter bees bored holes
into fallen cedar branches. The marsh grass rustled.

kill me, kill me! before I cut u good
Then in a voice I knew to be a royal eunuch’s,
I said, “I don’t want to die.”
so kill me now
I cleared my throat
of self: “All I have is my heart—and bare
hands too small for my body.”
lame!
“Then how?”
u sing me a dream u can’t shake
“I remember huge thumbtacks pinning me high up on a cork wall. Below, Dad wore a butterflied cow carcass with puffy-paint graffiti
on it. His girl-ape with a long giraffe neck gripped an orange biohazard box. ‘Hold still,’ Dad called to me as the baboon scampered up
with a syringe of his infected blood. My left forearm, when pricked, twitched like horse skin—there was screaming, whimpering, then
laughing non-stop, party streamers, ice-cream cake from Baskin-Robbins. ‘I want a better relationship with you,’ he called up to me.
‘Now you have the key to the Kingdom.’”
ur tacked-up jesus dream didn’t murder me

but the monkey was cool so yeah move a cape toward my face and
force me to u stab me between my shoulders
“Uh, you don’t really have a body.”
one day real soon I’ll pop up before u u’ll think I’m a buddy
3
Another vision
or something: my father limping after me in a hedge maze.
He holds a double-headed ax.
“Boy!
Boy! I’m coming!” he yells, distant, unseen.
(Once I scattered his expense reports across the floor.)
He calls out to the night,
which is also a boy, “I’m behind you.”
I step backwards
into my deep tracks in the snow
and the camera pans with me;
leap to the side, the script says, brush away your traces;
I disobey,
falling back to make a snow angel till I’m winging
against gravel,
which tears
my puffy jacket, and he’s found me—
“Daddy,” I say,
“I love you more than—”

4
Then I woke thirdway through my life standing on that island again
north of Jacksonville’s sprawl;
and I began to walk, pretty much alone. Others—
my mother, all the men I’ve ever kissed—
were ahead, groaning,
on a beach of dead horseshoe crabs,
6
so many we couldn’t see sand.
We didn’t know where to go.
No choice but to step on the carapaces.
Demon, daemon, unruly
taskmaster, why so quiet tonight? A hero never stabbed you in the throat.
Never cut off your starry,
horned head and dashed to the escape skiff to raise its black, tattered sail. Was that you in the monastery’s grazing field far away
from here, when I peeled off my blue-tinted contacts? Then the boy and the calf he rode
blurred into a single beast; I didn’t notice his slingshot
till a pebble nearly put out my eye. Like John Wayne and his stud, they’d zoomed, between the two basalt shrines, to rush at me. When he dismounted
and leaned against the temple wall, no difference, none at all,
among him, me, and stone. I put on my smudged glasses, the unity fell away—I crossed my eyes, and it almost returned. Nearby,
novice monks in their maroon underwear passed a rattan ball
back and forth with their heads and feet, so carefully, as if it were the world. In that sacred—really?—field were you
with us, bull-man? And in the other
fields, where a bullet
was too costly so they made do with the handle of a shovel? You rage
and thrash within,
seven billion of us at your bidding.
Snorting, trying to bite your own ears, you can’t be ridden like a centaur, the one I imagine galloping across
a burning dooryard of lavender, lilac, though you’ll ride us off into—
shut ur trap
tall pansy
u no Athenian—
Shut yours, cow-troll! You aren’t my soul, my mo—
Duke no Dante with a cocky ghost guide
lie back chug
the beefy pho
from ur douchebag
canteen floss
ur pearly yellows rest in my bed-
lam rock out with my talkin worm we
likey anguish risk grub slowly now slowly—
Enough of your “slowly, slowly.” You’re just barely bipedal.
I can love purely—
ur nothing without me love’s dirt
tight blindfold cage—
caw for me like a crow baked alive—
even if it’s only the passion vines and Grandpa Ott’s morning glories on the fence, or the plum tree, its prunes in the brown grass—
7
Body of lust, body of fear,
what you imprison’s wilder, more precious
and ridiculous than I can say.
Fall away, 
fall away.

Where smoke comes out of chimneys where girls walk holding
such places still exist but not like that not like they did in Hamburg where innocent smoke comes out of chimneys innocent and it’s
but coats are routinely mended one’s mother mends them
the story goes even in Washington Heights she made gloves
and Eva her charcoal from an early age as if by drawing to return remake what remains out of reach it was a sad farewell
in Altona where the girls walk sans opa! sans oma! note the elevated train the neighborhood passes quickly the way the world changes
Evchen fast by your window the trees thicken fast by your sister’s side the both of you on it without parents one house its chimney going
or are those windows out— they’re gone from here
their fathers’ hands along the Isestrasse unseasonably cool
was good with her hands he with his camera
as a child makes real at the railway station note well-to-do though not yet three how strange a train the next is it lived in the landscape shifting
yet to be crossed waters reunions wended through with word of
the quick learning of relative terms Mother mending stockings until— the difficult patches to onlookers the stuff of
the after telling what has to do with before a layering of paint
a smattering of the beautiful over what stays cloaked
it’s all right if no god explains or a limited understanding elides sensory inherent invisible as a child inside
vulgarity and violence a threat of wings left center right
blank as faces children warn they point or cower
drowned & saved
and these are the rough preamble but that’s polymer resin ropes stays mysterious knowledge spatial
a train slides away children know it
and are right to do so
too washed out and watered down idea
Tom knocked someone unconscious
tried to work: going badly but what can I expect
after so long a period of doing nothing
went to Hermine’s got the Shit treatment. . . .
sculpture came. damaged
what paralyzes doesn’t answer doesn’t know
what loves what loves
too filthy for a for attic
place like this too roomy top room fake as the room
of a god-child
tilted long faces
the children w. women w. same
framed by windows but frame’s edge
not window make do w. what
w. what you know blank spaces
do with what you know and what you love
which knows how as if the earth were moving now
acts like it knows plastic
at every edge on wood,
at yellow traverse’s plastic all cracked.
another “child” drawing numbers,
and “adult drawing” like child’s. . . .
walked with Tom thru city,
bought boots high black flat ones.
industrial the textile factory
ethical the ugly of the true with the hungry ghosts
if you die hungry
do you wander hungry can’t help it mattering the god-child
in priestly robes if you go without a nap are you tired
yarn & wire what with the materials
god-head of wire
if from a high place you fall
of discipleship without end
don't ask polymer so many questions don't ask
hungry tired fallen don't ask as all are assembled
That which drifts the arm leftward pulled by some force by some scarring marking apparatus of departure and remembrance
a hood later mask later to learn the hands bring water bring bread reading about Dietrich in prison as you and Helen make your way
scape enter into the record the death of children by violence & into that on paper I’ve not because of recent events here involving that with
can’t mask-wise put mine on I’ve not been able for whatever reason
of ink-pencil sorrows though I know a mask is bought from scars and been delivered Eva your figure says no says teeth of time gnawing of time I’ve been moving in and out of the radius of doubt its built rooms
with hands my hands to touch the hair of my children absentmindedly carries them the something that begins and tries to finish akin to grace
urgent thing
the robes of our lady
and teeth of time I’m through messy child- grim ongoing project which you’re familiar
to approach our lady haven’t I have I as you healing time scarring bright messy and full
the something that
my father said
Dietrich in prison at Eastertide yes I carried you
I bring bread and water I bring ancients who whisper tell me
so I’ve come robe-dark and pencil-thin to learn the trick of talking
it’s the house doubt built what could I bring all the way
to restore its first-built bricks harbor without doubt full-sail
twin of the wrestling you do with your pencil I with mine
from there to a new place did you carry me here yes I carried you
of grace a father offers a mother more rarely or not at all and
offers to others because I am already dead simply draw a line what to bring to such a table pencil-dark apparatus of cathedral that visits you
with hands to table someone told you
to children about death through any childhood
the sleep of dreams
and fever-blent brought you were sleeping the kind Dietrich before the rope with hands
finds you rare
From a worka- day rusty bar
the saw cuts
a cube of steel.
Its face shines bright, as love.
Welded in arc and sparks
to a rod, in and out
of a forge spilling flame,
a steel cube is swung to
anvil; it’s yellow-red,
like rosehips in our valley.
A woman, bracing a
chisel, a man swinging sledge-
hammer. Twenty kinds of nerves
go to the hand. Like the line cut
in the block, now cooling, soon
to make patterns in another, you
marked me. Do we follow the
way of steel, its impure
alloy strength? A master smith
said: comply, but contend—make
hard soft, hard again, beat blade
and girder into the other, be it
rabbit’s ear or morel. Love, oh
love for steel too, is built sweet, out
of strict desire, for the you, that
is not you. You.
Again pointing to the fact
of our degenerate character, we printers
changing jobs
and masters
from city to city— rootless ones.
He would pour out some wine for me and some for himself— wine which tasted of the sun and of the soil upon which this city was built. At other times we would stretch ourselves out on the floor of the garret, and sweet sleep would enfold me. Then I would wake and drink in the light of the sun.
Simone Weil wakes again in the attic with Christ
by her side, drinking in the light of the sun,
thinking of her ex, Richard II, who told her
she was born a serf and a serf she would remain
and in this romantic comedy of one doomed king or another
Simone thrilled to hear this.
Let us trace the evolution,
Jesus, back through Bunyan
to the Interregnum pamphlets of Levellers and Diggers
ultimately to
Puritan sermons
and Marprelate:
Robert Waldegrave dares not shew his face for the bloodthirsty desire you have for his life, only for printing of books which touch the bishop’s mitres. You know that Waldegrave’s printing press and letters were taken away. His press, being timber, was sawn and hewed in pieces, the ironwork battered and made unserviceable, his letters melted, with cases and other tools defaced (by John Woolfe, Beadle of the Stationers, and most tormenting executioner of Waldegrave’s goods), and he himself utterly deprived for ever printing again, having a wife and five small children. Will this monstrous cruelty never be revenged, think you? When Waldegrave’s goods was to be spoiled and defaced there were some printers that rather than all the goods should be spoiled offered money for it, towards the relief of the man’s wife and children, but this could not be obtained.

First  the plague
and after  the workmen

begin to move  from place
to place   ready to take

advantage     of any
variation    in the

demand   for labor
in the   demand

Of all the linotype workers— 
two-finger typists all—

none remain. The bare
bulb hangs above the

machine switched off and 
our position gone dark.

Listen, Jesus, Tarquinius Superbus, that old playboy, cribbed the Sybelline books and buried the rest
for Jos. Smith. Marprelate
would have bought all nine books from the oracle and put them out
in foolscap for Rump Parliaments.
Where we once walked along the river a night sky
moving past.
Gerrard Winstanley (Digger) and Marprelate
your digging does maintain, and persons all defame Stand up now, stand up now.
Your houses they pull down, stand up now. Stand up.

And then afterward:
Listen, Jesus, Tarquinius Superbus, that old playboy, cribbed the Sybelline books and buried the rest
for Jos. Smith. Marprelate
would have bought all nine books from the oracle and put them out
in foolscap for Rump Parliaments.
Where we once walked along the river a night sky
moving past.
Gerrard Winstanley (Digger) and Marprelate
your digging does maintain, and persons all defame Stand up now, stand up now.
Your houses they pull down, stand up now. Stand up.
I have gone out into a future that is mine without you.
To make your return easier I’ve had the mountains relocated to the north.
It’s not that I’m afraid of time, it is, after all, the country
of my birth, now good Your Grace, it is now
I know it as a relentless place of loss.

There was some excitement here
the other day; you may want to hear of it when you return.
My love, I remember your hair as you lay
your head upon my chest dunsticall and absurd.
This country seems so much
smaller now our position gone dark and
the kindness you showed me then left a burr under my tongue
The November light
gray across the attic ceiling
when you poured out some wine for

the architectural details
you liked so much and which I intend
to proclaim in next decree

All lovers lie
in impossibility of avoiding
or prettifying in

November together
when we’d forgotten all day to rise
the absolute
practical expression of
Witness, My Grace, the greater prevalence of dissipation among printers than among the average

workmen—attributable
to the greater ease in movement
and the more transient character
of acquaintance and human contact in this trade.
Skill acquired in any printing house or any city
is easily turned to account
in almost any other house or city; that is to say
the inertia due to special training is slight. Also, this occupation
requires more than the average of intelligence
and general information, and the men
employed in it are therefore ordinarily more ready than many others
to take advantage of any slight variation in the demand
for labor from one place to another.
The inertia due to the home feeling is consequently slight.

The Young Irelanders took their inspiration from the revolution in France (1848)
and chased a group of policemen into the Widow McCormack’s farmhouse.
Wm. O’Brien, the leader, went up to the window to negotiate
and the policemen shot him.
A general
fusillade ensuing, the widow demanding of the wounded O’Brien:
“What will happen to my five children—

hostages of the policemen?” “Absolutely
nothing, madam, the rebels being terrible shots, though this being the second year of famine, shooting them might be for the best.”
And now good Your Grace,
the serfs are massing at Foxconn and the King rides out to them: “Serf you were born. . . .”
[This poem written on Foxconn
tablet and read thereon my lord this year. . . .]

The peasants demand
the right to move to take advantage following instanter on the slight changes in labor market
and Wat Tyler nudges George Herbert
who is palmed in a pamphlet to Simone Weil in the ruined cathedral of European humanism.

Marx writes to the executive: He’s excited
(in one of his moods)
a little nervous, yes, but the uprising in Paris
is going well
and word has it
Johnny Marr will soon appear with the Young
Irelanders to play
those chiming guitar bits. Karl, disappointed with the
singing of the Mountain:

“the chest notes were missing,” as the Occupy protesters
made their way along
the Boulevard calling for change and the party of Order met them
with chasseurs and dragoons
in an altogether unparliamentary way, driving the kerls before them.
The streets—
every street vacant and cleared.
News agents assaulted and (stand up now)
the students kettled
for the length of the day. Shops shuttered, and the wind blown
through me.
But Karl,
for his part, has found a young Frenchwoman living in exile in London and all
she will talk about
is walking. The labor of taking one step forward
and he wants to get
her on the printer’s committee just one time.
By walking Men’s reversed Feet I chanc’d another World to meet;
Another face presents below,
Where People’s feet against Ours go.

And there they caught Marprelate’s printer in transit at the airport and had him eviscerated, with the king’s foot upon rebellion’s neck and even so poor
a son of Wat Tyler as Martin Marprelate demanding:
When Adam delv’d and Eve span—
The sunrise over the Paris roofline and the foot on the neck in 1848, and again in 1870:
Material Conditions drunk-texting Marx: lascivious notions of
use value—completely nude
41 Beloit Poetry Journal Winter 2013/2014
who was then the gentleman?

He would pour out some wine for me and some for himself.
Then I would awake and drink in the light
of the neon sign—no Chinese walls to slow
the penetration of the market to stop our intercourse.

Material Conditions drunk-texting Marx: lascivious notions of
use value—completely nude

and the Legion of High Finance on June 13 raided
the print shops of Boulé and Roux, demolished the presses, arrested editors, compositors, printers, shipping clerks, and errand boys, the hacker who downloaded the emails was traced and given the longest sentence of the lot— handed down by the good grace of Milord’s Star Chamber.
When we find ourselves like Mrs. McCormack’s five young boys—survivors
in an emigrant prairie—
land of absence with the speculators’ mansions rising up, dark
watchtowers around us— another place where I am you cannot be. Not a place
but a variation in demand
carved up by speculators; mostly Yankee transplants from the East— toilets cleaned and kitchens staffed by the Irish and German.

And in all love I’m thinking: 
my people.





When, and if, we think of you,
it’s like staring through humid haze 
at the souls in some distant circle of hell, perhaps, or heaven,
though it’s hard to tell
with us here
down below,
where things get done
to us faster
than heart can feel
or mind master,
where things get done
to us, where things get done.

Dust in hand in sun
The shadows said you should not 
Or visit only
	Now & again
But how resist this land, its rust-

Hued rests of ruin, red paper wisps 
Of poppy     The present here
	Is always past, a chiaro- 
Scuro flicker distant branches

Down through the layers 
Below the basilica, in the green dark
	A sound of water

The most natural thing
	I turned you   were not yet gone

Within now speech- 
Lessness, we, as

Without   I listened
For your still, small voice

The seasons turned

Again, & then 
Ear-empty, mouth-dumb

Within, as without 
Felt what had been

Unwoven          unfound

Now that I am 
free from all I love
	the black scaffold 
of the bare 
magnolia still
	standing at 
the lip of

spring when sex 
	will gather
and furl
on its limbs
	like dust
on shelves   I see 
the full

bloom slum 
coming and
the tramp stamp
	sunlight of 
summer muscling 
the alabaster
	blossoms off

in a wind 
shaken off 
	as a dog
flings water 
from fur
	wrung water 
blossoms flung

earthward 
	garden-
ward white 
wax petals
	drifting in 
the grass as 
snow is now

	like chips at a 
sculptor’s feet 
now even
	in the green 
deaf of leaf
I hear
	the bare tree’s

disappearance 
reappear
	for me 
winter stricken 
ribs throb
	through the earth’s 
green dress

and reflect
	in the dun
sheen
of the meltwater
	pond   now 
that I am
free from

	all I love

Flora in the roadside ditch
are boasting the watercolor purple of a pride of bishops— 
vetch, knapweed, clover, and the rosebay willow herb; 
and I would make a poem

the way old Bruckner caught a flight of pelicans in his
Ecce sacerdos magnus . . .
for eight-part choir, key magenta, though these times the spirit 
slumps, mal-tended in this limping country. Now

a blackcap, fast and furtive, comes to feast on the white berries 
of the dogwood hedge; bullfinches,
secretive, subdued, flit in a shock of rose-petal black and white 
across the alder thicket

and I am urged to praise, willing to have the poem
speak the improbable wonderful. Today
the poet Seamus Heaney said he was leaving us for a while, 
visiting, with Moses, high mountain pastures

for he has been slewed by grief for the misery of the people. 
As gift and punishment
he glimpsed the heels of YHWH, will come down to tell of it; 
What name, he said, shall I give them, should they ask?

District and Circle, came the call, or Seeing Things. Now I
have been high on Slievemore heathlands; I heard that piercing 
whistle, peremptory and off-key, I watched
the sheepdog low-crouched, eager, willing to spring; the furze blazed

with a cool gold flame; blithering sheep
were marked with blobs of red and purple dye, cumbered 
with knobs of dried-in mud; what name shall I
give to the people, should they ask? Milady Hare, who waits,

rump high, brooding in a patch of sorrel?
Or Crested Grebe, perhaps,
elegant on the waters in brown Connemara tweed? The name then—Seamus, abundance, lover, the promise and the death.

The thread has no reason. It is older 
than its fabric. Perhaps the bacon 
was burnt or the juice artificial,
the bread more stale, the hotel’s 
prices hiked, as they are each year. 
And now the lights, with only you
at a table, turned off. This is not 
your problem. Chabelita at her
stove, Pilar feeding the staff, Andrés 
washing dishes, everyone is cheerful. 
They take their time. As you will 
soon. The city knows despair
as the land knows deception. So
too you, the longer you stay. Once
you wed, the bride removes her 
make-up, puts aside her veil, unbolts 
her silver dress. Posada de Las Monjas 
affords no new linen. No children
run the calles to the baker at dawn. 
You have not been deceived. What
is familiar becomes more and more 
revealed. The old trees rot
and fall in the streets, the new vines 
shoot up. The church bells, each hour 
still clang over the roofs. The anger
is not yours. It seeps in the wells
and sewers, brick, stone, and mud.
It was long before you. And will last 
long after. There is something, child, 
you need to take off.

Halfway through our time there it was late
and we were changing trains at Kanpur
when we lost Leo who’d been with us ever since.
It was not even that crowded when we got back
with tea and sweets. He’d been watching the bags which 
were where we’d left them but he was not.
It was late. Each of us, it turned out,
was suddenly missing something—Veda, pen, pot, scarf,
beads—that seemed, when it went missing, trivial
but became, over time, of vast importance
the way Leo went from quiet guy to lost guide late at night
on the platform in Kanpur when we were changing trains.
What had seemed reliable and in place, what we had come to know, 
what, despite being so bizarre as to be beyond imagining when we set out, 
had become familiar, and this, that had become familiar, turned on us, 
on us and not away from us, and Leo was the first to go.
It began with Leo.

Even James had had it with shrines.
If he had to take off those shoes one more time
there would be, he averred, more than just three hells 
to pay so we checked into a high-end hotel:
yes absolutely you are from where.
Two Japanese kept taking photos of Shiva’s
mossy lingam in the lobby without
first offering the requisite marigolds,
doubtless the blunt stump took notice
and the road back to Kyushu would be strewn
with untended consequences. Nadia
ripped off bits of her gray scarf and wrote out
prayers for something (we were tired of asking)
and went off in search of a banyan.
She’s really going to tie one on this time,
Jack said, and we collapsed in laughter as fraught
as the route we saw home in those moments
when you dare to look, when the rains
go into week three and have ceased
to be novel or foreign.

Early in the morning when it was yet dark she had gone back to the clinic 
to bring Blake his clothes and they said he’d been discharged
he wasn’t there so she went back and woke Simon and Peter
who came and up they went past the desk to the ward
but where he had lain only a small pile of t-shirt and sheet
and two orderlies each with good English
yes we had just been calling and promptly the Embassy gentleman
came as per instructed. Get Andrew and Nadia said Peter and left,
but Sarah moved not. Then at the doorway
a tall man in white with no name
on his lab coat: Who are you looking for? Why are you crying?
There could be steps right here, she said, going down to some river.
My friend was not clay and glitter not an image of some orange god
not a version or bizarre incarnation of smudged attributes not something 
you people bow to and chant at and throw your food and savings and shirts this is he, is he, is not that, we refuse
to dance in some street-crush of half-naked hawkers and then throw him 
at some astrologer’s perfect moment into some clogged estuary,
she said, spilling everything onto the cracked tile.
Later, she thought he said Sarah, putting his mace, spear, and trident 
down on a chair, and came over to her, standing just out of reach.

1
It’s been six years since angels crossed the road at springtime.
Six years ago the Cherwell carried boats of scrolls whose black letters sliced through ivory sheets. We undid the blue ribbons and the words fell onto our feet, cutting our flesh. We bled. Our feet caked, shards of T’s and Y’s stuck out as we ran home in a sapphire meadow knee deep in water, gray spires suffocating as the wings came down in millions around us.
That night at the ball we crammed strawberries into angels’ mouths but they would not keep silent. “The desert is so still at night,” they said. “You can hear the shifting of the sand.”
The juice from the berries dripped from their lips and splashed on our feet, burning them. “My stinging skin, where is my home, where is my home?” I asked. The night was fluorescent, your green dress fired cannonballs into the sky. “It is time to celebrate,” you said, “not to mourn.”
We danced. Fireflies in the desert broke into homes, hovered over sleeping children, entered bloodstreams, blew up spleens, burned up hearts, singed brains and livers.
“The desert rose to the sky,” I said, but you had already forgiven them.
Your mouth covered my eyes, my tears made you spin round and round, your waist-length hair catching the strobe lights. Your seduction was complete, how could I resist you? You pleaded, “Love me. Love me,” so I took your hand. “Dance,” I said. I wished you were dead.
At seven o’clock no sun rose over the valley. The streets were empty as we dragged our trains home. You stopped for a moment to take up the fabric in your hands and then—as if you knew I would need something of you—you tore off the dirty train and stuffed it into my surprised hands.

Six years ago angels crossed the road at springtime in front of me. I stood in an emerald green dress, alone. They carried you away with them.
The empty street wound round the river’s neck and as I crossed the bridge on the high street, I saw the boats sail out of view. I threw the green rag after them. I was free. I was free of you.
2
I have a memory of you alone in the night,
The rain outside, you screaming to belong,
My people you called them.
I will not accept that, I said, pushing you away, These are not your people, these are not my people. You wore your silver angel around your neck
As if it would protect you from hate.
Conquerors and conquered we have been
With such jewels of god hanging by our hearts.
Like the sand in the desert, you had believed
The burning train would never happen again,
That the women on their backs were the victims of barbarians, Not our people.
“Why do you want to belong?” I had asked you.
Sometimes I feel belonging is like loving a corpse,
History’s endless funerals.
3
I return without you to Bombay, the city of our birth. Memory is a curse; what have you done?
I search. I know that carved silver creature must be somewhere. You hadn’t taken it with you the night of the ball, you had left
it on the dresser by the window overlooking the crab apple tree. I must find that Asho Farohar, I must wear it, I must remember what happens when I hate, when I hate who we are because I fear our people are killers.
You could not understand why I do not like mirrors. In the mirror in the green dress we were the same person; my betrayal—when you decided silently in a room full of angels to leave me—was to let you go.

4
I have been looking for you in a hundred cities; I have been calling your name;
I watch the mountains rise up in Tehran like Vultures worshipping the sun;
I throw my net into the Arabian Sea and pull up Skeletons of exiles who searched for land.
Hesitant in prayer, I stand in an ancestral fire temple in Udwada Repeating softly, humata, hukhta, huvarashta
Good thoughts, good words, good deeds.
You are nowhere to be found.
Don’t my children need to know who you are?
Finally, in Pokhran, in an ancient haveli with
A Hindu shrine that leads off from a courtyard full of peacocks I sit silently watching for a sign.
The sand moans, the well runs dry, the angels do not come. They will not come.

I rise from black dirt, reconciled to mallows slaked in deep swallowtail kisses, fretting blues riffs to lick the fog from off the levee. My yang for this place is the yin in its ground,
the stock and staple of my talk. Its outcroppings, more earthy than hallowed, hitched to walking plow calluses too poor to miss depressions.
And yet, a provender of sorts: an olio of King Biscuit Flour, lard corn dodgers, and loose leaf tobacco twist doled out to mildewed gunny sacks, hung on half-crushed millstones to never dry.
There’s a jubilee here that began as a prayer where humid evenings come to listen. More refrain than spirit at first, but even so, a voice: one
that would free the Delta from herself, and reclaim
her with a psalm—a hymn, in a tongue for every color, distant but resounding. Own-rolled, scored with folklore and cipherings, grist to mill and list into river bottom
dusters, dis privies with old chamber pots, and bury company store tokens in dandelion tumbledowns still cottoning to rebel ordnance. Pawned
to one-armed bandits in sundering Woolworth parishes. Cyclones that began as gusts with gales of their own, fanning seed for more flowers—boasting blossoms much too handsome to heart half bloomed.

Two years Rich Cook had lived across the hall, 
Giving me rides in his damaged car
Where we breathed the stink left behind
By a creek that flash-flooded hood high,
But this summer Cook was a soldier
In the Ohio Guard, and I was reading
The Victorians and Faulkner’s novels
At Kent State where classes had resumed. 
Since my second beer, I’d been posturing 
As a near-miss survivor, and now 
Cook Was drunk and angry and ready,
He said, to shoot me if history
Repeated itself. He carried
A pistol in the flooded Ford
I could see through the screen door
Where white moths were frantic to enter, 
And he wondered out loud if I’d piss myself 
If he decided to show-and-tell me
Just how cowardly I could be up close
With him and brother Bowers just back
From two tours and a pair of Purple Hearts,
A veteran who had survived
Hamburger Hill and nameless night patrols. 
Cook asked if I was a Communist now
Or just some big-mouth asshole drinking 
Beer with someone who was worth a shit,
And I was ready to renounce my years
Of second-hand graduate essays,
All of those sweet-sounding platitudes 
Seeming as simple as pre-meal prayers
While I was composing apologies
And expecting both brothers to lay
A combat-tested beating upon me.
I could say the overhead kitchen light beamed 
A Saint Paul moment of self-knowledge
And conversion, but what it did was
Flicker once when the refrigerator
Hummed into life just before Bowers
Said “Fuck the Guard” so matter-of-factly
I heard the period drop into place,
Ambushing one argument, at least,
In Youngstown where May was fishtailing 
Into June, the three of us positioned
As if we still occupied our late-60’s rooms, 
A telephone hanging outside Cook’s door, 
The black receiver he had twice torn loose 
Before sweeping into my room
After 2 a.m., both times silhouetted 
Against the light, spitting, “It’s for you.”

The Dream of the Foam Toy Sword

is as real as you, as real as the reign
of your mental confetti machine. The way you want
to be a real boy, a real seafood chef or arsonist, the way 
you want to be a real housewife of orange county
in the damp cellar of subcellular yen

is the way it wants to be a real sword,
to thicken its foam into devastating iron.
No more thwacks and thuds when it's parried 
or bashes a plastic greave, it wants to clear
its molten throat and sing like a smithy,
it wants to strike the wall and gouge the brick,

it wants in the midst of the child's roaring
to swing its truest self, sudden steel, a new dense weight 
dragging its arc toward the floor where it will slice right 
and proper through a foot, hack it clean at the ankle,
no soft whump of an imminent bruise, no
chuckling dance of ouches but the godawful shock

of a lopped limb, of the world that ended
at the floor coming to end some inches above. 
The sword aches to catalyze, to cauterize, aches 
to inhabit its form and forge, its history
and factory of heat and blood and siege engines 
the way you yearn to make yourself

a staggering lover or salesman-of-the-month 
or half the father your father was, how
you churn your guts and wring your fists
to sift a cure for failure—just this deeply
the sword knows if its dream coheres, if it channels 
the current racing down the child's arm,

the capillary hum and the lactic acid choiring
to the muscles, burn, burn, the lungs' shuffle
that feeds the child's vision of paladin, assassin,
if the sword's dream meets the child's as far
as the wrist that it could turn, that it can turn itself 
into the dream and bite through birth and dawn.

Aristotle said trash falls because the earth is made of trash. 
Babylonians counted stars in a base-sixty system, but 
cipherless, so you never know if a single
digit means sixty or thirty-six hundred.
Epicurus found being composed of random atoms means 
fondle folks at will and swallow your fill.
God does not play dice, by golly, said Einstein,
horrified by quarkmuddle but fine with bending spacetime.
In the Timaeus, Plato claimed our maker is perfect but matter 
just sucks, so we scrape at our scabs and yowl for towels. 
Kepler nested his laws of planetary motion in a hallucinatory 
lexicon of perfect solids and the literal Music of the Spheres 
mathematically rendered into clefs and quarter notes.
No neurochemist alive can patch the holes in Pauline’s brain
or explain the polished clarity of her memories of the Depression,
picking tomatoes in a white sundress, or the dumbstruck
questions she asks her son, parting her purse to find a phone charger. 
Roger Bacon in the thirteenth century insisted our natures
spread from our centers like warmth from a torch,
tremoring through furniture and friends.
Until 2004, no person had seen a live giant squid.
Vision, said Ptolemy, is caused by rays
which radiate out from our pupils. When Wilhelm Röntgen
x-rayed his wife’s hand, she knew she’d seen straight into death.
You can imagine how the Babylonians would have felt,
zero being invented before their eyes.

first day of school
1
i would take the bus to you, walk through your neighborhood
& navigate the colors.
3
take my student ID to lunch. it’s clipped in the corner for
free.
homecoming weekend
46
come to the dance. my hands wand around your frame searching for danger.
58
you can wear my letterman jacket home. if it’s the wrong shade of blue then imagine it around you while it sits in your locker.
winter break
131
i would airbrush you on
a t-shirt.
156
i would fight for you
like my shoes or my boys or my indescribable need for contact.
spring break
214
i know all the museum
free days by heart. you the exhibit i steal touch from in shadow.
226
i’ll stay with you forever. even after the streetlights come on or don’t work.
prom weekend
320
jump the broom
or turnstile. no car except kiss. no ride except want.
331
this song is dedicated to you: either r. kelly or r. kelly. love
ballad or elegy.
graduation
333
you can hold me before i disappear.

What It Takes

is what it gives. Stones
pried from dirt’s grasp 
pounded to pigment, 
funneled into vials of glass— 
a spectrum. Weeds
boiled, cabernet
distilled, for inks to map
the distance from this home.

There’s an underbrush
of something else, a track 
where insects rise
in clouds
from the wheat-
grass tide.
Just looking long
and hard enough. In balance
with the sure & measured stroke,
I find, beneath, not visible, a single 
thin dark line.

We stopped briefly before reaching
	the bridge, your eye distracted by some
	silk that might be suitable for a cheongsam. 
	So I turned toward the mountains, your purse 
	in my left hand.

A brownish black goat planted
	a hoof in the dirt, lifted the other hoof, 
	planted it, shifted, looking down a long 
	draw toward an old woman washing pots 
	in stream water.

Voices like water over the rocks,
	clashing, chaotic, unexpectedly quiet, 
	carried up the hill, but you bought
	no silk. And I continued to hold your purse 
	in my left hand.

The brownish black goat lowered
	its head to the stream, so fast and cold, 
	so much louder suddenly than women
	or wind. I cannot remember if the bird sat 
	in a nearby tree

or on one of the rocks to sing. But,
	as you looped your arm in mine and began 
	walking down to cross the river, every voice 
	inhaled, and in that hush I heard it: high notes 
	in a clustered hurry.

One
Not from dew. Not from cheese or wool. 
Not from rain. Hair or horse dung.

Not from cabbage. Cobwebs. Sweet basil. 
Vapor. Oxen or mules.

Not spontaneous generation. 
But metamorphosis? In insects?

Nature’s lowliest. Unseemly. 
Even unholy. Not unlike Satan

Twisting into a woman,
Witches multiplying like maggots.

Two

With a mortar and pestle
She ground, she mixed pigments.

	Not from dew. Not from cheese or wool. 
	Not from rain. Hair or horse dung.

Green from the buckhorn’s sap,
Gold scraped from mouths of volcanoes.

	Not from cabbage. Cobwebs. Sweet basil. 
	Vapor. Oxen or mules.

On lilies and hyacinth 
She’d find larvae to raise.

	Not spontaneous generation. 
	But metamorphosis? In insects?

Some with blue arrows down their backs, 
Others dusted yellow and snow.

	Nature’s lowliest. Unseemly. 
	Even unholy. Not unlike Satan.

What’s more amazing
Than a pupa swaddled like a child?

	Twisting into a woman,
	Witches multiplying like maggots.

Three

Female painters?
Guilds bolted Germany’s doors.

	With a mortar and pestle
	She ground, she mixed pigments.

She studied the pupa that frees 
Itself from its case.

	Green from the buckhorn’s sap,
	Gold scraped from mouths of volcanoes.

Were the household chores never finished, 
The spinning of wool into yarn?

	On lilies and hyacinth 
	She’d find larvae to raise.

Along muddy banks, alone in her garden, 
She followed the insects’ fruity scent,

	Some with blue arrows down their backs, 
	Others dusted yellow and snow.

With the care she’d take with her daughters, 
She tended each chrysalis.

	What’s more amazing
	Than a pupa swaddled like a child?

Four

The larva, a spirit; the pupa,
A girl; imago, full grown and ready to fly.

	Female painters?
	Guilds bolted Germany’s doors.

Reliquaries—the Wunderkammern 
Housing insects fuzzed with dust.

	She studied the pupa that frees 
	Itself from its case.

She fed them sugared water, the newborn 
Garden Tiger, Hawk Moth, and Emperor.

	Were the household chores never finished, 
	The spinning of wool into yarn?

With brushes tipped with marten or sable 
She recorded molt after molt.

	Along muddy banks, alone in her garden, 
	She followed the insects’ fruity scent

Beyond the camphor of wonder rooms 
And their musty habitats.

	With the care she’d take with her daughters, 
	She tended each chrysalis.

Five

What if she found species 
No European had seen?

	The larva, a spirit; the pupa,
	A girl; imago, full grown and ready to fly.

Not divided in boxes, moths from cocoons. 
The White Witch drying its wings.

	Reliquaries—the Wunderkammern 
	Housing insects fuzzed with dust.

From which plants did they lift, 
Which return to, to feed?

	She fed them sugared water, the newborn 
	Garden Tiger, Hawk Moth, and Emperor

She engraved in The Caterpillar’s 
Wondrous Metamorphosis.

	With brushes tipped with marten or sable 
	She recorded molt after molt.

Frankfurt, Nuremberg, Amsterdam.
In the New World, what might she become

	Beyond the camphor of wonder rooms 
	And their musty habitats?

Six

Far from what she’d known. 
Surinam. Unmapped. Interior.

	What if she found species 
	No European had seen?

Caterpillars turning crimson 
And cream in the guava’s leaves.

	Not divided in boxes, moths from cocoons. 
	The White Witch drying its wings

Glimpsed through a blur 
Of heat or rain.

	From which plants did they lift, 
	Which return to, to feed?

A tarantula. Leaf-cutter ants. 
Larvae with venomous spines

	She engraved in The Metamorphosis 
	Of the Insects of Surinam.

Uncased, wings stretched 
Wide as a woman’s hand.

	Frankfurt, Nuremberg, Amsterdam.
	In the New World, what might she become?

Seven

Spider-like: the strangler vines, 
Webbed trees, the tail ends of monkeys

	Far from what she’d known. 
	Surinam. Unmapped. Interior.

Species teeming 
From canopy to floor,

	Caterpillars turning crimson
	And cream in the guava’s leaves.

Is it fever?
Between leaves, a flash of azure

	Glimpsed through a blur 
	Of heat or rain.

Glints of carmine, indigo, 
Ochre, and ultramarine.

	A tarantula. Leaf-cutter ants. 
	Larvae with venomous spines,

A Blue Morpho, 
Sphinx moth, Ghost

	Uncased. Wings stretched 
	Wide as a woman’s hand.

Eight

Spider-like: the strangler vines, 
Webbed trees, the tail ends of monkeys,

Species teeming 
From canopy to floor.

Is it fever?
Between leaves, a flash of azure,

Glints of carmine, indigo, 
Ochre, and ultramarine:

Her Blue Morpho, 
Sphinx moth. Ghost.

The hardest thing to tell—as I come in
and pass through the vestibule, the scent of dried roses, tomatoes, beeswax, oak—is not the tempered cool of the old bluestone dalles floor, the faint light
brighter as I step into the hall,
a garden view, the empty vase and the cut-glass bowl, the boy-flutist in the red pantaloons, A Night Mass in Irimbo, and the unreasonable height of the roofbeam—
is not the quiet of the Haut-Bailly
in the dark below emanating through the (locked) cellar door or the cherry and mahogany inlay in the commode under the oval mirror, nor the oak itself,
massive and ancient, swallowtailed,
scarred, time-worn and hard like stone, or quarter-sawn, and the flakes, medullar rays, bare like gold veins, eyegleam, a light in the hardest core—
is not the way summer mornings shone
with a light that came pouring in from the south
nor what I sense to be the wake of time gone by or even loss, but more like a change of the arrangement—
is not the way the Ninth hung here
like a thick impenetrable fog that will not clear, suites
like nebulae, Cohen, Fournier (comparing them over and over again), nor is it the pounding sound of Young and Crazy Horse
or the special sensation one has when piercing
the foot on a surprisingly sharp-spiked wrought iron fence while trying to enter (the shoe stuck and filling with O-negative, then dripping a bloodline or fil rouge towards the knocker
three steps up)—it’s more like a noise without sense,
a crack, or a snap, a velvet-muted sound from inside the case
or the house, or the natural hollow of the chest, that almost passed
unnoticed, and then this squeeze, a tightening of joints

and phren and the vocal cords more tense,
more tuned, and with every new column of air more ready for piping a language that will not come, something to do with the overall condition of the instruments,
a hairline fracture in the maple body or the neck,
a loss of hair suffered by the pernambuco bow, or the horse, the loss of wood of the tree, a tone gone astray, a missing timbre or peg, or the zing of strings touching strings
out in the draft after being safely stored
away for years, the first and last sound that comes with it,
the baton ticks, brass, clef à remonter, lock that turns, returns and released springs and clicks back into place, then this plain silence
of origins, absence, passing clouds, waves
running through fields like wild galloping mane, the push within
the thin green peel (and all else woodenly skeletal), me leaving here in ’93, keyless—this unease I felt when she opened the door.

The pages of numbered rows of numbers evoked fields of wheat. No wind, but the grain moved. Something in the grain
swimming. Above the grain, long tail feathers. Pheasants
astride or astrut? To resist the pressure
to discover something, the accountant lingered there,
until the feathers reminded him of the overblown scare of dorsal fins. And then came the prehistoric similarities of fish to birds,
not how their single genetic path divided, but evolution overall
like the bloody aftermath of an audit— everyone just taking off.
But it wasn’t necessary to go after these birds.
One of them trotted right up to the hedge where he stood.
No, there were two birds.
He determined the male by its bright color—
although they were both bright—
and drew a knife, a buck knife, though he didn’t know what a buck knife was. Yet he was sure he knew how to throw it. Given the imbalance between
blade and handle,
even with the slimmest chances of accuracy, he threw the knife and it stuck, though he wasn’t entirely sure where,
till the female, quite calmly or quite removed, got away. Brighter, he thought. The male collapsed without a squawk or stagger. He wouldn’t do such a thing in real life. He didn’t even like meat. This was more automatic.
A tool was placed in his hand and he used it. He had a modern brain
and older parts exercised it. He didn’t want to clean that bird,
to go any further, but he didn’t believe in waste or any effort unfinished. He sprinted from the field to the nearest house. Signs of life inside,
but no people. He plucked and gutted the bird in the porcelain sink,
but was more interested in cleaning up, of showing no signs of a mess, what he was trained to sniff out as something very wrong.
He went to the garage, the first place he’d expect anything to be hidden. The garage was highly organized. You could eat off the floor.
There was a man dying there. This really upset him.
This even more: his guts kept spilling.
How many times did people need reminding of what they did?
He’d had a motorcycle accident that landed him halfway up a waterfall. You really couldn’t land on a waterfall, he advised. Fluidity—
you would instantly be moved. And then a woman,
separated from the man for some time, arrived to comfort him,
threw open the garage door. “Did you say, brighter?” she said.
To him or the dying man? He couldn’t tell.
He was never good with words.

An enormous jellyfish contained in a pillar-shaped—
some might call cone-shaped—tank. Others just tank.
I loved pillars or columns and you. Still do. But on our way 
out, hovering at the entrance—different than the one
we came in—I preferred geometry to architecture,
space to be determined rather than filled in, though I was more 
like it. The tank lighted from the bottom, less to
see under than through the protoplasm to the nerve.
It collapsed to propel up, the only way
up, and then relaxed as close to fluid as could be
without wholly dissolving. Floated down
like a wedding gown or an eye.

Betamax yaks taxidermied actress; 
appetites chitchat factual ka-ching!

Rainforests talk Toblerone through 
Google Translate’s fluent cuneiform.

Some glib bullet grazing razor-grass 
either whispers scripture or it won’t.

The Om of State breaks moonlight 
on the bent bars of its big-ass cage.

	Pre-verbal 
	lip service 
	avers itself.

	Invisible Christ 
hanging on
	the sniper’s crosshairs.

Hander in, slicker on, upsetter, overlooker, 
Level man, bottom man, note man, hold man, 
Blanker, booster, bracer, bucker,

Nipple threader, head swamper, paunch trimmer, lip cutter, 
Change person, action finisher, brim pouncer, joy loader, 
Beater boss, face boss, mud boss, undercutter,

Flocker, linker, gigger, slicker, 
Floater, flesher, fingerer, flipper, 
Puffer, puddler, legger, sticker,

Faller, feller, filler, slacker, 
Duller, dinger, dinker, dogger,
Scarfer, sider, flamer, jacker,

Goggerman, cleater, clincher, clicker,
Hooker up, knocker off, layer out, screw down,
Face burler, tongue trimmer, body bumper, bone picker.

The blue mountains like paintings, modern and stark, but in no way requiring a smart comment.
Long gone, the nirvana of real work, of playing within the risk of irreparable failure.
Back then, we were heaven-duped, close to the plots that would uproot and signify.
Then, we snacked and telephoned, skinny heavy people eager for a hasty if cold exit, how the terrible
dates would suddenly shift, the house of self cycloned by the gulf stream of a single question,
the nightmare swallows made sluggish by perpetual frustrated nesting. And this is how we’d cripple ourselves away from forever and gold. Some would speak. More falling. . . . Like midnight in the garden,
a singing jag both beautiful and sad.
And how we’d move on, drivers in our long sculling boats.

Inside the wormwood of Europe 
the compressed grain

sharp blossom of mold 
in the moored boats

the edges of the harbor 
where the deer drown—

such leeches
even the priests cry out

the father's cough
his own child eats like

an obedient carp

When night calls for sounds 
to cease, the barred owl
yet cries “Who cooks for you?” 
and somewhere a woman 
slippers through the dark
to a kitchen where water drips
a slow beat on the worn basin. 
She nooses the tap with string, 
a strand that drops to the drain, 
and waits for each bead
to catch the thread and 
descend into a well of silence 
not even night can bring.

A mouse scurries in the attic. Outside 
autumn reads convincingly in winter’s voice. 
The neighbor’s wind chime turns the pages

of the early cold. You stir when I turn
the page: Aunt Léonie grows old. She reads 
the street outside the window. (And about

this Moncrieff translation: the French echoes 
like church bells in the distance announcing 
some foreign ceremony.) The lamp glows
exactly like a lamp. Silence upstairs. Something has found 
what it was frantic for. The cat has stopped whining,
no longer tosses and turns

in its hunger. You turn the pages of your sleep, pause 
at unknown passages. Decipher
dark. The mouse’s absence turns

the pages of the attic. The pages
turn themselves. You open your eyes, a line
of milk down your chin. And amid all these pages, 
was there no story? No refrain?

i wake
to the silence 
outside myself 
the way
a bustling
city falls 
asleep

blood is a costly word 
to take into town 
with scripture

they leave a trail
no one can follow 
without being accused

of doing nothing

The dog was thirsty, the man could tell.
The choice: to crawl, maybe fall, along the edge again
to capture water, so the dog could drink.
Not as he himself had done, by dipping face
into the gated reservoir, but from all he had, his shoe.
In the dark, as always, police possible,
maybe more so now than ever,
armed with their suspicion, poison in itself.
All I wanted to do, officer, was help the damned dog. 
Just dog, no adjective nor expletive, danger in inflection.

We drive north through silence
and rice fields
bristled with stubble, blackbirds
and herons.
The air through the vents is sweeter
than it should be
but sweetness about to change
to something else
like candy held in the mouth
too long.
Our eyes water we taste ash
on our lips
a crackling sifts like static through
the window.
The flames are not yet visible
just the smoke
flat as a dry cloud pulled taut
over the fields
and the lights
of the county truck
flashing.
Someone at least
is watching, tending
this smoldering
that could so easily get away
from him.

After each lyric drop of rain falls bodiless, shuddering
and rippling to the shoulder of this parched earth.
After this,
the deep-throated sage, artemisia, and juniper slowly lift, arranging their scent.
A desert takes what staggers to it.
The storm landed in unplanted pathways the spiritless withered places, transfixed nearly
to stone, and now the ground
is socked in a blanket of flat-patch goathead.
Winds hiss through, unfinished, to say something we don’t understand. What we’ve planted fails under the branchless sky, and the periphery of the property is wrapped in fast-formed stickers, a crowded geometry: precise, spiteful, yellow, without margins.
Each morning we scoop with trowels.
I had never loved a land enough to want to bend
and whittle out the dangers, to lift them up by centers,
needling the soft pads of my fingers where they gaze upward. Enough
that I would sign my name to each spot I clear with a drop of blood.
My bucket fills with five-sided thorns sprawling like stars.
And in the end, nothing left
but the dead-dry ground—
again shredded at the effort of pressing water to it.

Tell me why being there was always ending. Tell it four times or six.
I’m back to the way the liquid ran out of the cup.
Back to the twang of a body, and its declaration. From this I learned that I believe in grief.
I’m not revealing the gaps, the familiar repeating strange without echoes,
but want to remember driving into the mountains when there was hardly snow.

Girlhood takes practice, like all proper violence. Perhaps this is why I find it so natural
to accommodate the work
of my daughters, all the princess rehearsals, doll covens, the confusing menagerie of picture book
killers with animal families.
There are never any mothers in their wild, just the spontaneous generation of carnivore males’ cubs, and I, poor naturalist that I am,
must be constantly reminded of this fact; I must be shown the big cats, bachelor wolves, bruised bad bucks,
and the silly old bear—they are all a mess
of me. Consider this, then: what makes Owl coax a suicide of drones from my fur, or Rabbit unlock the queen’s comb from my jaw? It is not love, it’s fear; it’s not much
use telling that to daughters, though. Children are medievalists, sucking crucifixion through every broken reed
in the hundred-acre wood,
and allegorizing every last cub, lost to the teat. Let them. Girlhood looks so arduous, and it must feel good
to keep a killer beside you,
buttoned in bearskin. Who else should raise daughters? Who else can make a hunter but a hunter?
I work my work
and do not question why nature seems to follow our nature nowhere, or why the wild things pursue the hunt.
What did you think I was doing
all these years? My paws clang in a bother of brown pots and honey. Did you hear me coming? Did you?
I should scare you to death.

Cataloged: a child and a stone child neverland: the crowd of cupids, claw-chiseled; speedracers drag
the coarse grain of a last lap; a lone horse gags, buck-wild on the bridle.
Everything is Circus Maximus twee
for the gods, and every hungry son
of a bitch in Rome loves a dead driver, buys those racecar beds from blue boys’ rooms in the Sears catalog.
Perhaps this explains the custom of carving little sarcophagi with lost races,
leaving the bright flags and gilt dolphin
lap markers rough, the cupids half-relieved, the rock rock. All decent customs
have these silly calculi. Take elegy.
You make the bed, arrange the busywork of games, lump the toys in nightlight, and say goodnight: goodnight moon, goodnight little room, toys, monsters,
hush, and little monsters say goodnight.

At least he had a new reason for not coming home.
The fender of the Firebird curled darkly
in the grass beside the highway several miles from the house, catching each pair of headlights that went by
and devouring them within its curve.
As I passed I tried not to look at it,
deep green relic of the second car totaled in as many months, obscene and surprising as the proof of some old ritual.
The neck of the broken brandy bottle would have gaped near it,
the spirits discovered, they told me over the phone, against all odds because of the glint it made thrown from the window
as the Firebird was rolling. Then they gave me directions
and told me to leave right away. It was urgent.
So I drove thirty miles in the clothes I had worn twenty hours
and didn’t bother to fix my makeup.
When I arrived the sun had frozen in the haze
over the mountains and stopped getting brighter early,
trapped in icy gray and weak pastel that paled the mesas
that ended right before Nine Mile Hill. I went in just to be told
to get back in my car and wait. It wouldn’t be long.
As the morning unstopped, the gray cinderblock building
reached to the parking lot, where I was the only one waiting.
I turned off the engine to save the regular unleaded
we couldn’t afford to waste, and grew too cold to shiver.
They told me he had to detox. That it took four hours
to get him sober, while I wondered about lawyering up.
He came out as if he had stepped out of the bathroom
at a restaurant and was looking around for his place,
studying the sweat-brown brim of his cowboy hat
and scuffing the burgundy boots he called “ostrich titty.”
He opened the door, saying not to say a word, not to ever
say a word. Did I understand? There was nothing to talk about. This was my first marriage, one I’d agreed to,
and I knew too much now to want to know more.
Not about any of the things he’d done,
how we’d pay the rent, what he told his mother in Oklahoma, where he believed his prayers, if he did pray, went,
or whose miracle it was, his or mine,
that he was so good at walking away from every wreck.

Fuckin’ Dave sings and mutters aperch the corner steps of the store where you and everyone else went to rent your prom tuxedos. He sprouts like a mushroom, you think. Drive to the liquor store and as you pass the steps are barren and then there’s Fuckin’ Dave instead. You remember walking to the Stop N’ Go Video on a snow day for a Sega game and Fuckin’ Dave was already there, birthed through a stratum of soft powder, smoking, listening to a Walkman. He scared you, with his long hair and leather jacket and so did his friends at Smoker’s Corner, hands in girls’ back pockets and Mountain Dew at their feet. The girls smoked disconsolate cigarettes while their boyfriends held you down and shoved mud up your ass and so you walked home with mud up your ass and fantasized about slow motion blood sprays on the bleachers and gunshot-truncated pleas for mercy. Fuckin’ Dave is there now as you write this, pulling the world tight and heavy into his concave chest and hooking his feet at the ankles so it spins faster and all the cities and lights are like a long exposure of stars spinning around Polaris in thick felt. Twenty years now he has perched and smoked, staring at the darkened and empty spaces downtown, writing an epic in geologic timescale. Oh my fucking god you think as you see that visage follow your car over the crest of the tracks and the gentle yellow sodium light sweep through the dark of your car and the rest of Hurst Street, your street, the warm patched asphalt inviting you to rest your head and wonder why you remember the things you do. Twenty years now but not finished. The babies who go there now to rent tuxedos and look like men in the tall three-fold mirrors are impossibly young. And if Fuckin’ Dave is there on the week when all the tests come back positive and the diagnosis is terminal you may finally approach him and ask the right question.

You, with your camera, are a boy with a Ball jar, out trapping fireflies. My secret, though,
is there is no corner I cannot paint my way out of. You want me as pupil?
Fine, I’m all aperture. All film stock—silver salted and emulsified. But I won’t stop
with just you—I take it all in. Morning, with its halved-appled light,
exposes in me invisible images, gray web of water towers,
wind-riffled river—painting calls them out. Shows how even by day
this is a lunar city. An island of indirect illumination. I stand to the east and fit
my eye to the grid—New York, the country’s kaleidoscope:
lit/unlit windows,
lumen-tiled towers. Here is where
we live—this gun barrel,
this crested butte, this jack-in-its-pulpit
of smog-hooded sky. And there, in that glare, our window.

The Cloud 1
citi of never-ending gates
citi of evidence collected in barrels
DNA the 100-year storm left
waterlogged
along Kingsland Avenue in Greenpoint, Brooklyn, muck—
citi of Sutton Hoo of golden breastplates punk teeth false hair
citi of candied orange slices & sushi
that preserved that raw that saturated color inside the steam-mouthed kitchen
citi of birth
documents floating down to Jersey
citi of preserved women
hanging from fat rafters like antique brooms
citi of preserved men
shut inside glass cases on soft black sheets
citi of gods
citi of devils
citi of can’t tell the difference.

The Counterpane 1
Here in my bivouac
on the other side of the world
I will write to you
about all the head-sunk people
eyes bowed thick with fear walking like statistics up
& down the streets & the ones who turn their faces
& who I misbelieve are you.
I am not sure I know the difference anymore between this person & that
along Kingsland Avenue
though some point guns & others
kiss me hard on the lips
& I am so glad
we are one of those
kind who point with our mouths most of the time.
I could say your name
or I could just crawl across your chest & our thighs would speak the text
lay your head against my neck & come nameless one
everywhere
London, Mumbai, New York, Shanghai these species: citis
this genus: citi
slicing off the y
no good asking anyway.
You are in another citi & I
am deep here in myself
—less these numbers, less these names & eyes—
but it is the same sky, isn’t it?

The Cloud 2
well, there were people not on any maps but in citis
on the maps
in statisticians’ shop drawers
shedding citizens’ data onto squared tile floors
& in the server’s ever-spooling numbers
circumnavigating solar systems since numbers
were light
& seemingly infinite
space
& on Tuesday at 5 p.m. the Milky Way is finite while at 5:01
there is more, encore du, encore du
in bodega storage closets
& police precinct bathrooms
where there loom broomstick endings
fractions systolic/diastolic
in private club parlors where countries meet histories written
under invaders’ thumbs &
numbers men gobble tables where eyes are multipliers
citis’ fissures, fissions, fractures
. . . the ethics of loving are complex
if this can be called loving at all
the 4:05 p.m. from Newark arrives at Penn not at all . . .

but solidly within dream
nightmare & imagined futures arriving softly
across bridges leering brightly
in breezeway corners & last-century elevators
crossing each storey’s
horizontal steel
each light-pierced foregone life-line
water -line food-line power -line line-up
line of defense
graph paper
the Arecibo message:

double-helix human
the extraterrestrial
signal 6EQUJ5
forwards & backwards WOW!

The Counterpane 2
Your back
is a constellation
is code map & lexicon leading the way
across & inside
the counterpane. Time we have wasted wanting. This humming of hands smoothing
tugging
piecing
palming the skin. Take the batting. Take
the needle
& sew the
we of us between these
crosswise stitches mating belly on top of belly halves:
flax duff
wool tips cotton waste & rags.
Whatever it takes to be warm.
Whatever it takes to hold together two horizons pierced
through with light:
Jacob’s Ladder Flying Geese Monkey Wrench Crossroads.
Underground
Railroad quilts signaling what everyone

desires
kissing—revolution—the gasp— your hip fastened to mine unfurled & free.

The Cloud 3
Tal Afar citi of
blood stars
patterning soldiers’ boots
splintered windshield wheeling about Lt. ________’s head
firing the warning shots
flashing the hand
signaling
“Stop”
the Arecibo message
humans cringing
in the statistician’s office corner
Samar
Hassan
officially unrecorded
all these blossoming terrors
Samar beauty exploding citi.

The Counterpane 3
The pattern is here.
The shop is mine.
Hour passed hand along nape of neckline
fabric which
choosing chooses me— tools:
scissor, machine, spool blade & rule.
What happened
last night along the roadway home?
What happened last star-splintered year manning the checkpoint?
Or in that secret tree split open in the garden?
Pattern is here. That pattern I wasn’t meant
to have. Stitches organizing sky—constellations pointing toward futures
I didn’t know was there plural.
P = slow loves
perambulations
of dresses around the garden market flowers
patterning the day.
Do you have this?
Is there one of these? What I go finding
is never what I leave having found—
you.

Dear shopkeeper stocker
prophet
I came today
imagining
just where I was going & you suggested
new ideas.

The Cloud 4
the A train to Far Rockaway was bound to run over Sunando Sen.
“If I’d smoked a blunt that day, I wouldn’t have pushed him,” Menendez said.
a universe of subjects encoded in things
[a dictatorship
of—(preposition) belonging in, composed in—(preposition) of perpetuity]
once Blake opened his mouth “all sublimity is founded
on minute discrimination”
object becoming subject remaining object
Sunando Sen was bound
to fly when the A train to Far Rockaway arrived.

The Counterpane 4
My head is full of you & the wind has picked up your scent bringing you back to me. My head
aches from feeling
& the lights along the sidewalk grow yellow with their simple being
in the face of all their glassy eyes have seen— backpacks walking into distance
& shopping carts, carriages & scooters
people too. People not
in citis or on maps—people in each
other’s arms. Along the blue black walkway
beside benches crying with sweat are her & him & dogs
tethered to their masters
sometimes many in the hands of one walking with his head down.
In my brain today is hurt
I had not known I wanted & wouldn’t
give up. I had finished the quilt
so I went down & sat by the smell-less river—
just a frosted gray strip of moon laid down between citis that see each other across the river
but do not touch. These quilts
are called crazy. Patches pieced with no pattern—random except for intent.
The citi on the other side of the river looks like the citi on this side of the river.
Except I looked & someone looked back.

The Cloud 5
citi of alleys all back
behind the boulevards alley-living alleys of strays alleys of broken pipes alleys of rich tenants & porters
alleys of runaways & unconquerables
reading Plato
by nite light
citi in which the philosopher is not wanted ideal citi
every citi where
“an hour cannot be spent more pleasantly”
than at Harry Hill’s place on 25 East Houston Street
brothel, towers
of shuffled papers, bodies
leaning toward dissolution in water
187 metal slugs or 2,200 gallons of #2 jet fuel
& amortizing memorials advertising grief because telling always seems
the way
’cept the aliens ain’t listening
citi of broken eyes navigating sidewalk cracks
because placing eyes back in the head means scalding fire
walking the dead man’s route—
the Jornada del Muerto—Manhattan Oppenheimer quoting the four-thousand-year-old burn-your-eyes-out texts:

De Civitate Dei.

The Counterpane 5
She walks into the vestibule & leaves a bomb meant for the ambassador.
She walks into the vestibule & leaves an umbrella I left at the table
which pattern chooses:
“we’ll see when they carry them out” (Szymborska)
I take the elevator down from 14E step into open space
such saturated color, light, heat flicking like a peony—the concentration
required to press my eyes against her nape like a brave limb of birch
as she retreated into the kitchen stepped back out again wet & on fire—
exiting the vestibule I unfurl myself in the rain.

The Cloud 6
a topography of citi reveals monuments to Babylon
ticking through the pavement— glass, levers
slaves sleeping upright in dim corners & tunnels sniffed by rats
stealing gold: pharaoh, mayor, architect embalmer, saint
atop the thwarting bull
a ballerina en pointe
a bronze man reading
literature dumped from the Free Library a card catalog unwritten: occupied
blue horizontal lines, margin at the top categorizing “citi”:
she “will go out in time, will go out
into time, hiding even her embers” (Duncan)
I love you even as love refuses names refuses to be named
because it is refugee
my sweet untold ballerina
Hassan.

The Counterpane 6
If the branch is to bear its birds & angles featherweight leaves & invisible winds
for as long as it is possible to hold anything then it must make peace with earth sleep-spot, dirt bed & disassemblage. Swaying
early October toward ice & that clear lacquering weight, the nuthatch & its love
still hang upside down & that branch bend might be your crook of arm & sleep while below that improbable mattress unfolds itself with
warnings, wind signaling too, beaten up
leaves showing their veins.
The nuthatch does not love its mate. Such sloppy thinking. Nor does the branch care either dropping here or there onto lives built & lives
spent. Hear the snarling wind its teeth
in a hurricane season biting the hide of time
& you whom I want in my mouth, both your past
self & your future long-haired bark beauty—a soft knoll I might kern into, forget for a moment this fall.
I want what the many have wanted, my own
failings a nest of reeds holding up the tunnel’s mouth. Reed, water, splash & break, whatever’s left
there where earth asks sky its questions
worth the price of bearing.

The Cloud 7
sometimes there is no edge—
just sheets of cloud
statistics underneath, dying in each
other’s arms, equations exchanging messages on the backs of napkins & stars
sometimes there are no clouds—
nothing to cup hands around
color pure & tender-less, a message reader-less, the cobalt blue bedsheets crease-less & empty
seven million drops are walking citi
merging into cloud, falling, emptied, collected, rising again into five-storey walk-ups bleeding
mold the 100-year storm left
documents signaling life
strewn about the apartment & underneath
the coffee cup a note left encoding
the next coming, the next Sutton Hoo
treasure sunk in Greenpoint, Brooklyn, muck—
our unearthing. sometimes genetics explodes from alien directions
& Samar Hassan crouches
in corners. sometimes, there is life where none is wanted— but not in this house. I want
this & this & this, but not all
of these things want to be sewn
together. the pattern counter to plan is love.

The Counterpane 7
Disarmed is a word
dreamt by men who don’t love: what I have to embrace
stricken away & patterning the landscape’s empty floor.
These limbs are weapons & forgers of salt triggers & lines of sight
stretched across the plane of bed on the one hand
& nighttime the other
where my enemy might be
myself pointing back, pointing toward
what cannot be stood—
outside the light is daisy, your hair spilled
pillow-wise
wets the edge of my arm
& though I do not think of you, I
dream of you & our coming into a clearing
holding your arms to your sides in my embrace out there
under the drone’s eye, the sun lighting the crosshair’s eyes its green undeniable desire.

The Cloud 8
tonight the lights of citi come on for us or at least this is the story
we tell isn’t it because
the citis on the maps are never
the citis on the maps but a border that begs crossing this night & that remorseless fence
that cold-wet water welcome
drowning in sight of land until “my friend drag me out” & strangers in white gloves
pound the water out the refugee’s chest turning over coughing dust
from tunnel-low below sedimentary
rock below pressure
below green water oil tankers & cruise ships swimmers embalmed in their yellow frog suits
fishing bodies from the river
below catatonic skyscrapers staring at their beautiful skins winking in the river’s mirror
below air & stars & void. we dug another void below it all
& there were souls where everyone knew
they might be hidden but no one since the last god had thought to see & then to us it seemed
the bores we made & the souls we had claimed easing their way out the walls now
& into air
were the crest of it all, everything below now rock now above then air transfusing into air
all the ghosts in love with diggers’ light.

The Counterpane 8
You are the ship & the sea
I had to leave I never
had to leave—at night the lights
scanning the beach
seemed a new world
& as I crawl between your thighs
placing my nose in your hair
arms wrapped round your back
you are the wave between
me & the shore
I must swim through when the ship founders, briny grind whirling
sirens & a song signaling
“Stop”—not
heeding the lieutenant’s
glare. There’s a matter of life & death worth discussing
sure sure the lights are one
a new world
the same old world
I have grown to love
& will ravish
again
you citi
you nameless original (clear blue) smile. All dissolution lingers too long—
then a yellow
Vespa flies by, two women on the machine scissor, machine, spool
blade & rule
& we sew.






I am sorry I have no happy poems about the ashy hallelujah of knees. Whenever I open my mouth, ghosts raid
my poor tongue demanding names. I say Devonte & my mouth drips stray braids. I say Keshawn & vomit gold teeth.
It’s always like this, my one good song still unclaimed at the morgue, my hands try to clap & end up cupping a skull.

my father gives a lecture on the power of good pussy
meanwhile, I smack my dry mouth practicing Darren’s width, for whom I must make my jaw a legend if I want him to call me again. I make myself a wet absence of light, almost pussy with the lamp off & no cellphone glow. I’ve been mustering my way up to Darren. Before him, Michael. Before Michael, Kendrall. Before that, God knows who. Before my memory ends, there was me, playing contortionist in the basement, my body a fucked-up crescent moon, grandma upstairs cooking something with too much salt, & my tongue finally reaching the sweet slit, a first kiss all my own. At this point, my father is explaining what good pussy is & ain’t & gets mistaken for, how good pastors turn foolhearted nigga at a whiff of uncrossed legs, how it can make a man ditch a woman with clean up his mess or give it a name & raise it. But I know what my mouth is & ain’t & what I try to make it. I try my best to vanish my teeth, make my mouth soft & warm & almost named Kim. Darren, who say he ain’t gay, say shit, nigga & shake & rattle & roll his pants back up. He say it damn near feels like a woman & don’t look me in my eye. He pounds my fist when he leaves like we just finished playing horse. I know I should let my daddy finish, but I want to tell him I already know what my mouth can do. That the slick he preaching ’bout is a language I’ve practiced in the dark. He say only good pussy can make a man lose his religion. I say I have heard Darren speak in tongues, I say my mouth is a shiny, new god.

After the Wide Awake Gang pried away,
after Los Traqueros laid their sleepers down, long
after China left town, he build the tower.
After the gandy dancers arrested beds with ties,
bolts, steel that bled in slick silver plates. For the hand
to mouth to hand and back to god, for the god the strong-arm pulls and four-beat chants, all dogging drawls
for the doppling down.
The tower stood before the night that lasted for days—the night of Frye and Price—
before the errant wave of Thin Blue Lines’ batons, before
blockbusters, knuckledusters, Grape Street Crips,
toy drives lame at the feet of Bloody Christmas.
Before zoot suits were black and white and all hung out
on the line to dry, before the blur of claw bars, blues bars, rebar, death of the difference in de jure and de facto. The tower stood
and the tower remained.
Because a barely-five-foot man had it in mind to do something big, out of sight. Out of the blue. Out of being
out of place, character, fashion, control. Out of hand
and shallow pocket: seashells, mortar, perlite tiles,
rare ware. With the help, here
and there, of mothers who sent their children with the broken blue glass of milk of magnesia. A man build the tower
because it’s not enough, because it’s not enough to pretend to be untrained and clumsy—it takes nerve to commit
to naïve. Because we’re all outsiders
for now. He climb, he glue, he stammering hammer, he
good, good, good over bad, bad, bad all day for the divorce from home. For mnemonic device, vice, for fear the sled
is drifting away with Marie. For art
brut, no law but the raw and the rough, because it is absolutely enough to be alone and silent
and must be, whether we like it or not.

The speaker is Fab 5 Freddy
MC Agent Orange, a former chess prodigy, likens his rapping style to a drunk
kung-fu master: his unorthodox cadences are purple centipedes
winding around grimy beats. No Cuban Link, diamond-
studded Jesus piece—
just a wreath of firecrackers.
With a brown paper bag cloaked over the mic, he steps to the stage
& chugs imaginary swigs
of truth serum. In the other
hand, a tray of horse mackerel sushi & bluefin tuna
suggests he’s about to serve some raw verses.

The turntable’s faithful skinny arm has needled the 45 over and over all night while you have lain, I assume, passed out. Our shared wall’s thin as an eyelid
so now I know the lyrics “Green Onions” doesn’t have by heart. Wake up! Night has sung its way to morning, the town already fidgets and shouts. The street bosses have mopped your vomit from the sidewalk
and cursed your good times. The clock
has nailed its coffins for the new day’s losses. Don’t be dead! Wake up and play the other side.

1. Sweet Charity
Your cigarette will never leave your lip though it dangles on the edge of falling, caught between the smolder and the slip— your legwork isn’t fucking, but it leads
to fucking, stillness meant to make you beg
the bones to grind, and stop, and groan, and grind until you’ve sucked the ashes from your griefs
and stubbed the husks against the railing;
a whole life limned in burnt and broken lines,
the sour heart that went off like a bomb
with years of powder waiting in the keg
almost as though it didn’t think you gone;
a molten substance coiled in your core,
the red slick your footprints leave on the floor.
2. Rites of Spring
The red slick your footprints leave on the floor is paint I’ve spilled, or let’s pretend it is;
I spent so much of high school on the stage
I might not know the difference anymore.
Oh ugly body, up there even now
with no way down. Pina’s young dancers writhe; the girls flinch toward the boys; the cellos rage
and crumple into heaps, not knowing how
to stop. And who does? Not you, gray-haired queen who taught me my first steps. I mimicked yours. You told me I was gorgeous, and I tried
to hide how much I needed what you’d seen.
Oh dead man. I remember that first dip,
the sleek pop hidden in your left hip.

3. Cabaret
The sleek pop hidden in your left hip
is all the lust I wished I’d learned to wield;
nine, I kissed a boy on his left shoulder
to stop him jumping off the stairs; thirteen,
my tongue untied, sweeping a girl’s mouth clean; six, my father saying my bare skin
would harm the leather of his chair; older schoolgirls asking why I wouldn’t shave
or wear a bra; my next-to-nothing slips
at parties where the women pulled me in
to look like rebels, then turned boyward, safe, my softness both a weapon and a shield,
and I went home to finish, like a chore,
left, and leaving hungry: give me more.
4. Pastel Blues
I’m left, and leaving, hungry. Give me more.
Blues has a language for this too. Fishtail
and shuffle, jelly roll and drunken braille.
The needle drops, the record spills its guts.
I sway and lean against the kitchen door,
come here, come here, and press my eyelids shut. If this is shame, the flooded well of breath
she stirs in me, then give me shame, and play the thing again. I learned to dance to sounds like this in basement rooms, in strangers’ arms; we held and left, and held, and spun, and left. No blues on earth can make the living stay.
But ask me anyway. Lull my dreams dumb
and then some. I want some more and then some

5. More
and then some. I want some more and then some, then flip the vinyl to the other side,
and this is church, where we pray for the dead. But my dead are drunk queer lunatics,
my dead slugged vodka, groped and slapped and cried for Judy Garland, knelt to cock and clit,
so spare me psalms, give me the wine and bread
and blood. Sinnerman, where you gonna run.
Piano acrobats the river down
to dust. I’m through with soloing. Get up
and crush my bones, my friend, teach me the ground; there’s still a film of red left in my cup,
and floor enough to spin, so might as well.
I want a dip so low I can see hell.
6. Café Mueller
I want a dip so low I can see hell
though I’ll be blind when I turn back. These chairs, all over the damn place, nothing to do
but stumble, shove, and stagger toward the wall only memory can tell us is still there.
A woman trembles as she struggles through
to clamp her arms around the first man’s neck.
He holds her tight before the second man
steps in, manipulates their limbs, a lift
they can’t maintain, and so she drops, then back to clutching him, again and then again,
faster and faster, desperate in their grip.
This room’s a dark sea. I’m a piece of jetsam.
Hold me for a measure, then for ransom.

7. A Snake in the Grass
Hold me for a measure. Then for ransom take this dusty footage of a serpent becoming a bald man in a black hat. Fosse’s last captured performance: dancing as the Little Prince’s snake. A desert
and a thirst, of course, the dry temptation
and dream of death. A budget musical
no one with pride would cop to watching, much less more than once, but here we are again, because the body still believes there’s such
a thing as going home, a faith as dull
as skin he tries and tries to shed, but can’t.
So sting the child, as though you wish him well; then wind right round the body, sad old shell.
8. Ein Trauerspiel
Wind right round the body. Sad old shell on a hospital bed at fifty-eight,
a stroke; Fosse was sixty, heart attack; Pina, sixty-eight, lung cancer; Nina seventy, and if you try to tell
me about how she never choreographed,
I’ll dash your eyes against her fingers, sharp
as they became from leaping on their own.
Too, go ahead and tell me they were straight,
as if that means anything to a corpse.
To be queer is to make your need an art
and try to meet it anyway. The hearse
your dressing room. The streaking lines of makeup and then the water. Get yourself naked.

9. Run to the Rock
and then the water. Get yourself naked
for once, peel off your fifty layers of cloth
and own up to the cipher left inside.
When they dress your body they won’t know what uniform to give you, you makeshift
carcass, home-repaired cocoon, the moth
that only knew to flutter toward the light
burned out inside your eye’s white bulb. A simple drive: to notice things that blaze, and go.
As if directed on a stage built from the dark,
glare blinds all your lenses and heat crumples down your armor, leaves your case a charred black scrawl no one can read, but let it stay.
Say what it was you had to say.

10. Kontakthof
Say what it was you had to say
for breath and growth, the heart as it expands its catacombs and trailers (then balloons
to bursting? combusts above its basket?) When the theater is empty, one light stays
for ghosts. I used to climb to the dark room below the catwalk where the costumes hung and whisper blessings till the curtain rose; the cloaks muttered at the floor. Prop casket, empty as a long-abandoned lung—
and what of that desire, that death suspend its hold and give me back your obscene jokes? Queer too, how superstition seemed so dated before you imploded and turned sacred.

11. All That Jazz
Before you imploded and turned sacred
we flirted in the back of choir practice
as only a young dyke and an old flit
can; I said I’d marry you for your money and you agreed I would, and then you died not three days later, lover at your side;
I’ve told this story twenty times. Service
in the movie theater. A found clip
of you in tap shoes, humble, shuffling, wicked in brief flashes of eyes and teeth. The choir director asked your limp expanse, “Am I supposed to teach the dance myself, buddy?” You started kicking. Senseless muscles splayed: the strangest turn your back has ever made.
12. Orpheus und Eurydike
The strangest turn your back has ever made came in a dream I had before we held
your main memorial. I wandered up
the stairs at a gay bar and found you, no shock, obviously, except that you had
died. I told you I was afraid I might
forget the dip and how it worked. You smiled
and said you’d teach me again. As you cupped
my back your age reversed. You swept me down, then back, then said goodbye. The service showed slides of you as a young man: my blood stilled.
I can’t explain what happened, how I’d known
how you would look, but here’s as close as truth: your ghost taught me to dance, taught me to prove.

13. Who’s Got the Pain
Your ghost taught me to dance, taught me to prove these things do happen. I never forgot,
and every time I let my body drop
the weight’s a conversation with the void:
hello loves, I’m still thinking about skin;
how do you fare without it? How’s it feel
now everything that is can be your clothes?
Are you the shoe that fucks the ground, the sun licking the steel, kiss of the chalky pill
against my throat each morning, the barbed voice that murders me against my speakers, groove
as deep as grave, to keep me living? Those
are the ghosts we need, their tender shove;
pain’s the only place where we can move.
14. The Red Shoes
Pain’s the only place where we can move
as though we mean it. Pleasure is that too,
of course, a sea of vast and deep allowance
laced with teeth. Blood is as blood does. Ghosts are as ghosts did. These are the steps. Come now and learn them over. Remember the girl
whose shoes forced her to dance until she died and begged an angel for forgiveness? Be
too proud to beg. Move faster than the tide
that slices at your ankles as it grows,
your spine the long horizon’s swooning curve behind which there is nothing we can see.
Smoke in a bottle, tossed against the ship;
your cigarette will never leave your lip.

15. Ensemble
Your cigarette will never leave your lip.
The red slick your footprints leave on the floor
and the sleek pop, hidden in your left hip,
left and leaving, hungry. Give me more
and then some. I want some more and then some. I want a dip so low I can see hell.
Hold me for a measure, then for ransom;
wind right round the body, sad old shell,
and then the water, get yourself naked,
say what it was you had to say
before you imploded and turned sacred,
the strangest turn your back has ever made— your ghost taught me to dance, taught me to prove pain’s the only place where we can move.

He was not your vintage Cartier-Bresson raging. He lacked his stamina,
his temper, his temperament: All things scaring people ’round the bend, or he’d just be in your face for the fun of it.
He was your classic manic depressive par excellence,
with the hooded brow, the glassy eye gaze.
He’d simply mimic what he saw and turn away
consumed by demons, so many demons. So many limelights dimmed. Not the candid compositions, the accidents; not the
arbitrary cropping of the frame.
None of these, not even when the rain
came drizzling, nor could he scramble or remain
invisible for long in the ancient New York streets,
the inky blacks & whites, that harbored his anxiety.
He staged too much by his intimidations of reality,
prearranging all those true shots from the false,
or shuffling from the Bouwerie to Bleecker, fearing he’d be noticed, oi, vai! by passing all those blessed hand-me-downs and underdogs.
The pathos of the past haunts his every movement in the snow
looking for the last elusive shot to make, and where to go, and where to go?

Only Allowed One Step at a Time
and each step replaces the last
Yarrow sparse among the rocks Trail sign crooked on its single bolt
yet ant with a moth-wing dashes by

Climb all morning to the granite ridge
Love is stubborn, not always sweet: stonecrop growing from his bones and ashes
Mist on the wind, all day

A house sparrow smacks into the window; the cat punches two red holes. I wrap him in tinfoil—this seems dignified— not the cat, feline tin man, moody and ill-humored. No, I wrap the sparrow, the weight of two slices of bread, set him in the trash gently, giving him a pat. You see, I am not completely lacking in maternal instincts. There, there. I’ll unwrap you later and warm you up in the microwave. Sometimes I hate the cat for the things he does, and because he is a cat. There are issues my husband and I no longer discuss, a small no-man’s-land in our marriage only the cat is permitted to cross.
Once, driving down a dirt two-track in Sedona, a family of javelina crossed in front of us, brash, hairy, pompous in their ugliness, and my husband hit one. The mother—or perhaps it was the father—turned and rammed our bumper with her tusks. She nosed the limp pup, glared up at whatever animal she imagined our car to be, but a machine cannot alter the past, cannot ask forgiveness.
I’ve been thinking of the sparrow, sandwiched in his foil sleeping bag. The dents the javelina left are still visible in the right light. I’ve been thinking all day; I could use a snack. A songbird on toast. My mother always said humor was an unattractive quality, like buckteeth, said it was really only a kind of meanness. My husband has one of those terrible belly buttons that swells outward like a hernia, but at least he is not too funny.
What you have heard is true: the saddest moments occur privately, lugging the vacuum down the hall, stopping before a closed door. I might have put the sparrow in a shoe box and left him in the spare room. Sometimes the dead come back to us, the way a longing you haven’t felt in years quietly returns: Here I am. Did you forget I live here?

You are attractive because you have a beech tree growing out of your head.
I mean, whenever you have an intricate or powerful idea, a beech tree grows out of your head and I find this incredibly attractive.
I can’t decide if you are attractive because of the smooth gray bark of the tree and its coppery leaves and the great roots that reach into the seams of your occipital and parietal bones or because the tree is the physical manifestation of an idea.
You are so sexy when you sit on a bench and the tree growing from your head spreads its branches wide, casting shade over the small park in which your bench resides.
I have seen one or two other people whose ideas manifest in physical ways. One grew dandelions that quickly turned to puff and flew away, and the other grows birch trees that are beautiful but cast less shade.
A beech tree is a novel in which characters come and go in rooms darkened by wide-planked wooden floors, worn tables. Where light travels across a wallpaper made of faint roses.
I like to sit in the shade of your beech tree. I like to take a sandwich from a waxed paper bag, eating while I read.
When you are finished with an idea, the tree disappears. Like that. Sun falls everywhere.

A steamy fragrance, peracetic—
and two young women intimate,
dressed in disposable paper
in a field wiped out, almost entirely,
of teeming life. Under bright-beamed light, one of them as if dead. The other, hovering, her emotions fluid, contained,
like what you have seen in Vermeer’s milkmaid, pouring out of her hands. Each gentle pinch poke scrape
of the blade: swift sure pressure.
The effort to heal becomes what it touches.

Now that my mother’s elbows crinkled with loveliness are bone grit and flake
No broom can shoo her away from a cabin porch nor kerchief cleanse her sigh from a storm sash
Her atheist heart is rubble
And now her worried miles wash away, a hurricane lost to itself over northerly waters
Gulls, take up your scavenged glints and go on Fish, go back to your breeze-flecked leaping
Psalmless woman, gone to the oldness
God kept for her, beyond the fatigue of erasure
Coyote, crouch beneath the eaves of your cold, luxuriant hackles Deer, come to the edge of your intelligent shyness
Drink, for there is no one to witness you
She is unselfed, and safe now with all of her death and strewn too wide for a meadow to matter
O relic denture, wedding pearls, ungainly bifocals—toss these off any prow and they will bob for a moment
Small things, O sink-thee-nots

A ghost mother
stands at our front door,
witch daughter by her side. Wind blows
through us.
Outside, each house lit
with jack-o’-lanterns
squinting their triangle
fires. My son is a lion,
runs in circles screaming
“Hi hi hi.”
He can’t help it.
My wife Grace and I don’t go out much. He’s too
loud.
is profane.
His head glows inside
with ancient women
burning. Epilepsy is sacred. Epilepsy
“Trick
or treat.” I offer
the candy bowl. I have little left. My son can’t eat
sweets. His meals
must be measured. The little witch
this much.
takes a Starburst. I can give
My son slows, comes

to my side, his hand cold
as stone. 

1943, Shanghai, China
One night
a soldier asked all the girls
Who can do one hundred men?
I raised my hand Soonja did not.
The soldiers put her in boiling water alive
and
fed us.
What is living?
Is Soonja living in me?
1946, Chinju, Korea
One year after liberation
I came home.
Short hair
not wearing hanbok not speaking clearly.
Mother hid me
in the back room.
At night she took me to the well. Scars seared with hot steel
like burnt bark
like tree roots
all over my body.

Under the crescent glow
she smiled when she washed me. My baby! Your skin
is like white jade, dazzling.
She made white rice and seaweed soup put my favorite fish on top.
But Mother, I can’t eat flesh.
That night in the granary she hanged herself
left a little bag for me
my dowry, with a rice ball.
Father threw it at me
waved his hand toward the door.
I left at dusk.

1. Hans Lufft, Wittenberg
I was born
in the terrible Century
The Word made Flesh and back again
to Words Everything
was changing When
Luther rendered
the Scripture
in our Tongue
making the new German
it was I who
made it material
in Blackletter illustrated appropriately
lined up Bodies
on a Sheet
my Vendors cut
from Animal Flesh and dried
in the Heat
And the Wind moved
on the Face
of the Waters
though in the Beginning there was no Wind

2. Aldus Manutius, Venice
The city from above the city broken into woodcuts six of them and dressed
in ink The sun on the canals the rough white seams
between the parts of town Turpentine
and soot and oil flood the quays the docks
where gondolas are moored the tented markets
Above them all the domes of the Basilica like letters drying in a holy name
In my hand I hold a weightless sheet of paper
and lift it to the window’s radiance
until each slanted letter legible
on either side when held up to the light
is moored to another margin: the woodcut book St. Catherine of Siena holds swung open
like a city gate in her lined hands with four
italic characters my invention on the open page
of the book in the image of the book I made

3. Christophe Plantin, Antwerp
I press it to the page: the name
my father gave me bound in an iron frame
and Latinized Each new-cut majuscule awaits illumination Oil
and ink are heavy in the air as I prepare
the double-column index
and stir a tempest in the text
though outside too the house
blotted out in fire
when I might walk until the sky is white
with stars over Antwerp
and watch the dark canals below usurp them
record their images beneath the bridges
beneath the ships
which passing trace their cursive scripts
in the black water
Sometimes days after I’ve rolled it on to paper

the dim signature
of a single backward character
will linger
against the grain of my fingerprint
a word made visible through technique
though it’s not a word I speak

1
The law demands a representative.
Asked to translate, I cannot translate myself.
My family came for the Golden Mountain (Gum Saan), the California gold rush. When the earthquake destroyed the records (there were no records), my grandfather became a “paper son.” His slot was bought.
My father moved east to New York, found work, then west to York, built his Wonderful Garden.
He said Americans can’t eat enough Chinese.
The law demands a defendant understand the charges.
I barely know his dialect, this refugee, Shengqiao Chen. Not Manchurian. Not Cantonese.
I was born here, where the Underground Railroad ran. The Lincoln Highway travels through town, a ribbon tying two coasts.
The law demands habeas corpus.
The law demands a body to be prosecuted.
Messiah College in Mechanicsburg is my alma mater. My degree is in English. China is my Epcot Center where no one drowns and everyone buys souvenirs signaling happiness.
The law makes demands of the body but never of the soul.
If interpretation is what you need, that’s more than I was hired to provide.

2
I write in the report
The Golden Venture freighter
foundered
& Shengqiao Chen
was dragged to shore eighteen-years-wet illegal lungs split with salt—
off Queens
off Rockaway off ship ten jumped
over the side into the screws
“I would do it again” though
“the water was cold” as was the beach where nearly nude girls
chests crushed
under latex hands trying to restart hearts were muled from Fujian to America
vomiting sea.
I write in the margins
33 Beloit Poetry Journal
Fall 2014
what the screws do to you what lack of love does to you every law does to you
every single law signaling imagination failed

3
On my shelf, I never find the book I am looking for.
There is another, in a different language, with another spine. Another way to cover what’s underneath.
Alphabetization is a border fence holding out/in chaos.
Chinese has no tense.
Shengqiao Chen wants to learn.
The language of buying and selling.
I adjunct at the community college—English as a Second Language. Proper use of the comma and the full stop.
Proper frame for an argument.
Proper attitude toward the opposing view.
An attitude toward anger.
Errors of article and agreement.
How to create great forts of words, impenetrable.
To experience.
Of the actual.
I choose a dictionary and Pilgrim’s Progress.
The proper use of the subjunctive requires a lifetime to learn.
And even then unnecessary.
This counterfactual condition.

4
CSX [“how tomorrow moves”]
train cars full of chemicals through York
east to Port Elizabeth seagulls circling
toward Chengdu
where oysters drop from the rooftops
Foxconn built into Apple’s leaky
suicide nets [“how tomorrow moves”]
shift over or about to begin
China that new old Eden née America
rumbling out prison slits [“how tomorrow moves”]
beside the railroad tracks the mind’s hand
lets go

5
I write in the report
Shengqiao Chen
watches the prison vigils outside slitted windows folding origami hands from donated GQ mags—
“my friend drag me out” the sea.
I write in the margins
36 Beloit Poetry Journal
Fall 2014
how many folds
right angles
shaped in laps against rounded bars form palm’s meat
hand arching up the back hand praying upstate in York which buys the refugees
to fill the jails it built
awaiting the ships crashing down on Far Rockaway to come drowning to come
border crosser come

criminal walking five nights against desert come
the profitable refugees
to York
“my friend drag me out” come, the sea

6
What Chen cannot say
“I had been watching the mockingbirds on the ledge outside all night
& given up thinking
I was like them with their prepositions signaling they knew their way
in, around, above, over, with & through.
“There was just me here alone
so when the jailer shaking keys
like a baby’s rattle told me to go, I thought just knowing the door opened was enough but when he threatened to walk away
I said, Yes, I am coming, gathered my papers my origami hands
so that he did not think I loved his
blue eyes enough to stay
& ran.
“The door was like that.
When I thought it would not open & nothing could be on the other side, it did
& when I think it will never close, there is someone there saying, Hurry up.
“Here is a flower I folded for you
when I thought I would not see you again & here are my empty hands.”

7
What my dreams say
who does not want a new land
new city
clean
like god smelling Tree
the first time?
that is what you are to me U(S)
clear, sea, unctuous lover contraband
& Shengqiao Chen pinches dumplings
along Red Hook Batteries
singing subways
great underground tunnels crossing & recrossing exiting
everywhere
What the papers say
Death of the freighter Golden Venture towed down off Boca Raton mouth of stones mouth of ship’s bones rats caught in the trap
the Coast Guard the water cannons making her sink making her grave

marking her a site
for divers
swimming through her belly
“within sight of the Gold Coast” “laid to rest”
“an artificial reef”
“I am not dead”
inked
in the skin’s creases washed away

The rules are made in factories. The rules are made to be broken.
Broken people see themselves in broken things. Whole towns of broken people work somehow.
Somehow is not a place.
Yet you get there and wonder: how?
How, repeated, is a kind of howl.
In wilds and towns, how answers how.
How do you begin or end? There are no rules. Begin again.

It’s got one operator and two numbers, one
harried taker of incoming whose job it is to listen
and sound unalarmed, to first do no harm by recalling
which number a caller at the end of her tether
has called. One number offers antidotes for poisons
taken mistakenly. The other instructs how to bake
a Bundt cake with hemlock. Keeping it straight is a lot
to ask of one insomniac, who on quiet nights dials one
number from the other, taking turns as a certain injured
party, practicing for when he gets back to the dark
still house and talks himself through it.

I lean into sleep alphabetically but tonight I can’t follow the q or the g, only a lapping
that deadens all letters and seeps into margins, a lapping that drapes a blanket over recto
and verso, over misprint and ardor. Inksleep, moving with magnetic instep, pulling
the loose pieces to it, the run-ons and fragments. I wade in, awash in the blotting, hem
gone indigo, knees steeped in the deep blue that comes not with the terror of typesmear
or error, not with sessions of eyeshut,
no blotch or flub, no fear of omission. Just
ink that spills from its tipped well that seals the lids with lists
and inscriptions, the inverse of erasure,
the gathering stain I let at last overtake me.

1
A blue-gray triangle
fills the body’s chambers
breath across the collarbone quiet down the ribs flowing flame at the solar plexus.
Breath drawn from the space of air outside the body
penetrating tiniest nerve endings
Hear it See it
The sun reminds us of our time.
Peaceful curtain, drawing.
Blue-gray inside orange finger flame.
2
A bird knows
how to re-enter the sky
clustered at the fingertips.
flying from the buildings scaffold of wing.
Is the blue-gray triangle your mind
growing rays from the cool hands of the clock
towards a large still place?
Not supposed to live past the age of five, you wondered at what you saw: porpoise signaling from the waves.
Later, your poems tracked the sight lines
of aviators clearing the bomb trail
and from the ground, “the sky . . . streaked with pilots falling.”
Blue-gray porpoise, lasting, leaps into the sun.
Your mind skirts the universe starlight from canyon floors and names far and near as blood and stranger.
No use dying amid your sense
of having to climb infinite ladders and stay standing.

The high cliffs beckon.
3
The birds.
Approaching the city
from the west I see the rising
blue-gray towers, orbs, triangles, silhouette of mysterious Chrysler
and Empire State buildings.
The river strand shining white
like your hair around your living lined face.
Cool slices of sky in the river current.
4
Blue-gray, the changing cloudscape nest of orange sun behind trees
Gray changes to rain freshens the paved road.
And when I ask, you direct me. I leave the door open a crack
for higher heat—your mind aglow
and three new pencils dreaming beside you.
Looking down, looking around for clues I say little. “It’s all so uncomprehensible,” you reply.
Your eyes, the blue-gray
looking out from the horizon.


It snowed the night white and black And you are sharp
outline of this tender visible seeing
This morning, every branch speaks to the ground as it speaks to the air
February: an ungallant, undeniable between
This is the juice, the squeeze between, the time ground works
to bring round what we will know
and recognize—
How we need the verge
Caution Shoulder Work Ahead
Ice jam at the bridge Stream’s locked Busting concrete’s cracking from the beam
I hear delirium, the changing blood Water caught hard
Ungallant, undeniable
The water must through!
It could be called delirium Speaking to many
But it’s not Change

Stay I said but already she was gone.
I set the table: feeble sun, napkins rolled in their beaded rings.
Silver tiffin box. Outside: that tree. Moss and lichen, damp ferns,
all its tendril crack and spin.
I was left alone. Every dawn retaken. A paper hymn, each broken note: gate, road, tires, rocks.
Before she died she said: too many windows. Birds marked up the sky then it all erased, blue as before. Dark hole, brass horn.

One taxidermy grizzly bear, standing (fair condition). Albatross skeleton, mounted as in flight.
Domed vignette of songbirds in bronze leaves & branches. Foreleg fossil identified as mastodon.
Eight framed boxes of butterflies, organized by color, no thought to genus.
Everywhere I look the moon in mirrors: reflected in the gems of beetle backs,
planets in the glassy eyes of foxes.
A world unbalanced by so much keeping.
Murder bird. Milky flame of ivory. Feather thief. Name things. List.
Box of pressed ferns & orchids.
Notebook sketches of hummingbirds & swallows.
Taxidermy badger, taxidermy armadillo. Framed pine-tree study: its leaves, seeds.
Mass of feathers, box of jaws & teeth, Various bones, unlabeled shells.

As there is no adequate Arabic version of “as the crow flies” When you come into the land of Canaan
We are the distance

The Delineation of the Borders [1603]

That is the land

The Holy Land once the Promised Land or Palestine
[]
Palestinae Delineatio Ad Geographiae Canones Revocata
As there is no adequate Arabic version of “as the crow flies” When you come into the land of Canaan
We are the distance
That shall fall unto you The distance
Of the journey in the wilderness and the conquest and partition
And as we were worthy of sketching it so will we be worthy, with our own eyes The distance
Of seeing it built up and settled
As today it is called
The distance between birds and Jerusalem

As with a map, as with narrative
Any chosen detail necessarily blots out Proximate details

Like the new studies of memory— Items in a list spoken aloud Are made more memorable But make the unspoken ones Disappear

Say: that painted copse of trees A quaint flourish
Could cover over a village

this is the map without names & names without maps / maps of unprecedented embroideries of flora / maps of sleeping
stone / maps without edges without scale
if I don’t let my right hand wither if I don’t let my tongue cleave to the palate of I do not remember / unexploded coffee unamputated bread / room at the inside / room at the outset if an image of haven if image of heaven if image of leaven if cleaving leviathan then leave close the question who begat whom / before
we settle on a name / contract the pregnant question

The view from on high
looks down at the way’s turning, the instant an eon.
Only what lasts out the gaze is destined to appear.
Always before
the human has been lost. It almost is again.
The street, then crowded with the traffic
of drays and carriages, is vacant. No one strolls the boulevard.
What did not stay put could not be caught.
Only by happenstance could a man emerge.
He stands near the corner,
shadow fixed to page because he was fixed
to the spot in life.
His shoes, it is thought, were being polished.
The smudge at his feet might be the bootblack,
seen as the eternal, if it does,
might discern us.

The day dawns repentant, sky blue. Union Mission
hauls in food and blankets, toys. Pigeon Creek, now slaked,
plumb in its banks, yet still flexing at its gouged shoulders, is sick—
green-brown in clefs of sunlight— dull as a gorged serpent.
Too much to drown,
after more mine-rain runoff
than Mingo tribal land would suffer, its breach was obscene—massing
diluvia bent on blood feud. Sycamores snapped in tandem.
Roil stormed the house, cleaved its seams and sockets, white
shakes skived in coils from its face— the Pigeon in the children’s room,
counterpanes of water draping spinet and chifferobe.
The roof caved the porch. The saltbox jackknifed, joists
gone for tinder. A good house— swamped, then sundered,
vitals bared, the yard washed off to Pike County.

How could I care I’d come to be a member of a family my name so-called I rose from bed
made my way down the corridor up the stairs across the stone threshold the mole-hilled yard already in sunlight
sparrows already in bunches roiling.

Once upon a time I sat upon a curb where was I where was I going to be what took me aside the butterfly bush
what boredom lifted the hours away.
Once upon a time a bicycle fixed on the future passed a girl in marigold pedaling
one leg shorter than the other
not a word between us only once or twice a glance my way.
Was death upon her then?

Would it hereafter ever be over? Like waiting for a knock at the door I paced myself biding time
between thumb and finger the green-gold powder from a monarch’s wing its iridescence fading.


The night I left not fleeing so much as walking away from myself in time I broke my word
no moon no stars no last look back just making my way if not then where would I bygone be . . .

. . . or come to be preoccupied
with what across the inward eye amounted to my destiny
a sixth floor walk-up with an alley view interior to a shadow play whose end if unforeseeable
I still presumed to say.

Roving from Nike to New Balance,
Prince to Puma, I pick up a pair
of size 13s, some shorts and blue sweats, still feeling the sneakered beast scuff
his muzzle against my skull.
Two tall, hard-shouldered young brothaz fondle Air Jordans, talkin a little shit:
If I getchu down on the block
wit deez muhfuckas’ll be callin you Betty.
“A drowning man,” Mooji wrote, “is not interested in air” and as the constellation that pardoned my life goes dark, I recognize this snag in my chest, this cut breath, this
lonely, late mid-life knowing: the inescapable all around me, desperation all around—my own
stumbly efforts at love, my own trying to say say something, while the duck-speaking dickheads salute their zombie platoons.
Always big, bad Death posting me up, backing me down, the ball’s trick bounce racking my heart: I know he’s smooth with either hand, but still mean
to snuff his shot.
In my college days, when my parents were well
and the bulk of worry sat elsewhere,
I strolled around with my boys and mostly, we wanted the same things:
to play sports, “make big bucks,” and have
the fine babes find the come-hither in our faces.

What I miss is that damn sure hellyeah! we carried like crisp cash. JC, his wit, that manic laugh, Eric’s slick grin,
and Doc, so thin only his head
cast shadow: that loud halo
of hair. “Don’t touch the ’fro,” he’d say.
I miss my boys and the Ohio Players
funkin’ us up against the Earth’s black hips—
. . . you a bad, bad missez with those skin-tight britches
runnin’ folks into ditches, yeah . . .
We couldn’t help ourselves.
O Sex, song book of the Better Angels, how I craved and savored your generous pages—chapter
and verse and verse: kissing for hours, daylight lost to the liquid velvet of the tongue, the body:
delicious synagogue, cello hungry to be bowed.
These days I’m a Sir a gray beard to be addressed with deference, someone whose wisdom might even be vaguely revered.
I don’t believe the longing ever ends. I can’t believe
I’ll ever understand what I need to understand,
but in college I told Doc, “Prob’ly by the time I’m forty things won’t get to me as much.”
As I look at my life, I’m afraid and earlier today, in the mirror, I saw my mother’s face
shocked at how old I am. My goodness! How old are you?
And when I tell her, she’s sure I’m lying—and to be honest, I just
don’t know if I’m the age I am. Each year, part of a conversation I almost had with someone I meant to call.

You think maybe all you do adds up to a definable sum: the eulogy,
a campfire that lets survivors
warm their chilly hands, but really nobody knows
what turned inside you or why evolution has guaranteed that none of us stick around. Recently,
a friend shrugged, “Might as well be positive,” and I want to bear the affirming flame,
to believe in people because I’m a person.
I think about Kennedy’s brain blown all over his wife’s pink dress,
and Malcolm X, dying
with a new idea guiding his voice—
but whoever mentions Yuri Kochiyama holding his head in her lap? I believe
in the last word she saw lighting his lips.
Across the street, beneath a sky-blue sky, trees black-barked and bare. I’m in a café now, surrounded by clattery laughs and scrambled chatter, a mad jazz that would scatter birds. Awhile back,
one of my boys died. I heard about it long after—
the funeral, somewhere in Georgia—so in my mind’s eye, Dewey’s still alive: doin’ the bump, party-whistle beaming in his mouth, “Jungle Boogie” rockin’ the house.
I used to think my lucky days made me different somehow—“some angel
payin’ my way”—like my mom said,
but this poem
could just as easily be Dewey, almost remembering me at the same party,

under the same groove: my fantastic history filed down to a few finger-pops and some Kool
& The Gang. It’s hard to breathe
without the delusion that magnified my life.
I sat across from him in class. We both wrote poetry. Does everyone secretly
believe they’re indispensable? I stall inside this self amazed by my face
which is brown and not remarkable.

You’re a big he-man, Naso, a real stud in public,
but at home you neigh the mare.

Caesar, I will not praise your camp, nor lick the backside of your stamp.

Prick keeps trying to assault the Piplean mount with his poems. He ought to carry oxygen.

You see an apt lad walking with an auctioneer and right away you know he’s bought and sold.

O you who hold me now in hand, do not recoil
from these misshapen lines
nor shrink from touching me. . . .

O smilax! How deliciously
ambiguous you are, neither asparagus nor mushroom! How seductively mottle-hued! In spite of your thorns
I wade right toward you every
time you beckon from the bushes!

1
The soul enters the body through the mouth.
So the legends say.
I say: the soul enters through childhood.

2
A barn with its doors left open fills with night swallows.
In the hayloft
certain dark sections
flicker with movement, the dimension of depth.
Finally, stillness. The moon—
a threshing tool
revealed in the diminished light. The glint of its blade.
And the earth under a black quilt.

3
Sleep: that ancient union of death with its body.
The child sleeps.
As in—the child returns
to the time before her body.
But the earth always adjusts.
A blueness pools in the shadows. Dawn pierces her
with its strange dream.
The birds open their throats, cry out—

4
Before language, there was just
the peculiar house of nerves.
Now the world is buried in me, to the hilt. The sun burns off the mist.
I take my violence out over the field.

Bait Dog
It’s not the fighters
bred on hunger and chains,
not the losers, shot in the end
and dumped in a pit,
but the bait dog, the one
who crawls into the ring each night, back bent, gaze magnetized
to the concrete floor.
She crawls to me
and all my lost feelings return, their teeth sharp, unused.

you’ve sighted me among red lechwe lunging over waterlogged weeds, my snarl a curl slurring psalms of a mokoro sunday.
I am that claw or that hook in that mouth, that fullrot hole, that venomous root.
I am metal in the sole
of your durashock boot, a body toggling after an asp’s mass of fiends—heathen me, lurching low in the lichlands,
slaloming for meat—I am the flintlock, the longfang, harpooning through air the snare kept and coiled
on the battlefront a hoplite in scalemail, this merciless gab, both ghost raid
and drone war, this star-garnet crown,
this whipcord in longhand is me as a snake the charmer, the wrangler, the rat—those too are me. and the slipknot. and the bullet—

They have listened at your throat for root sounds, sought the Ur-language in your heaving grunts
and sharp barks, but you are only a corn farmer’s unsanctioned experiment,
your teeth rotted and rank with bitch’s milk.
Once they kinned you to a boy, needle-boned and reared
in his father’s aviary. Seeing you, he winnowed and chirruped
for his finch mother, his robin aunts. They tore you from his neck in a spray
of inexplicable feathers.
Yet you charmed the youngest anthropologist
with your lean haunches and swinging breasts,
the way words glance off your shoulders. There is, of course, shame in it—the wanting
what nature has not prepared for want—
and in his furtive pleasure at your messes, your spine bowed, your quiet straining in the corner.
During the ceremony you chew nuptial lace,
swallow seed pearls like pill bugs, and sniff at the preacher’s crotch,
your hackles subdued in a froth of taffeta.
You will not be the first to enter the bridal chamber
on your knees, your nails clouded and clicking the tile,
nor the last to nestle afterwards at the foot of the bed. This will become your routine, nightly the splitting of thighs,
monthly the measuring of your dark, estral skein.
Though you prefer raw things, things steaming still with life, he would wither you on greens.
Though you can skin a rabbit with your eye-teeth,
he will prod you to radishes. You will slink into the yard at night,
fatten instead on worms and frogs,
and once an eyas, storm-blown and keening
for its mother. When you cease returning for suppers,
he will cease to let you out. For days you will sleep dizzy on stacks of field notes until you wake one morning,
your nostrils thrumming with the scent

of his jugular. When it is over, they will find you in the yard crouched behind rusted scales, jawing your husband’s skull,
sucking, greedy, his white-shined bones. When, out of fear, they abandon a leather muzzle by your mat-thick head, know this:
it will be worth the belly full of buckshot.

1
Today my daughter testified de raptu meo, “Concerning my rape,” bore witness to the truth, The truth of that to which she testified,
From Latin testis, root of “testicles”—
In the vernacular, “cojones,” “nads,”
“Balls,” “boys,” and “stones”—and though she swore by none,
No man or boy has call to lend her one.
Her one great role—played by so many stars! So many stars, most cast for just one night,
For one-night stands, no second or third trial, Trying, under pressure, to say what’s right. The right to silence generally conferred on us
Conferred, on her, an onus to speak up,
Speak up and stanch those tears behind her words Her words could stanch. It’s all obscenely trite,
To write a scene—cribbed from a screen—that writes Itself, itself repeats and magnifies the harm,
The harm, not hurt, it took some balls to do.

2
Cecilia Chaumpaigne played her role. No balls, But balls enough to testify that Chaucer, Chaucer the couplet man, did take by force,
Did take by force what she alone might give, Might give and never have again. Released— By her released—he sent Cecilia ten pounds.
Ten pounds Cecilia gained for having “stones.” Chaucer’s stones lie now in Poets’ Corner.
In Poets’ Corner canons dust his stone,
His stone and those of lesser English poets, Poets whose voices dropped a pitch at twelve, And who, by twelve, knew honesty by tone,
By tone of voice—the men who hear it, know it. I know what silence in a church won’t say, Won’t say which of these poets, pens at rest,
Penises dust, rests easily in such a place,
Placed as they are so close to Geoffrey Chaucer, Chaucer the couplet man, stone silent, now as then.

3
Athens cross-examined Maycomb’s Ewells, You’ll recall, in To Kill a Mockingbird,
A mocking, superior Atticus Finch
Inched Mayella Ewell away from perjury, The jury itching to deliberate, Deliberately to affirm Mayella’s lies,
Lies she learned at the left hand of her father, Farther and farther, bent by blows, from truth. One “truth” witnessed on screen by many boys—
Many too many boys?—Mayella lied,
Lied like a girl, lied de raptu sua, Concerning a “rape” that wasn’t one at all,
But a confederacy—Maycomb’s fathers’
Fathers’ fathers bringing rope for that “boy” Tom, Tom “robin’s son,” no mockingbird safe from Finches.
From Finches too many boys learned girls lie, Lie ballsy with their right hands on the Bible, Biblically lie about boys they know they want,
Want to lie with, not to: lie is what girls do. Girls do not have what it takes to testify— From Latin testis—de raptu sua.

4
How many met like Cecilia and Chaucer? Chaucer in arras, whispering “boo,” pen stiff, Stiffened most urgently, though he was married,
Married fourteen years, and not to Cecilia, Not to Cecilia but to a well-born maid
Called Phillipa, like her queen, a lady’s maid
Made in a bed—her father a courtier,
And a courtier’s son—a vessel, a lady Made—doubtless—in release, release most blessed,
Blessed by the church, and with his wife ordained, Ordained the one vessel of his seed. How many? How many met like Cecilia and Chaucer?
Met Chaucer, and made him ache—so he did find— And finding make, make in his chamber, make
To understand him, at a feast, in half-light
Half-cast and half-withheld by torches,
Torches, sconces, tapestries, or in some crook, Crooked while his one vessel Phillipa danced her part,
Her part in a new reel, and rushed to enter,
To enter as he entered, in a rush, to reel,
And reeled, too, in a bawdy house, as some say
Cecilia’s stepmother did run, as her family name, Chaumpaigne, French for “open country,” or “field”— That field, as it were—seems made for meaning.

5
Today my daughter took Cecilia’s part, Mayella’s part. For Chaucer stood a boy, A boy my daughter “knows,” but barely—
He barely knows her, though they’ve met, this boy, The boy who got her stoned, the boy whose stones Ached—she passed out—ached until they didn’t.
I haven’t said yet how he met my daughter,
My daughter, whom he knows biblically: she drank Three shots, pre-party, then he put a bong
Bang against her mouth. Maybe they kissed, lips Bang against lips. Maybe he put his hands,
His hands, on her ass, in his room. Maybe,
Maybe his balls ached, like Chaucer’s balls, until— Until they didn’t. She’d passed out. When she woke, She woke in open country, no underwear,
Nowhere near his room. She didn’t know until— Until she did. She does not know him sober. Sober is Athens, not Maycomb. Sober can
Consent. Sober knows “no” and “no” is no Double negative. Soberly she testified,
From Latin testis, meaning “stones,” and “boys.”

6
My mother held her tongue and held a glass, A glassy silence seventy years long,
So long that even I learned to see through it,
See through the nothing that her mother made, Made and kept for her, until she’d make her own, Her own to care for—silence, a man, and children.
(Six children, it turned out, four of whom had balls.) The balls it took to break so long a silence!
The silence brokered, weekly, by her mother,
Her mother, weakly, strengthening in mine
What I reject in me. Of course her mother knew, Knew for years her husband raped her daughter,
Her daughter tasting beer and anthracite, Anthracite, tobacco, and acid reflux,
Acid reflux, like emotion mooted,
Muted, his slow bent motion muting her
Mute bedsprings, release coming to nothing, Nothing for seventy years, nothing I saw through.

7
When my older brother raped my older sister, My older sister says, I had just come out, Come out—peekaboo!—like the film based on
To Kill a Mockingbird, starring Gregory Peck, Star of Roman Holiday, my mother’s leading Leading man, who would not touch a lady,
The lady she wanted to believe she was,
And was, unless she wanted him. O Attic shape! O Atticus, O Tom, unable to keep silent,
Silent as glass, as vodka with rocks, not stones, Not testifying, from Latin testis.
My sister did not not not want to say it,
To say it is not Boo—is never Boo,
(Whose name means “be afraid”)—it is not Boo We ought to fear, but fathers, brothers, mothers.

8
A wreathèd garland of deservèd praise,
Of praise deservèd, unto thee I’d give,
I’d give to thee, who knowest all men’s ways,
Men’s crooked, winding ways, wherein we live, Wherein we die, not live: for life is straight, Straight as a line, and ever tends to thee,
My daughter, who did testify today
De raptu meo, and who does not write lines, Nor poems, which sound so round but wind,
Wind down the page, as Herbert’s “Wreath” has done, Must do, in black and white, for poems’ resemblances Dissemble. Life is not straight. It writes,
It writes us down, twists facts, makes images. Imagines, for example, a girl waking,
Waking up sober in life’s open country,
Glassy eyes open and no clear memory, Memory cleared by alcohol and life.
Life left grass in her hair. Life’s strong left hand
Bruises the page, as any poem must do,
Must do, to do a poem’s work—hurt and not harm; Hit hard and drive the reader to her corner.
To corner a mockingbird’s no sin, you know.
You testified, my daughter, de raptu meo, “Concerning my rape.” I have bent these wreaths
For thee, who art more far above deceit, Than deceit seems above simplicity. Forgive not poetry, but poems’ complicities,
So I may live, and like, and know thy ways.
Know them and practise them: then I might give For these poor wreaths, give thee a crown of praise.

Hold the glove to your face, cupping your chin.
Peek through the holes,
and the world will telescope out.
See your mother sitting in the stands. See the pitcher swoop her fast arm. Breathe in warm glove.
You have been put here because you are good at being wrong.
Be wrong well.
Catalog the dandelions,
the lumpy lawn,
the foul line’s chalky trace,
the cloud that rises from first base.
Stand, unready,
in the green nothing you have been allotted. Close your eyes.
Don’t worry.
Everything never comes your way.1 
Luck has left the tidy shelves of books intact 
and a leaded window in the back: 
each square divided into smaller, beveled panes. They defy 
and say survive, survive. 
2 
Three men in bowler hats stand before the shelves and browse. 
As if oblivious to the ruins of the house, 
the terrors of the night, they study spines, reflect. Wear woolen overcoats amidst the char. 
A timber holds the standing walls apart. 
3 
Under rubble, a ladder and a covered chair, crushed. The archive, leather-bound and made to last. 
What once was roof reveals the vastness of the sky. Inside becomes outside 
and everywhere the shock of light. 

In the disregarded foreground (beneath patrons, awestruck, on each panel's edge), out of sight of God's eye which rolls up the azure gradient of our flattened sky, careful studies of the unessential
take place: dill, borage, common daisy, mint; little mallow, tansy, comfrey, dandelion— the painter's hand was restless, the flowers
say, so painted us, who toil not (neither do we spin, but here we are); up there
the work of conversion goes on: the hand, dove, and wheel; an apostle; a baptizer— faithful, devoted, intelligent, wise,
the chosen people kneel. But we're the field.

With their frames the panels seem to be a window, so we look
in through a window to a window, beyond it to a square we know
from CNN or Al-Jazeera; anyway, the news. No one’s here. The angel’s
gone. The girl has walked away, to ponder things and keep them in her heart.
Anything could happen. The future isn’t yet. Outside, a siren passes,
then again: an ambulance. A cord
of oily smoke in a far-off neighborhood.
She’s left her book. What does it say. The page is creased and rubbed
and old. What does [smudge smudge] require of you. Do not turn away.

entrance, her body rotates to reveal the pale cotton
hammock eight months has made of her shirt
& the skin beneath it,
& she shimmies through the turnstile
in slow motion, cradling her girth & swaying,
more like a dinghy listing in its dock than any ragtime
dance. We pause for what seems an appropriate
length of time—one Mississippi, two Mississippi—before each spectral reproduction and nod
in the direction
of every art student proudly standing post beside finished
Rothkos & da Vincis made distinct with personality
& permission. How,
I wonder, can I be so different: I stand
beside her as if I did more to render her expectant
than follow directions. Thirty-three weeks & a fortune ago,
Luck slipped on suspenders & heels & appeared
at last as a blue plus on a pee stick from the corner store.
She is everything every book promises a woman
with child will be & I have little to do with it. You I can’t yet
know are not offspring nor descendent & your composition,
while original, will be
of an inheritance I’m unable to give. I cannot
dream the Mona Lisa in a wheelchair or call my water
lilies Monet’s any more

than I can make believe that you are of me. If it’s true that addiction is prayer gone awry, then what
is this ghost of myself I have cast into the double
helix so swiftly refining your lines? Your mother is van Gogh
& I am merely waiting to see what she will deliver into my frame.

I’ve lost Praise—
the missing green spine startles
in its absence, and that absence recalls the absent hands
that once held the book
at a café on Hoover St., in the heart—
if we can claim one—of L.A.,
where a man swiped his palm over his head and shrugged
before handing the book back to me, lighting a cigarette and staring off
into the distant light
fading
into dusk. Even the endless distances end,
when we don’t even long for the time to return. I think of the places
where his hand, any hand, used to be. Of Georgia O’Keeffe,
the photos that Stieglitz took of her
before the operation, before the mistress
and the pictures of her posed in the same positions. Of O’Keeffe, triggered
into new space:
harsh,
but her own, down to the bleached bones,
arid in red dirt. Give me that loss: the shape of me in shadow.
That
I would like to lose, to scissor myself from my feet and write something separate
from feeling
all this snow on my tongue.
Listen,
it’s simple. Praise is no longer on the shelf
where it should be: pressed tightly against (the naked right breast, the split- figure on the cover of) The End of Beauty.

Outside, her mind lies,
a set of keys. Proof of living, the brass steeped
in the snow. Inside
my mother watches her wedding
on the VCR. She wants
to unlock the last home
of this tuxedo gathered
like breath in her arms. She names
each child on the tape the same pretty name, one
she has asked me to notch
in her bedpost to guard
against mistake. When I hear
the familiar music and knock
on her door, she opens herself like a cloud
to let me help her. Phillip.
Gregory. Anne. I review
her siblings until it is clear
each small bird has flown
south for the winter. Outside, she takes the snow into her mouth,
proves it’s ephemeral in seconds.

I wheel my cart through the vegetable aisle. The leaves awaken a familiar tingling, of mint and pepper, pungent in my throat’s wall.
I remember Lahore: the humid jostle of aisles in a shop tucked in its neighborhood. Cartons stacked up front. The shopkeepers
squatting in the shade beside a host of flies dizzied by heat. Shalwars folded over knees. I shake the limp stems, spraying my hand.
I remember the trickle, the lick
of sweat loosened on my mother’s back
as the pot over the stove fire spat and sizzled
through the afternoon. Her hair frizzed, as if piqued by her temper. I stayed away, skirted the kitchen door and lined mats,
plates, and cups on the table, listening to her fingers snip the leaves
over the rice, heaped and steaming,
the pulp lazing in a pool of lemon, and her song, soft and low, easing into the afternoon.

A photo falls—of you,
of the city of saints. Behind you,
terra-cotta bricks of a Sufi shrine.
Centuries ago, a Sufi arrives at the city.
At its outskirts, the people hand him a glass full to the brim.
No more room, they say. Outside, too, the season is long and indisputable, winter locks necks
with another day, fetters petals in the ice.
The Sufi entreats them, returns the glass after placing a flower on top, afloat
and out of season. All day, I bury the omens— the phone call, the flowers, the missed note
in this far country—no longer count the leaves falling over the headstones
outside my window, the days that lift
and drop their cloaks at the sill, the regrets
that loom, the crown of hawks overhead.
The Sufi is welcomed. He graces the city in return with a day of endless sun. Beneath damp cartons
and spider webs, back in the storeroom,
I bury the photo. Behind me, the telephone rings. I answer it,
my mouth a broken glass.

A scrap, a scrap, a scrap.
And you cat-crept upon the warehouse, all smoke and black velvet, to see those dark scraps drain skyward—
that they might tangle their tremor in your hair, their calumny circling the streetlight’s aureole.
Mostly space—those scraps, that brick— though none can pass through.
Your rasp voice sparking its low medieval purr.
Lo, the guard tower eye! A scrap of shadow, a wing, a scrap—
not the unmown wheat storm-shivered,
not bricks knuckled together, but one mind touching another, tugging,
movement a contagion, a fever turn
wheeling above that bright ache of razor wire.
The lights in town no long flicker. We trade one barbarism for another. But how the mind still longs to bury its face in the rich fur of words.

If this tower reaches heaven,
who will deny us paradise?
With that promise, I build.
But what I think is a great spire
is just the lofty perch of Post Bravo— night’s eye with a machine gun cornea. But what I think are fallen angels
are the fantails of F-18s, shrieking fire.

Behind me an old Kurdish woman holding cherries in a plastic bag rustles gravel
the way you might clear your throat if you caught a foreign soldier pissing in side-alley rubble
that had been the walls and ceiling
and staircase of your home. Even rocks drag shadows away from me.
Old men beneath the street squat in catacomb cellars, drinking chai, selling rugs:
Turkish, Iranian, Persian woven patterns: old maps, unforgotten transgressions, borders made soft,
reassuring to bare feet so that color might bloom crimson in the pattern pressed by a hundred thousand steps.
Irbil is like Rome in this way,
it is like Athens, each city suturing new skin to the skeleton.
And this is what passes
for ablution: splattering dust from rubble. The woman coughs her black shoe
in the gravel again. Laughing, she offers a cherry and slow Kurdish
This was an Arab’s house.
With cherry seeds
and the hem of her dress she disturbs the dust.

Closer than a church bell’s dismantling. A stillness raveled rather than torn. I expected violence
brought forth upon good rust and megaphones,
upon command wire, unfastened earth, and buried yellow jugs.
I expected old men around gas-fed heaters
to turn their faces away from me, and children to throw stones,
but not the young girl at the hand pump water well kneeling beside her bucket to kiss the dirt.
Even the sun arrests its tilting, shade pools at the minaret’s base like thawed ice run out from the stones.
I did not expect the song to be lamb smoke wandering paper-thin between the furrows of sunset-hammered
rice and poppy—a drifting current of lemon through red wine, a ribbon sometimes
touching the lips—obliging the lips to touch the hands, the forehead the ground.

In Jeddah, city of Eve, weeks flew, calendar days as useless as money pegged to the dollar, as useless to me
as a passport without a guardian’s signature, as trivial as the marriage proposal
from the middle-aged man whose room
I was led to by a scheming sister after
a ladies’ luncheon. The latest in a line of eligible girls to be snared so. And she from an old family.
When I confided to the Red Sea, the pipes
in my bathroom burst. Hajjaj, our handyman with Nile Delta wisdom, scratched his head.
To the sure earth of Arabia I entrusted myself on my carpet at noon, envisioned a Nabatean door carved into rock, entered there.
The pulse of my heart a tether unwinding
behind me. In the rose chamber before me
a man, no, what smokeless fire perceives to be man,
form not as crisp as his sharp yellow eyes. Here was an ally. If you have nothing
to say to the jinn, then say nothing.
All those long days of two calendars,
the sun pressed in as the virtue police patrolled the seashore and shops, cafés, and malls.
I chose my veils, my perfume, and my jewelry with care, then my face and fingernails became provocative. And then a fatwa
forbade women to be alone with male jinn. Tedious are the days behind a woman’s gilded ribcage, awaiting the key to be let out.

We want customers to bring us arrows fletched with macaw feathers and whisper the password—
sterile—three times before we let them in. We want men with narrow hips and a good memory for myth
to keep us up all night reading Ovid’s Amores
or recite Sappho as they groom their mustaches
in the mirror above the bed. We want to bite,
to climb, to zipper our way back into the story where
the Amazon queen appeared in her girdle before
three children and foretold the lumberjack apocalypse.
We want the men who bus in from sapphire mines and rubber plantations to spend a week’s pay
on ten minutes with a one-breasted woman who’ll let them call her Hippolyta, the sound of their bodies
like a fresh catch slapping the dock, wet and desperate and piscine, like damp laundry flapping on the line,
like a mule at its branding, like a novitiate visited by the Holy Spirit in the middle of her vespers.
If we want sonnets to praise the downy hairs
on our upper lips, who cares? If we want to learn about
the French Revolution as we eat cake, so what? Only in this building on this day in this town does
anyone commemorate the children returning home, their knees already scabbing with bark, to warn
of bulldozers and chainsaws and the perils of flying kites next to power lines. We celebrate the miracle
one customer at a time, nocking our arrows and aiming for the sun’s white eye. We want

to write in our diaries—Dear, there are some things I would not do for pleasure. We want it to be true.

The leash yanks—a trace, invisible messages trailing
I open a book, seeking a remembered passage
as far down the scale of life as the worms and even perhaps to the amoebas, we meet a general alertness of animals,
not directed toward any specific satisfaction, but merely exploring what is there; an urge to achieve intellectual control over the situations confronting them
grackles cackle in the bamboo

suspended from nothing, pennants of breathing white putty hovered above our heads, one for each, pursuing us wherever we ran
in the green field—dread


when the blood vessel broke in the left brain of the neuroscientist, she couldn’t say where she ended and universe began—
it was all a matter of energy
shimmering swim of molecules atoms streaming fabric of being belonging
her tears recalled when she could speak again, out of her right mind, trying to explain
to the hungry brains gathered in the hall
what she’d seen and touched on the other side

the seeking circuit fires during the search for food, not during the final locating and eating of the food. it’s the search that feels so good

in a dream I vomit
living fish—
the river, somewhere close

words shaping air, stroking skins (braided bark, old scar) awake
in the mind flesh flames
with rustlings of switchgrass,
crow caws, purple starflower and fire ants, the quiet cow
come to the killing floor, the body a story being
told, untold tongues telling

inside: spin and pull,
whirled space of muons
and bosons, weak force, strong force, quarks named “strange” and “charm”
dark energy, dark matter
outside: this cosmos one among many lifeless or haunted by life forms, seeking

say nothing say no one
is ever lost forever lost say what slips from saying what is said by “this leaf” or “the rain” say the names we can’t keep what keeps us

absconded gods, Ithaka, Eldorado, ghosts of appetite—
say emptiness
is an entrance,
disorderly ditch
of pungent mud and slime, last year’s tattered cattails, new reed blades rising,
not the singing
of a golden bird
on a golden bough,
but trills and raspy clicks of red-winged blackbirds in the accidental light

1. Listening
How long have I been sleeping here
Naked upon this louche divan, fluid
In my sloping dream, the dream I dream
Of you in the terracotta shadows
Listening? I might be an odalisque,
Though this is no one’s chamber but my own. And yours—it is the chamber of the dream
In which I speak to you, the faintest breath Out of Brahma’s mouth, say, the fragrance Of lotus drifting across the waters,
Or the scent of a word that comes to know
Its meaning by moving dream to dream.
2. River
When I rose from the river I was still
The river, and in my red hair flamed
The encircling wheels, wheels within wheels, By which the very air around me moved.
It was then I felt my body blossom,
Orchid and trumpet flower, lily and lace,
A necklace of birds spread hand to hand
As my fingers poised to key them into song:
To be the stream and what allays the stream— Fountain plash, dolphin leap, supernova sky. And the nipple-hard blue mantle of my breast Like a cold eye staring into nothing.

3. Tears
Salt-heaves out of the inner ocean flow From the threshold eye: self’s backwaters Laboriously fermenting, while the legs
Of the ballerina twist around themselves Like snakes around a tree. O snifter, flask, My little drip-bag of tears, the extract,
The elixir, the equinoctial champagne
That keeps me primed and wired for the jump! I balance on my head a punchbowl of heads— My many faces, the brave losses bobbing,
And these bottomless flutes like waterspouts. Lift a glass. Cin-cin. Watch the boats go sailing.
4. Ark
Sea worm, sea slug, this moiling sea of skulls, The crocodile’s puppet mouth gapes wide
At starboard. On the ark of infidels
The clown is captain, his zombie face
Gazing out from under a pinhead cap. Professor Wolfsnout, aft, has found his likeness In the bridge-less waters. He ponders it,
Raw imago, like someone reading Braille. Portside, the hound master gives the horns
To ward off the sky’s bloodshot malocchio.
The muffle-eared, the apple-crowned, the dead Rowers—only the foc’sle birds aren’t me.

5. Passing Through
To be without oars in this great dismal swamp, Mire bayou, slough of despond, toxic boat way, Naked, puffed, choked, following the current, Or is that my navigator, leech-ridden,
The steam-engine swan hauling me through? This roiling swill fumes with my childhood, Bed-buggers and boogie men, a brackish troop. Or shall I call them my colleagues, sump-mouths Wading beside me in their element
Under the impossibly blown, blasted trees? Far off, the acetylene sky breathes and burns. Even here, who can believe, a drift of jasmine.
6. Islands
Now I see even the islands are moving,
Carried away on the ocean’s current,
Stream of many streams that runs downstream. Now I see that my eyes are their eyes,
The islands’ eyes, the many searching eyes
Who look castaways from a sunken wreck— Bird-hatted, flower-collared—that one
Whose every thought is a lily plume,
That other whose fear burns above her like gas. If I could but be the one looking up,
The heaven-starred, of Easter Island calm,
That one island, I-land, landless: Is.

7. Shoreline
What do the birds whisper from their crown, The crown they have made around my head Each in its own tuned, rueful lingo—
Chirps and chatterings, chuffs and chants, Each wound in its own restless fluttering?
On the shoreline the dun reeds also whisper.
It is the wan voice of the undelivered.
Nothing of that sentence translates in the dusk. Am I not a warrior left behind, the war
Over, still at war, an assassin wreathed In camouflage, my body draped in flow? Time to kill the king on his empty throne.
8. Flood
Downstream the head floats: the head of No one. Along the floodplain and out to sea: No One.
No one sings now to the gone sky, No One.
Into the dead eyes and behind them: No One. Each one, one thing and all things: No One. Lullay, sing lullay, lullay sing to No One.
Echoes along the surface, into depths: No One. Tiger blooms rise. The torn body: No One. Orpheus dis-limbed to the bright gates: No One. Birdsong’s adornment: this nest for No One. Intervales of silence lift high now for No one.
No one from No one, No one into No one.

9. Ophelia’s Garden
After the turtle shook the world from its shell,
It homed through all the waters without bounds, Through quale and quanta, ever ascending
Until it broke the surface on the single pool Where the dead girl floated who dove in there
And swallowed her fill until she was the pool
She willed herself in her swelled grief to be,
And so began the change, her skin turning scales, Her breasts lifting lilies, the fronds surrounding Inclining like mourners, while the turtle
Paddled, swimming to her palm, dandled, open, Flowering there in the sky blue of Krishna.
10. Floater
Goldfinch, grosbeak, cardinal, meadowlark
Frame me counter-clockwise in my slow repose— Eleven o’clock, eight o’clock, six o’clock, one,
Such as they’ve arranged themselves around
The jade leaves with their black, revolving blooms. I would compass them to the four directions.
I heard each itinerant call in my sleep,
Listened until I rose awake, feeling
The strange ferment of my eyes, their wakefulness, And then, out of the searing, blinding coal
Of my own death flagrant on my tongue—
This violet and golden bud emerged in bloom.

11. Fecundity
And all shall be well, and all manner of thing Shall grow through and out of me like a body Made of light, my feet rooted in the planet’s Lucent pool, its waters reflecting sky
Out of which flower fields unfold their flesh, Such benignly eloquent wordless bouquets, Everything efflorescence, sexy material ghost Of me, immaculately maculate quickening
Life, bone-house birdhouse (the human hidden In the heart’s whorled foliage) and the blue Haloes upholding twin swans curving whitely— In me you will find no sunset, only sunrise.
12. Fledgling
Out of the sea’s cracked membrane of stone Struck as by Moses’s staff, this island of islands, Emergent, the tree burgeoning from deep below— An improvised mast, an ascendant cross
Lifting its one fruit through the blue reaches,
The heavenly zones at the mind’s final end:
A child’s face, imago, heron-crowned, rising
Out of the sleeper’s dream, out of the river,
Rising as anywhere forever out of blight,
Out of the boundless, out of nothing, molecule By molecule with the perilous spin of stars—
It has been waking for a long long time.

Seventeen giantesses speak in tongues as we unleash
the dog to run mad through alder-thick ditches.
Each is named for a woman in the life of the wind backer who sells their collective work to a Florida conglomerate— sisters, mothers, daughters, Baba Yagas in one-footed stands pull near-dry wind off the line before the rains come,
fold the charged edges, neat and tucked.
Left out toward the sea,
these seventeen forgo the wind’s rowdy entry
as wrecked weather coaxes, crooks
stormstayed birds in whirring holds,
collects, collects to nameplate capacity.
Sea birds, drawn by force,
drawn to dissected skies and the props’ salutation, must navigate narrow openings between the blades. Just the same, we cannot stop making this pilgrimage.
We circle their hutted footings,
their slow drag across cloud-foxed sky
and hope for acknowledgement. Bless the humans
on the edge of land haggard with self, on the edge of blades where the wind tolls up on hind legs, and hesitates
around the turbines to sniff out our salted shortcomings.
Snagging loose threads of static, the storm’s white light rumbles of rain, and fog breaks into bud.
The Vestas shadow the access road cuts—small hallways leading into purple clover, devil’s paintbrush,
evening scrawl of lupine’s color wheel.
If this weather holds, it will all keep spinning.

One winter they cleared the asbestos from our rooms. Through great chutes the white gray flowers withdrew.
We breathed asbestos in our dreams of snow,
its delicate tendrils. They said it wasn’t dangerous, the way it sifted through interior skies like a kiss. A boy will press himself to you.
You will inhabit his bed
for somewhere to sleep because you have to sleep somewhere, when snow is falling
or asbestos, unquenchable.
Unquenchable, no flame can touch it.
One winter with the building sealed deep into snow,
they pulled out the asbestos, leaving vitreous white shimmers everywhere in the light around our hands.
Asbestos would keep us warm if it enveloped winter rooms. You leave the house and walk out into snow,
where you can no longer tolerate what he has done.
One winter they sucked the asbestos from the halls and closets and back rooms,
with steel hands peeled asbestos from the ceiling.
We wore our frayed nightgowns and watched the men.
He will press into you and you will think you cannot breathe,
but it’s only asbestos flickering, a small pale bird in your mouth and soul. One by one the birds get taken.
Allow him to reach for you. Against the wall at night birds’ wings shudder, winter flight, fugitive unquenchable substance of asbestos
through which girls pass with slender feet.

flap and flit inside the steel rafters bare as bridge girders through which their cavernous shrieks echo waking puffy-eyed pre-work
shoppers adrift in the hangover fog of dreaming each
to each our carts’ bum wheels chatter down the shadow
aisles where we brim with tampons tarragon enough Energizers to resurrect our dead Hess trucks from their boxes
I scarlet the bargain bin
mirrors with my pre-dawn neck-knot askew I cannot
tell where the sparrows weave their sleep to shake the weeping pelt of rain do they sanctuary here because they can no longer nest above their crushed young sprawling goopy cruciform across the knuckle-gnarled root-moss no wonder
they gorge on low
feed bags of Tastee-Os corner-torn from grazing the clerk’s blue behemoth ladder he clatters
from one blown bulb
to the next twisting
us all ablaze hereafter

Not that the man waving me slowly into the single lane or the men behind him laying asphalt
in the doldrums of August are aware, but the world’s longest running science experiment has ended
just as it was predicted to end,
which proved what was already known: the road upon which I drive only appears to be solid, is in fact an artery
or minor capillary of bitumen oozing
me home from work against the flow
of the funeral procession approaching from the opposite direction.
I’ve heard hearse drivers in Missouri earn an average of ten dollars an hour, which is difficult to live on, even here, but is still a job with a purpose as clear as the ozone-stripped sky,
and as the driver passes me with his train of mourners in tow, we briefly
make eye contact, and he nods
in my direction as if to say,
the only thing we can possibly say
to one another in such circumstances: You exist, I acknowledge this much.
In the rearview, I see the procession as they are given priority through
the work zone and see the workers who break and turn to watch it pass.

But there’s one man who keeps on after the others have turned back to work, thinking perhaps about the living
who follow so closely behind
the dead to the cemetery that will absorb the body into its rapture of worms. And even though
he’ll probably have forgotten
this moment by the end of the day, right now he stands there alone against a river of molten tar
like the gnomon on a sundial refusing to cast its shadow.

A cold wind strums barbed wire, but off-key. Distant thunder spooks a dozing cow.
The fields are empty and are going to be.
My old dog run off with some bitch coyote, my pony sold for glue or puppy chow.
A cold wind strums barbed wire, but off-key.
Slipknots tighten over memory.
Seasons carve their tally in the brow. The fields are empty and are going to be.
I crashed into the prairie’s only tree,
but sculpted this guitar out of its bough.
A cold wind strums barbed wire, but off-key.
Now, not even buzzards follow me,
and turkeys roost inside my rusty plough. The fields are empty and are going to be.
The sky is blue. The earth is wide. And she is gone. No mare comes to foal here now.
A cold wind strums barbed wire, but off-key. The fields are empty and are going to be.

1
The train ride up Russia’s
north coast makes him nauseous. Snow falls, in a hurry
to mimic the mercury,
and flapping seagulls’ Cyrillic squiggles
mark, in mute air, where the mackerel are.
The barge traffic hum sounds almost like home, and a Bolshoi ballet
is pent up in each bullet.
2
If the cliché of the state
is to scribble its stet
on each corpus, dictate
its subjects’ brief predicate,
demand they pronounce only plural pronouns,
then what scares the tyrant is that poems, read
from the right distance, resemble fingerprints, that the Hermitage
of one’s language,
no matter how abstract,
can’t be ransacked.
But what good are metaphors, he thinks, if I freeze?

3
He’ll chop a wide plot through that dark wood the first autumn, follow Auden’s bright shadow
until his waves crash
their accent against English
shores, making our own lines sound so far from home.
The moon will recycle, one day, its sickle
into a ruble
he’ll pick from the rubble
of stars, and vanish,
with Charon, past Venice. But not yet. The train comes to the end of its sentence.
Full stop. He looks over the cold samovar
of the evening sea. What breakers say
to the sand isn’t much,
but stones are no match, being mere matter,
for the water’s rough meter.

1
Horse broke clear
across the pasture, horse
broke clean loose
and cleared the fence. Didn't you
tell me, don’t put the cart
before the horse, didn’t you
tell me, get out in front, girl, get out in front while you can—
down past the fence, past
the river bend, the horse
got clear of the house, clear out of sight—
and didn’t I cut that horse
loose, fast as any knife—
2
It’s always good to get out in front, you told me once, girl, get out
in front, but don’t put the cart
before the horse—and my horse was a chest of knives, and wasn’t my horse slick as any knife
and fast and sleek—and my horse was sleek as your knife, I mean your knife flat against my cheek
I mean didn’t I get out in front, my horse, out in front,
and could you catch us then,

could you stop us— and didn’t you tell me
the river is a snake, girl
but even a snake can drown.

The light gradually eats away at the image, at the contours, and at the words, stealing a dot here, a curvature there, a lone slender
stalk that used to be an I
until it was eaten away by forgetfulness, first the serifs became indistinct and the black became
uncertain, as if perpetually asking itself: am I really a mark on this page? and it asked the question so many times that the
light saw its advantage, and answered: no, no, no, and so with that, the I relinquished its hold on that one millimeter of space

I once watched a storm cross a pasture. The horses fled, but I was stuck
dizzied by darkness, the potential of water and open space.
I was unchanged by it. Meaning, it taught me nothing.
But I still remember
just before it reached me,
outstretching my hand to feel rain, my head still bone dry.
This isn’t a metaphor to teach you about love. It’s a way to say goodbye.

As a child I found a wolf spider, her scalloped web, the wooden bench she sheltered under.
I remember checking her at dawn, at dusk. Egg sack on her back, her body
no smaller than my thumb.
My fear of her was all-consuming,
I remember confusing it for love.
If I tossed a cricket into her silk, she’d drop down,
spin it unrecognizable. As an adult, seeing
the spider’s photo, I’m caught—frozen but twitching.
Who am I to recall her this way? When her egg sack began to pulse,
didn’t I strike the match?—
all those spiderlings—didn’t I burn her kingdom down?

We woke up this morning, each of us, a stinging in our right hands.
The flesh welled up in a red curving line as if a brand had been pressed
to our skin as we slept. We puzzled it over coffee, consulted our lovers or parents or friends.
No, it doesn’t burn anymore. No, doesn’t itch. There’s nothing the matter, it seems, except
we’re convinced this can’t be good— the suddenness of it, the uniformity.
We begin to lay one hand over the mark when we meet. We nod at each other instead of shaking.
It is like a nakedness, this flushed swell, and no one wants to talk about it anymore.
But behind our backs, our fingers move: tracing, retracing the rise.

From the dead. With pallbearers who are half as young
as their faces suggest and twice the oxen they should be.
Without a daddy at all, or with a daddy in prison, or at home,
or in a different home. With a mama. With a grandmama
if mama ain’t around, maybe even if she is. In a house, or not.
In the hood. In the suburbs if you’re smart or not afraid of white fear or even if you are. Taking risks. Scratching lottery tickets. Making big bets. On a basketball court. Inside a courtroom. Poorly in the ever-pathological court of opinion. On faith. Like
a prayer from the belly of a whale. In church on Sunday morning, on Monday, Tuesday, and every other. Before school and after.
In a school you hope doesn’t fail. In a school of thought named for Frederick Douglass. Old school or not at all. With hip-hop or without. At least with a little Curtis Mayfield, some Motown, sounds by Sam Cooke. Eating that good down-home cooking. Putting some wood to their behind. With a switch. With a belt
to keep their pants high. Not high all the time. On all-time highs at all times until they learn not to feel and think so lowly of
their aims. To be six feet tall and not under. With a little elbow grease and some duct tape. Sweating bullets. On a short leash. Away from the big boys on the block. Away from the boys in blue. Without the frill of innocence. From the dead, again. Like a flag.

Think of the pine woods, men who strike bark with chipping knives, given over to their work
as if bewitched, none speaks or turns to look. Think of the camp boss on a horse with lifted ears,
escorting Zora Neale Hurston, who means to collect songs and lies. Up in his face asking to be talked to,
she wrote. Think of wounds in living trees, gum oozy and viscous, the good soft drip, thin and light, cream,
almond, pale yellow. Black men whose swift strokes bleed the pines for gum, she wrote. Think of trees
cat-faced, the gouges diagonal, whiskery, cicatrixed. The chippers don’t make up songs, the boss tells her.
These are lonesome woods, he says. Think of threats, shanties, beatings, commissary bills. All she hears:
the slash of knives, bark chips shifting underfoot, men who grunt, sigh, exhale, keeping time perhaps,
perhaps whistling a few cautious notes, maybe not, little sounds, the drip of scars, the silence of trees.

Oh, Mabel, that that I feared.
Questions loosed & plaguing me at night.
I wish to tether them & my body that demands I touch
certain parts.
Could it be the Soul has like demands, for all Eternity?
’Spose God would look down
& say I have Sinned. Though Mac claims Sin’s not
a constant.
But it all went so fast. & the Truth is—
writing this morning makes
the letterpaper qualmy.
Papa would not approve as Mac is not prosperous
& not a Lutheran.

Have found a Mrs. Beatty.
Rickety stairs up & up,
five pine chairs & a picture of Jesus.
She poked my belly through my dress & took my money & said, come back on the morrow—

Mabel, the morrow is upon me.
All night, dreamt of the Terrible Shooting—
& who would be next, when even the President can’t be kept safe?
I don’t like to think about Death.

Clock, Unwind: be New Year’s again—
today Unsuspected, Mac still a glimpse, curly
black hair in need
of a trim,
bit of a lisp.
Oh, that my face were not so broad & plain.
Fear, I am dizzy.
God has slacked his Grip.

Rickety Stairs, railings corded with rags, have
Mercy on me.
(Yet how can Sin be raveled from the Soul?)
Mrs. Beatty has a chipped
tooth. Though my landlady says— oh, by all accounts, she’s—
if only—but, Mabel, what other?
Always,

Boiled and drank, provokes women’s courses.
Rundled, bitter purple herb.
Grows big by the wayside (run-by-the-ground,
flee-away). Here in Suffolk trapped in gardens.
With vinegar, abates the marks of blows about the eyes. Helps the cold griefs of the joints.
Carminative. Diaphoretic. Also called witch weed.
Ought not to be taken if pregnant.
Squaw mint, stinking balm.
Weeks of icy rain, hay moldering in the fields.
Oh, to be you, cousin, running wild all the way to London.

We count the amount it has not rained
in days, in inches, in mind: I do not speak to
others if I do not have to, I do not pretend. It has not rained, and I do not
wish to discuss my day, or my choices.
I do not wish to consider choices. The air
is wrong is what I say, there is nothing
in it, you can feel yourself hanging in your mouth
if you breathe. I say if when I mean
when or because. I mean the dust on everything.
Everything sticks to everything inside
of me, indistinguishable from lack of water.
My friend says a grave is the absence of dirt. I remember once walking the yard seeing
in the invisible age this box I filled
with sand my heart. I am sick of saying it—
I am not asking anyone to take on the water.
I am not asking anyone to take on the air. How
to think of a place needing rain when it feels
this close to disappearance. A desert is not a lack—
like every living being I used to be one younger version of myself. I do not miss but
envy her scent for water, the way
she divined. What is a grave if you’re literal
about it. What is a glass but a vessel we raise.
I taste the current that travels the air wrong, like
something forgot. When I was a child
I took petrichor for granted, smelled it freely

through the rust of tinny screen: dust and rain-cooled shingle sizzled the clouds moving
through every room like sound. It’s not the effect
I long for but it helps to say it. It helps to say a grave
is the absence of dirt. It helps to say
it has not rained and we need it, speaking
in the plural, covering the singular as
the rush of absent things would cover their first sign.

all day have gone hungry some men are girding themselves to our eye sockets where hunger has launched forth in a rage during the neighborhood guac party
where I ended up somehow with blood
sausages and brittle flecks of chips
ground down in the bag like clipped pinions
the neighbors so graceful shoveling my slight gifts inside themselves during
each breath of televised slaughter men disguised as golems striving to crush
or be crushed while a small pig skitters among them stepping from hand to hand as the glut shifts up and down the field
leaning toward comprehension I join my neighbors in their red murder howls only once calling for the severed
hands of one the rest wanted kept whole
in a distinction I once would have understood but in these latter days I see man for the flesh sack he is
flightless and brutish and short he will reach for the pig he will fall again

but Father I don’t want to be some prophet priest king to such family
peel this blessing from my hairy arm
I want it light and loose for hunting
what wild game streaks by my present tense
happy to quitclaim my future it
passed to him in your invalid words
but my sighthounds speak forthright howling their hunger up at the deaf-mute stars
no clodpates these beasts nor dullard I for loving the flesh and the pottage
no sly mind geared to anticipate in my skull yet I often reflect
and distress myself with my nature
profane man of body they whisper
I know with serpent mouths unfettered and judging but I am home in waste here with the dragons of wilderness
hunting under what eyes I know not nor care for when I hunger I eat
and when the roaming burns me I roam
and if my seed is to be lesser still I will spill it into nations

Look, here’s the spot where a razor-sharp glance sliced off a swath of clotted sepia as proof:
to the right, waterlogged fields and barn roofs emerging from the murky, gray expanse;
to the left, a knapsack and frying pan,
damp pleats, somebody’s fleece, a blur of chins
beneath workers’ brimmed caps. Rescue boats
might arrive—who knows when—from Kamien or Brest. The water’s still high. Grows stagnant. This one
sharp glance trims away the rest: the excess
world beyond the flood, crisis team in frock-coats
and mustaches, their gleaming telephones
on broad mahogany desks. Whatever’s flat remains so on the blade’s bright surface:
these streaks of rain, not others, reach us without the ones before or since—the rising water and drowned scarecrows and hidden strap on which a small, black Leica is dangling.

I slip out of the compartment—stuffy, as usual.
Since daybreak, I’ve seen one Breughel after another
as it’s late fall (and if not for some station now and then,
some apartment block or side track, this train would resemble
a gallery of the Kunsthistorisches with its exacting replicas:
oh, to drop those villagers with carmine doublets and blue trousers between the willows, cleavers in hand, and to paint them
so meticulously with both palette and the mind). . . .
I unlatch an image (the woman next to me is smoking)—
a landscape so clear, as if all fog and varnish had vanished: beneath a wall of twisted branches (which some gracious soul might call a grove) a lapis cloud looms beside a red one,
against a backdrop of thin, black trunks.
As if suspended in cold air, like atomized splotches of clotted paint or a photo of electrons.
A city guy, I’m weak on trees, so I scan my memory;
the train slows, and the names come: blackthorn and hawthorn (or tartness grafted with love—
I’m strong on nature, thanks to books), their leaves just fallen, revealing clouds of sloe plums.
And after all those Breughels, all that mental effort, how not to describe it: this fierceness of beauty. The hawthorns and blackthorns, those clouds sticking to the ground. Such an unexpected gift and from whom, in my twenty-third year?
The answer “From no one” would be ungrateful and, in truth, too simple. The blackthorns fly past.

Within the weary beauty of Chopin—
nonpareils, Champagne—we sit and sit,
confused accoutrements. Monet, who dreamed
of water: how unbodied do his lights
descend. And small Gauguin consumed like sweets his nudes, his mangoes, greens, the girls unsure he'd keep his word. To wander slow, dead slow, along ennui. Ah, the luxuriousness of boredom. Sea breeze. A certain way of shaping sound
and color. And music. Long, retiring chords—say the way is clearer now, my friends, friends for
the polonaise. Insistent, nonchalant,
we're languorous in time. I'd turn. I would,
but for the weakened battlements outside.

Something mutters at the trim
of the page—a word or two concealed within an heiress’s coat.
At the gallery opening, she draws them
to herself again, under her breathing, beside a dimmed canvas. It is raining now
across the broad plains of Kenya, where syllables range, sweat, conspire
to become: the needle within her thoughts—
at once certain and sheltered. What is this sound—sound’s shape? The voice of a lover leaving? What trails through air
remorseless as this slender glass of Sémillon, abandoned beside a paisley chair?
Speak. Speak, pale form, lest I be lost.

Photograph of a sign I cannot read
Can’t read except a guillotine
in cheap paint
strong as pillars once
dashed down Dashed down but in
an artist’s hand arrested
Arrested or incessant fall
of thought once steeled
Resistant words I can’t read in-
to the world I can

Say one true thing

And some days I hold before me like a cross against the devil
the face of a man who was jailed.
I say his name instead of weeping, and this is what comes of it:
the tie,
just barely loosened from his thin neck, stays
the same. Four hundred and eighty days
in solitude stay the same. Seventy days in a cell in which he could not lie down remain
one day and then
another.
A man leans forward as if impatient
with the edge of a green couch.
And so much depends upon the palm
of one hand against another, the shape of his knee, the glaze
of sweat across his forehead— Confess: he is no proof against the sky,
but bargains with it.
Like a witch on a wheel, like a raven
who speaks long after death, he makes himself ungainable, he makes himself an obstacle
to ease.
But I am not dissuaded. Each surface I look into holds
this battered, minor god—
pressing upward, flayed, pursued.
Look, it says—a face—we do not die.

They came to this the same way I did
They had to imagine it, except
They had to imagine it As it happened
A large man, who is black Or white
Carries a woman
A small woman, a girl
In through the door of a building Without a door
Something else is burning, a building And she is screaming
It is night and she
Is only one of the things they have had
To imagine
In their short lives
They want to help her But they don’t
I don’t have to imagine this But I do
And I don’t help much Either
‘Sixteen years ago today’ You used to say
Twenty-eight years Thirty-two

Years ago, today Buildings burned
And something else was screaming


In another dream, in silence
We get out of the car It isn’t our car
And follow the man and the woman Him dragging her, her screaming
We know, although
It is memory, and silent
Past the fires’ dangerous light Past the fires in-
To the building
In through the door
Where he will be waiting for us And he is
And what we do won’t help her But we go
In through the door in a full knowledge You first and then I follow
I always come out without you Without her
With or without him chasing me On the dark, wet grass
And I will outrun him
I will outrun him because

There is something back there he wants More
And whether it is Your death or hers
I wake again Without knowing

He says that
but what if he says then he
says the country has or maybe
oil plutonium maybe how
much and not but enough so
what if under the surface who
knows he says he knows and he
and he and he but not he he doesn’t believe
maybe he says in the future. Germany
and Germany and Merkel and Schäuble
and conspiracy and so dumbed
down as a what do you as a
nation do and as this glory that was is
ours forever and look at these books
and these books and these our words and
we can learn to pick up our litter if
taught if told if allowed but no
these our ruins and that
bleeding union that bleeds that we need that we don’t
that we do and what about
next year what about in two and in ten
will house bubbles rise and soar or burst and bust
in two in five in ten and will we pay for
them again and again and taxes and when
can we sell and when will pensions
will they how will they and the winters are cold and the wood and that tax and that tax and that tax and that
tax and that tax and we
will not be downtrodden union unite why should will they
in Spain unite denied deny we know we don’t
believe in debts we do and they do and then
and then what if will they next year in two in five we must believe. This is now. Today. Don’t get slapped
on tv. Not our fault our fault and where
are the rich we are poor the rich on the hill
with accounts accounts unaccounted accounts
and now they we’re all poor and then he remembers
our glorious dances and lifts up his arms like the rays
of a sun to the people who scream Yes

and remember these years these thousands
of glory years ago and now what now what
who is to pay who is to rectify he says he can do it and so does he and he and he and he and he and who in what do we believe

Awesome, its two-beat life span trochees in and out
of my mouth, a defiance riding the silence
that enjoys us, like I did that chile relleno burrito, or last
week’s pinkest sunset, dad’s new surfboard, or the news the darkness on my forehead is benign. Yep, awesome “is elegy to what it signifies,” meditates Robert Hass,
as the pleased voice is pleasure’s psychopomp;
the just-dead world made word, made, as poem, almost successfully alive. Yet on public radio some poet
calls me, mom and dad, probably you, ridiculous idiots for saying awesome/awesome. Awesome
is more gesture than word, is a pumping fist,
nodding head, thumbs up; never le mot juste, none exists. There’s nothing precise about awe, its magnitudes are unknown quantities of some,
a suffix that suits The Big Lebowski to Half Dome
better than those of wonderful, beautiful, purposeful. Yet it’s dreadful, just dreadful, says the Oxbridge pedant,
dreadful, my dear, these youngsters with their fretfully impoverished vocabularies. Qualifiers are drowsy reflexes: The astute server says, the Napa pinot is terrific/
terrific choice, the sole with farro and peas/have a terrific evening. Where’s the terror? Where’s the terrific
fuck I’m supposed to give? Hackneying is not . . . no,
not just thoughtlessness; it’s sharing a lingo,
an understanding, a social identity, yes, lost
the more it’s shared, just like the thoughtful play
of synonyms can be a bully’s game. Awesome means you no harm, just rolled out of bed, and hasn’t done yoga in like a week. But awesome

is the monument we’ll raise to your splendorous, venerable, your preeminent diction of novelty. Awesome will be the natives’ education; bedeck our adjectives
in morion, codpiece, and crucifix ’cause who needs readers when subjects can be got cheaply? Who needs art
when vestments are the rage? Forgive me, dreadful
is my overreaction. This hyperbole keeps rupturing its crypt; it can’t stand beadledom, not least of which my own.
Hordes of undead hyperbole to come, the most ingenerate
mode of speech because we all make like awesome!
and die. What’s there to repel the dreadful, dreadful darkening but our persistent awesome/awesome/awesome?

1
I have crossed the Judaic age of reason
twice now at twenty-four. Innocence interpreted as a mere illusion of childhood—
a basic sleight of hand. Experience
like an appendage we find on our bodies
in the dark, then bury and revisit
and bury until the map is too worn
to unfold and follow.
In junior high a girl
grabbed my jeans out of my gym bag,
put them on, and paraded
around the court, telling classmates two of her could fit in the pants. Magic 8 Ball,
will I be beautiful? I asked
over and over in my grandmother’s basement.
During our weekly game of dominoes,
an old man urinated on the floor
then wept for it.
These are the things that kill us eventually.
Our organs respond to neurons wrapped in shame through the decades—the effect cannot be ignored. Kunitz claims desire makes the engine go. Shame shuts down the motor mid-rotation.
2
Tiresias, why were you embarrassed
watching two snakes fuck?
Did the phallic wrestling conjure too much arousal to witness without destroying them afterward? Magic 8 Ball, will I be beautiful?
My childhood clairvoyant rolled its blind eye,
told me to concentrate and ask again.
Arthur Conan Doyle called on a medium
to contact his son, Kingsley, killed post-combat. Tried hard not to die,
Kingsley communicated to the soothsayer. Doyle strained to hear him through the thin November air. Nothing.

She said Kingsley calls me dad,
Doyle recorded later in careful script, dying to remember the medium’s tête-à-tête
with his dead, holding hope
against reality: That’s good—
but he always called me dadsy.
Tiresias takes off his sunglasses, realizes he can see right in front of him, and his breasts are leaking.
3
The empires of history are filled
with the shameless breasts of concubines. They laugh and refill chalices, thumbing silks with despondent eyes. Write miserable poems in careful left-handed script. They do not want freedom—that is a misunderstanding.
They want a fig tree
planted closer to the window,
a dove nesting. Albino peacocks.
Caramel cakes, hot oceans,
arias di sorbetto.
They want the men
to turn around one more time
as they walk away.
But these longings are common, private,
and not worthy of record. They repeat through the castles of civilization. Dust, and the dust returns.
4
Linda Gregg told Jack
loving him was like being alive
twice. Her life large enough
to fit two people in its fabric
two times over. But as for me:
Both times a wall met me.
Both times, I was naked and ashamed.
Both times, I was most mesmerized
by the aria di sorbetto, sung to me privately
while everyone else waited in line for Champagne.

5
The Japanese reorganize
their wooden objects to instill small meaning. The light lightens, and the moon is lassoed when it tries to spin itself away.
C. is asleep for two more hours,
and I watch the morning catch dust
across the floor, hear him breathe, wait.
I saw something similar
in a barn once while feeding horses
at 5:30. As I stood knee-deep in hay,
listening to the mares and the Arabian hum,
I knew I could never explain the beauty to anyone— the dusk was gold and ghostheavy, splitting
the mangers’ planks like rapture—
the afternoon a painting no one will ever get right.

In spring they cull you, the doctors, those dreams of a beyond-territory built with
clean human minds in concord, chimed
to a single knell, shrines astonished with
burnt sacrifice stacked under a cut-white sun. To eat, eating, will be eaten. To
make of misfortune matité, a morning
a cleansing, a mild rising and rose-
trimmed. In winter they
(the battered veins, the glitching beat) among
reassemble you
their likenesses, with smudged armor, thumbscrew
CT scans, those whose
from yours taking them in, who sold you anything
gazes ferry them
won’t say they like wonder or hope.

If we leave our front door open even
a crack, the dog comes in. A fuera—out—
I groan from my bed. I am waiting out the sun with a book of poems in which a woman walks naked to a well and pulls a rope
from the dark earth
like a serpent’s tail.
When she pours the cold water
over her skin, drops cling and glisten.
I sweat. Scratch flea bites. Cringe
when my roommate yells
with the necessary force to send the dog out the door.
The dog is pregnant,
looking for a place to give birth.
The guys who live in the bar next door
call her Chaparrita. I’m told it’s an endearment for short, chubby females.
Yesterday I watched her gnaw plastic bottles they threw in the street. They claim she’s theirs, though I don’t know what that means here
or in any other country.
Every time she sneaks back in she looks at us like this time we’ll realize we love her.
At sunset the bar opens. We lock the door.

I didn’t know I was afraid of the dark
until it rose off blacktop and ran toward me
as if it had been waiting for me to round the corner
where the last streetlight burned a hole in the jungle night.
By the time I know the dark is a dog, it’s too late to turn. All I can do
is pedal faster and hope my fear carries me past its teeth.
I could shout, but I don’t.
It’s only when I realize the dog is silent too, that I see it’s Chaparrita running toward me, nipples swaying beneath her belly so swollen it almost drags on the street.
I brake, flip my kickstand down, get off,
and kneel before her. When I press my face against her neck, I breathe in hunger and dust and love.
Was she waiting for me?
It doesn’t matter. I‘m the one who rode out of the dark crying her name. Chaparrita!

it there, we put it there
our wanting it is it
it is
father
lover lastly
genre
please
here,
a variation on refrain
(smell of sex,
drinking
with children in the house)
because we put it there
(how we
all stayed friends)
every borrowing
drags along with it the whole
we put it there because
please here

The father will keep the son on ice,
keep him cold so the body will last the day,
the tractor spinning its wheels inside
the circular driveway, the bucket pulling
up the front yard, piling soil under
the box elders. The choir will sing
around his bed with us, and one man
will be a kind of clown, unable to make
any face but his frozen one so that he looks
like he is singing the tractor song
while we sing songs we don’t know,
say words that sound like words
in songbooks until we play a game
of singing, sounding like we are praying
in tongues, but we will have to sing
or listen to the tractor out front, digging.
When the word is Alleluia, the room will ring,
the syllables clear to us like water at Nichols Pond. You will think this is bad planning—the digging drone underneath the song. Won’t it be in poor taste,
the tractor blatting its own song in the front yard? The tractor is a water strider in the front yard,
its legs like oars to each side, but it has nowhere
to go, it refuses to dig anywhere else,
sounding like a furnace in an old home.
You will speak over it, or sing, anything.
When the woodcock comes to circle the house, someone will lower the pine box.
It will be so quiet then. It will be hard to believe
the woodcock's song doesn't come from its throat.

I want to tell you about the thud against the back door, that my man says, “bird.” That later we see its tail sticking out from underneath the siding. That its tail feathers shine like oil, shifting purple to blue,
and we are kneeling on the wet decking. The yellow
of its stomach making it something more
than the brown birds everywhere, a tiny prize
for kneeling there, for prying back the vinyl siding
to find a yellow-bellied flycatcher, its cheek bloodied.
I want to tell you how he held it, said “Passerine”
before it took flight. Little Passerine. Songbird.
Before she left, I brought my daughter to Saint-Jeannet.
There were swallows like boomerangs near dark,
like here, like everywhere I go. I want to tell you about the neighbor, the scientist, who said they were swifts, not swallows. Swallows are Passerines,
but swifts are not. Passerine, I thought, Passerine—
a more future verb tense for to pass, a tense I can’t know yet—a passing I can’t understand. The order Passerine is a mess, the scientist said. It’s impossible
to track its evolution. I want to tell you I don’t understand evolution, any of it, even mine, becoming the mother
I will be next, the one who lets go. Once, I stood
on a bridge and a man taught me to call sparrows to eat
from my hands, told me he was a sinner, that what he did for me was atonement, which is a thing I might understand.
I want to tell you there is nothing like their tiny grip,
the way they quiver while they peck at your palm,
wanting to fly out of reach. I want to tell you what happened when I let her go, but I don’t understand it yet. I want
to talk about this morning, the little yellow bird in sudden, dizzy flight. The trees full of yellow. How I lost sight.


it’s not that we’re all born genderless though we are. rather, once we were all small women inside our mothers’ uteri, something about science & sex organs & hormones
& god. no wonder she wept
red negligee when she walked in on me at ten in her worst dress spinning before her dead father’s mirror, my eyes made up
into science fictions. felt me
again inside her, my pig thirst threading her blood & body
mass into another veil i’d wear
& not care for. seeing mother
cry i found myself
into manlier fabrics. years later when i am a boy again she tells me it’s not that she hated me fey. rather, she swore she saw
the mirror sob. fetal lady,
little daughter, tiny apology.

and again the test comes back negative for waterborne parasites
for gonorrhea of the throat and of elsewhere for white blood cells in the stool
this isn’t always true sometimes it’s a phone call from your lover sometimes it’s your computer blinking on with news of what’s wrong
with your body this time
simple really how he says the name of a disease
and suddenly you’re on your back staring out the window onto a highway
suddenly a woman enters the room to wrap a black cuff around your arm and squeeze your blood till you’re no longer sick
to slip a device under your tongue check if your sweat’s accompanied by the heat it demanded
and aren’t we all of elsewhere sometimes the nowhere places you make yourself inside the hallowed chambers of the hospital and inside the man’s unsure voice
when he calls and is too scared to name the precise strain of letters
you might share now what parasite might feed on the topsoil of your groin
what laugh track what tabernacle unlatched to let all that god in what bacteria spreading its legs in your throat as you speak
when the illness is terminal you drink an eighth of paint thinner all the color drains from your face
all those little rocks in your gut turned to buses all those buses full of strange men each one degree apart all going somewhere and gone now
funny how a word can do that garage the body
what if instead he’d simply called to say epithalamium or new car or sorry

Some part of it goes or is taken
and me absentminded
cracks along elemental pathways
prompting surrender themselves
later grateful not to have clipped artery on ceramic
missed or missing in blue Luke once imagined
pinprick alongside celestials the morning half delirious
and what they add up to when you shade them in
blue because white and slick the driveway
from my hand quickly falling so that what he made
cracks as those parts of the brain without much
the time it takes to forget I’m holding it
some part of my body
darkest nightfall
with worksheet sums
guess what from the night sky
your numbers make his dissolution when he can’t see one V each
for Big and Little Dipper and one missed number for star-tip
the way the mind parcels out minuses
when you go out and when he does he is
can you save them
9 Beloit Poetry Journal Fall 2015
tracing by hand celestial bodies
your night sky’s in pieces careful
but falls where they fell says after I go
can you pick them up


In Raphael’s fresco
The School of Athens, we see within the large concentric arc
an assembly of philosophers, astronomers, mathematicians, scholars— some in discussions, some writing
with quills, two reading, at least one reading
what he wrote, and one
wholly in the zone of his own thinking, oblivious to
the hullabaloo around him, cut off
from the rest: Heraclitus.
The one who said, “We both step
and do not step in the same rivers. We are and are not.” Penned it in his native tongue:

The accepted interpretation is one cannot step into the same river twice
since, moment to moment, a river rearranges the mosaic of its face.
Same goes with us and all the reshuffling we do nonstop: body and thoughts,
cells and breath.
Our bodies are sixty percent water, the brain alone seventy-seven percent, we carry a river inside us, we are
and are not
this current passing between us.
Praise the dead for bestowing us these, our waves. Downstream, we’ll do the same.


Heraclitus does not exist
in the original cartoon. Just marble steps that lead the eye
toward the vanishing point. His appearance was
an afterthought: Raphael
only wished to paint Michelangelo
as Heraclitus—in the style of Michelangelo—
who, a few rooms over,
six stories up, supine, season after season, painted nine scenes
from the Book of Genesis.
When Raphael tilted his head back
in that spacious chapel, he must have thought to himself, Genius.
Thought to himself, He is immortalizing himself.

cartoon:
A drawing, its outlines perforated. Connect the Dots with pinholes. If there is sunlight behind the paper, one will see
a constellation of absence.

Raphael needed first to scrape away
a section of his fresco—some steps,
some flooring—then apply another intonaco,
transfer the cartoon of Heraclitus, pounce his stippled outline
onto the still-wet plaster, and finally
brushstroke him into being: flesh, hair, the nest of his beard.
And his lilac-colored stonecutter’s smock, his tan workmen’s boots.
And the marble block where he rests his elbow, where a black inkwell is set precariously on the corner.
And the up-curled paper beneath his hand, five lines already written, the sixth
half finished.
And all the shadows
woven over him, encroaching toward what is lit.


A bean, a nearly 500-year-old bean was found
during the restoration of the fresco. Kidney or cannellini
the article does not say, long green Romano pole
or violet podded stringless I will never know. There is
a theory: “probably from
the lunch of one of the plasterers.”
Slob. Clodhopper. (You think any of Michelangelo’s workmen
were this careless?) The fallen bean might explain why
restorers detected problems with the plaster’s ingredients:
instead of sand from northern Italy, Raphael’s men mixed
volcanic rock from Mount Vesuvius. Hence a faster ruin.
Hence the cracks forking down from the fresco’s upper region
like rivers, lightning, the intricate scaffolding of branches, or our own
arteries dividing to delicate vessels, divide again: thinnest of fissures.


Circa 1510, Raphael
painted da Vinci as Plato, made Plato and da Vinci one,
right hand gesturing
heavenward, beyond the stone archway to
that fractured sky, that volcanic eruption
hidden within the clouds. See how the breaking
creeps toward the one raised finger?
This is the contract we make by breathing. We sign it every second.

M fills a condom with clean piss,
ties it off around a rubber band.
He takes off his pants and shimmies the band up his thigh like a garter.
A wolf walks in on hind legs. It howls its intestines out.
The wolf is a body with important holes.
I am in Saint Paul,
far from home, three months sober.
My body feels desiccated.
M is shedding his body. His body,
one giant peachbruise dribbling venom.
Anyone can buy clean piss online.
M buys it from the sober house next door.
An old man peddles twenty-ounce Gatorade bottles for ten bucks. M is filled with holes (he is not the wolf).
Beneath his blanket he shoots heroin between his toes, within his fort
he floats toward the yawn of light.

The crowd waits, ready to burst into anything but this slow-motion wreck of an intro
they’ve never heard before with its swaying guitar and that recorder floating out of the dark
like Irish pipes, and now some jostle to the bar in the back, talking over the top of this strange lady
who’s sure all that glitters is gold and into the white faces on the tops of their pints, while one girl—
spattered with paisley and red beads like stopped droplets of blood—sways before the stage
(the tempo and reefer in perfect harmony now) and no longer wonders about this man with blunt hands
and manners short as his hair, this man she recently started thinking of as her love, no longer wonders when he will return
to put his arms around her in the clumsy way she finds endearing but suspects that—if it lasts—she will come to loathe,
and then the lights drop and Plant sweeps the blitz of his hair across his eyes in echo of the gold leaf sparkling
across the ceiling like the small and distant fires of homes burning in the hills all around him
as if it’s Easter Tuesday 1941 again and the American soldiers whose children will gather like druids
around any turntable playing this song are covered by a blackout
in that theater as air-raid sirens squeal up into the distant hills,

the city unprepared (no searchlights accusing the cloud-speckled sky, no chuff of anti-aircraft),
and because there is nothing to be done and nowhere to go, Delia Murphy, on stage in chiffon and lace
as bombs begin their soft percussion in the distance, says, “We’re not going anywhere,”
and drops into “Bye Bye Blackbird” as one soldier gathers the small bouquet of an Irish girl in his arms
and swings her onto the bare runway of the dance floor— this floor that will collapse twice in years to come
beneath dancers pounding their lives into it with all the rhythm the small hammers of their feet can manage,
but not this night, no, not tonight—and now other soldiers drop their need, their dread urgency
to do something, and follow his lead, gathering their own girls from the garden of faces along the wall,
and soon the floor is swirling and Murphy is singing,
Make my bed and light the light, I’ll arrive late tonight,
bombs dropping across the city from a flotilla of diesel and gear, dropping down alleyways carved into the air,
and they dance on into the night, hour after hour
as clouds and blaze swirl up throughout the city
like flirtatious color gels spinning paisley and psychedelia across the scene, Plant picking up the tempo now,
buckets of drumbeats dropped at his feet, Page’s guitar rising on the upbeats, and the lights pound
and the sound rises and the crowd finally engages,
boys returning from the bar in waves like aircraft

coasting above a defenseless, darkened city, and
when he does return and slides his arms around her,
his hands hefty as peat, she will smile and think him wonderful, aware only of his hands
and the music and the ripe crush of the crescendo as it breaks across them both,
together there on that fragile floor, not knowing, of course, that he will die in McGurk’s
in December of that very year, die beneath a wall brought down by another bomb, brought down
out of some terrible and ongoing heaven.

The lightning bangs and the rain takes its cue
and looses its sacks of stones across my spring-
cleared roof, but I hear another night in another city
when rain rushed down as never before—a night
in Belfast when poets read into the rising atrium
of the Ulster Museum and rain was shrapnel
on a steel roof, rain was horses in a galloping dark,
the audience marooned there in that tower of art
and history—soaring pterodactyl crossing space
above our heads, Irish wolfhound hugely in the corner, posters acknowledging the Troubles down the hall—
as the main lights vanished and the fingers
of emergency lighting pointed out faces in the crowd
while heavy shoulders of thunder trapped us
in that bamboo garden of rain that fell and fell
all around us and the rain kept coming and coming
and water flowed feet deep down Botanic
and flooded cars all along that street of bookshop
and pub, the chip shop’s lights like a ship lost at sea,
until there was nothing to do but retire to the pub
beneath a rain that fell like history and tenacity
and filled Friar’s Bush graveyard
across from the pub—stone-bound acre
of tall grass and headstones thin as roofing slates
where the fake ‘Friar’s Stone’ found inside and
inscribed AD 485 is in fact Victorian affection
for a gothic past of mist and myth, because back then everyone was trying to forget the bodies felled
by cholera and famine in 1847 when the island
hunkered beneath another rain that gathered like
the accumulation of syntax, long layering of grammar
and history and hatred and dogged abandonment,
and people either left or died, which is the condensed history of this island, and the easy answer, and wrong,
because someone had to stay behind, someone
had to write it all down, someone had to catalogue this space made empty by rain—green land of stone and rill
and the vandalized sheep, small back room of an island
now dark and filled with chatter and pints,
a peat fire burning ancient, heaped accumulations,
and these bodies warming, ridding themselves of the rain.


Morrison, eh? the cab driver asks
as we’re driving through Shaftsbury Square
and the collapse of old churches.
He forgets where he comes from,
so he does. And we pass an old wall camouflaged
by a mural of red hands flanking a masked gunman
and scarlet fists like all the small roses of rage, a wall
that warns—YOU ARE NOW ENTERING LOYALIST SANDY ROW—
as the Union Jacks accumulate and the rain. In the gauzy wasteland of myth, one man
wanted this island so desperately he separated his hand from his arm
and heaved it from his ship to the shore to win the race to first put skin on Ulster,
so now red hands mark a bloody map spattered on buildings across the city.
The easy Irish soul has come and gone like a home left long behind when
Van’s daughter slides out from behind the risers to sing “Sometimes We Cry”—her voice
a thin cloud in the long blue collapse of day
over the Lough. The piano builds a bridge for her
to cross the black estuary of his voice,
and their singing builds an island in the air
where waves bother a bird-churned shore.
As they finish the song and wave to us before
the dark altar of the drums, the rough surf
of applause beats down on them, and their two hands
join downstage, lit up as if they are wearing
history’s bloody glove and the future’s long white dress.

which is neither misery
nor melancholy per se,
but the way anything buried
aspires. How blackness becomes
a bladed pendulum swaying between
am I not a man & a brother
& meat. How it dips
into the position
of the unthought,
then out. Trust me.
Foucault isn’t
helpful here. I am after
what comes when the law leaves
a dream gutted. The space
between a plea & please.
A mother marching in the name
of another woman’s dead children.
Not the anguish she carries alongside
her as if it were a whole separate person, but the very fact of her feet
addressing the pavement,
the oatmeal she warmed in the microwave that morning, sugar & milk
& blueberries blending in a white bowl
as she reads the paper, taken aback
only by the number of bullets
they poured like a sermon into him.
How despair kills: too slow to cut
the music from a horn or set
my nephew’s laughter to dim.
Who can be alive today
and not study grief?
I am dying, yes, but I am not the marrow in a beloved’s memory just yet.
There are bodies everywhere
but also that flock
of cardinals making the sky
look patriotic.

And maybe no one’s happy
I think to myself, usually
during the plane ride home
or as I read dead French philosophers
on the couch, only a child’s height away from my girlfriend who, for real
for real, is a Platonic ideal in her own right, all any reasonable citizen
of desire might dare
to imagine in these times
of breakup over text message & earnest tweets left
unanswered for days. We fit like the grooves on a bullet. We both love Rilke & want children & think furniture
design is pretty important. Three months into our tour of the human condition,
I dropped half my rent
on a Corinthian leather sofa because it sounded cool
& she didn’t eat anything with preservatives in it,
so I figured No biggie.
This is what all
functioning adults do. They lie expensively. They lie awake
on their side, eyes ajar,
lover dreaming of cormorants right next to them,
counting the minutes

until this, even this bows
to the sovereignty of rot. Beloved,
if I came from anything unworthy of shame, I would say so. I wouldn’t
brood across the country this way.
If I knew how to stop calling
your presence pity, my therapist’s couch would grow cold
as a slaughterhouse. And is that
what you want? To break such a flawless routine? To stop screaming
at typewriters, expecting rain?

1. The city in the distance
Green-encircled, rising, it emerges from banks of fog shrouding the dust and scrub of that anonymous endless plain we call our country.
It is not. Our country is the city
we have longed for, the city created
out of that longing: hortus conclusus where every tree known to us flourishes, a green density blossoming beyond all ideas of beauty against that bluest sky.
In this city we can find the food remembered from a time before language, a potion for forgetfulness, which, tasted, satisfies a desire
we never knew we harbored.
2. The desire for a city
It is not the desire of an old woman.
It is not the desire of a young woman. Young, I wanted steppes, snowfields,
a plain undelved by the devices of man. What calls me now—crone,
haggard wraith—is ocean:
the waves’ spaces in water
where water is not. Only in night’s other universe, waking outside
myself, am I the woman who
once desired a city.

3. The city as mountain
In teeming rain I am climbing a hill so
steep I barely manage to keep upright, keep moving, carrying bundles of wood, sticks, straw, packed bales that come from a country far
from these cobblestoned streets. Alongside
this path there’s a construction site, massive buildings that seem skeletons of an unfinished monument. I see I’m lost, I don’t recognize
the names on street signs or the alphabet
in which they’re inscribed.
4. The city of past and present
The city contains its past in cobblestones paving old alleys that climb up from the river as if they were blind or drunk,
mad to escape the water. In a tree
that has grown around the iron fence
of the present. In inscriptions not on parchment or bronze, but which,
like lines on an ancient face,
trouble the calm surface of the present: crazed hieroglyphs etching concrete,
stone, steel.
5. The city of despair
If the stone turban of the grave marker could bow, weeping; if the arched branch of the aspen could shake its yellowing tears on the parched gravel beneath it;
if the spike of the minaret could pierce the gray sky and bring down rain, perhaps a woman living in this city could stir, could shake off her torpor.

6. The city of old age
This city is capital of a different country— time, accident, affliction—its borders marked by a wide river I cross unaware
on the vessel which bears and
wrecks me.
The river carries me swiftly, insensibly; I have left my home shore far behind before realizing I am flotsam,
washing up on foreign rocks.
In the city of illness, suffering,
every morning I wish away the present. In the city of health, all
I want is for the present to last.
The fortunate among us cross back again, welcomed by the sands
of ordinary sorrow, transient ills: that green space where affliction waxes and
wanes, vanishes for a time.
Still we will return to the city
where affliction is the soil from which each moment springs, the air we gasp for, the shards of ice
wetting our parched lips.

Nocturne
—tells how after, still entangled, you roughly pressed your lips against my wrist,
my eyes long adjusted to the dark
so that, and still uncome, I saw
that your fourth finger, raised there on
your arm propped by the pillow, shuddered also in some love throe of its own, your body’s
inside violence fading here
inside me too. Your thrown-back arm and face lit violet by the outside’s shadowed
snowlight.
It was then that I, uncome, remembered from my childhood
those spring days when the front tree
burst softly like first snow with cherry blossoms
floating from their thread-thin stems. Unpickable, their own brief being
being its own climax, each blinked newly, thinking I’ve grown old the moment my partner blooms.
And I remembered from piano
my own fourth finger quaking,
clumsy and square-tipped
since coupled with the smallest finger,
and how at my lessons
that ring finger, betrayer,
always seemed the weakest and the hardest to control. That trying not to try too hard
the piece’s final fragments, how I took it up myself there
in the darkness where I’d always been: that final trill that sounds an echo at/against
night’s separations.

This garden thrush.
& this one. & that one
over there. Mates, matte- mediumed & collaged, but round-bodied, ovarian
as vowels & perfectly
winged, each strikes
the pose passé juvenile delinquent on driftwood in
a gallery’s open aviary.
Dear Catastrophe Waitress pipes in as the artist
with chevrons buzzed into his scalp is treed by art hounds chatty as sportscasters, erudite as olives with their one red point. The artist, it seems, has mismanaged imperfection, each of his objects accumulating
zeros. But what of these thrushes? So hollow
without us, each a vessel
for this person I inhabit briefly, discretely, as I
peruse & genuflect, each
red second sabotaging the previous, scavenging & salvaging, trained socially
to chirp no open
grievances against art
or artist & goodly as any obeisant deacon. It seems the birds are teaching me
how to watch them. Even
as the critic’s ear bends
sail toward another conversation, hooks a
theory from an adjacent squabble & adopts it for his
own, I cannot help but be thankful for these centuries of contradiction in service of the new
as the garden thrushes, almost human now, collect the dust
of our captivity.
This garden thrush ginning bees
from the hibiscus articulates a relationship between memory & desire. Or doesn’t. Best to watch. Bird returns from bush unrepentant, un-alone, wings fraught
with a terrifying living music & proceeds to seed from itself the subject
of its desire in a violent yet quotidian dance. What does it remember, having fed its hunger? Does it regard instinct as a necessary madness, like the woodpecker who one day wakes
to drive its perfect beak into a palm tree?
Desire need not be satisfied, never taste
its unsuspecting
hunger -to-action- casualty. It lives
in opportunity, however illusory, driving us wild & flitting about the fetish symbols of what absorbs us. It reinvigorates one’s

faith in the pure instant, free of before- & after- math. Like memory,
it usurps one’s willingness to participate, arriving unannounced with swift appetite to explode the immediacy of a moment. We cherish this agent, reject self-authorship
& are emptied of time’s form. Desire (umbilicus) unites
us to thrush / thrush to bee / & bee to flower, whose own leaf dismisses its bond
with the calyx
for the intractable, quick love of gravity.
This garden thrush
is a lark, an experiment
in materialism, an attempt to determine how-when- why the mind bends
to the ephemeral.
Imagine this bird
exploded
so far & fast the migration of its atoms became both an anachronistic wave
& eventual pointillism— light from a dying star.
(Finely layered in space- time, measurable in theory, being somewhere between the fleeting neutrinos of Seurat— recognizable only when they strike at something larger & the polarizing
Ben-Day dots
of Lichtenstein, haunting immense vacuity, charging the in-between.)
Where then lies its song?
Some other poet has been here. I have recordings— song, poem, memory— “Split the Lark & you’ll find the Music / Bulb after Bulb in Silver rolled.” Murdered & dissected for its music, the bird, with study, disappears, its particles expanding.
It can be viewed no longer irrelative of everything else, is itself reconstituted as a collective probability,
or the self-fulfilling replications of a viewer- cum-creator. Matter as energy, both testament
& dream, the either-or
of immemorial & we its beautiful, irreverent song.
This garden thrush, grub fat, notices me watching, notices me not
Wine cork popping—
some breeze lilts a dandelion— garden thrush at noon
Brooklyn lamp—
garden thrush under a cyclist’s tire still twitters, still sings
Drunk off its own heartbeat, stroking clavicle of moon— garden thrush bewitched
This garden thrush is the infinite syllable held, some possibly bequeathed sentiment, or the essential call,
the prolonged naming. Dear Unified & Infinite Interim: you are a god’s stalled instruction, finger at the lip, the first thought or final wish? Saint Vacuum
of Interminable Silence & Forgetting, you are Reason’s longest winter, false prophet of hope
that words can outlive us listeners. With Time peering back unblinking as Hirst’s tanked tiger shark,
I feel moved to repeat you, syllable—use you, as you’ve moved me to examine
my own singsong & surreptitious love for sounds sexing themselves into poetry. It takes but one more sound, a pairing, for meaning to happen: another thrush—plush
as a rush of barbiturates, crux of the coroner’s kingdom, unhinged as religion, itinerant as wind, bitch of the slinky dominatrix unleashing
a Sister’s forgiving
permission—the second utterance giving way to
a season, a song for one’s self, a pleasurable aperture of private performance sans raison d'être.
O wrong, wrong-
headed, long-winded whisperers, music can be meaning enough.
O long, song-laden words, you are reason enough for reason’s artful obliteration.
This garden thrush
walks into a bar with a cat on a leash
& a flamingo in drag.
The bartender asks him what’s the deal with
the entourage.
The garden thrush says, “My grandmother died and willed me this old lamp & when I go
to clean it, out pops this genie, who says he’ll
grant me three wishes.
So I asked for a bird
with long legs
& a subservient pussy.” The garden thrush
loses it, squawking
at his own joke.
The bartender goes back to wiping mugs
with a rag. The garden thrush asks the bartender what the problem is &
the bartender says,
“Jesus, T. This shit,
day in day out?
Where’d you get these two?” T looks over his shoulder. “Met ‘em at a party. What’s your fucking problem?”
“Go home to your kids, T,” says the bartender.
“Not before I get a drink,” T replies. “We really gonna do this?” asks
the bartender. The garden thrush stares at him
a moment before putting on his hat. “Some kind
of brother,” he says.
“It ain’t no pleasure in life,” says the bartender.
“Fuck you,” says the garden thrush. “It ain’t nothin’
but pleasure.”
“Is that guy really your brother?” asks the flamingo once they’re back outside. “We served together,” says the garden thrush. The cat is already down the block. “Served? Served like how?” asks the flamingo, “Like at a Burger King? Like in
a war? You ain’t been to no war.” The garden thrush leans against the wall, points. “When you tuck that between your legs, you reckon that makes you more of a woman or less
of a man?” The flamingo has heard enough, takes flight, an asterisk tagged
to the moon. The garden thrush opens his flask, wishes he had back all that money spent on shrimp cocktails. The pleasure is all mine, he thinks, but I have no right to pleasure.
A sacrifice here & there & you’re left with nothing to sacrifice. & a man with nothing to sacrifice is no man at all.
This garden thrush is garnering burrs as it escalates through the brush, is garnering bits
as it unfurls
across my computer screen, digitized & greedy in its becoming, claiming, pixel by pixel, the birthright
of its origins
in varying coded colors. The old world snaps. The new physical arrives in diminished consciousness, fed
by a taste
for the next graphic element it will inherit. Narcissus at the water’s edge sees his truer, eternal self—pliable, reducible, downloadable
& made anew.
The movie star
is made of extras.
The morning star
has stolen every North. What zodiac
could possibly contain what it is itself contained within? What inner life will
we consider precious when we decode
the thrush’s song
and replace it with
our own?
I am the shadow stalker sin-dripping
& God-cursed begotten of the descendants of Cain. From between the claw scales
of my body seep solitude & words
meant to be scrawled monstrous across the walls of my cave as war-blood
& bone-rattle. Bored & insomniac
I stand staring outside my den
at the pretty haloes of pine torches
burning in the distance in their disparate pulses
& listen to the singing the brighter laughter
& calloused clapping   their cackling voices
honey-hued & at home in the brogue of their own kith & kin. While I
flense the bodies lying ’round my cave
& stuff myself inside their skins & scalps
from head to toe & loping down the hill,
across the moors & through the night, I reach their mead-hall, trailing blood & strips of skin
to join their wassail. There I toast & boast
among the men I used to butcher, glib
& loud in this loose hide I’ve jury-rigged
from their dead. My tongue is riven as I fight
the urge to mount the bench & roar in their faces:
Don’t you hear the music in my howling
in the hard-struck syllables of this sibilance
in these rough-hewn runes of my roar?
So different from your tongue the tempered cadence of your dumb iambs like the drumbeat no one dances or sings to. Do you see the edges
in my keening, their gleam & grace, grooves
& jags brittle in their barbed beauty?
But the rage-cry gets caught in my throat stays there quivering unsung like an arrow just struck striving to be more than
itself: a murmur a melody, a hymn.
So I remain stuck in their skin, mute
& enormous with war & words, unnoticed
to the end of the night. Unnamed. Englished.
Maybe you’re thinking of crying at the news because you can’t pronounce the names
of the cities where children are lined up
lying in the street, wearing T-shirts with American actors
& they aren’t children anymore
because they’re dead & their city
is burning & has always been
burning & the envelopes from your credit
card bills are too close
to the stove’s orange circles where your pasta boils, the kind you make
when the man who protects you is coming over, but the men who protect us, don’t worry,
have their axes & their hoses & they light
the ghostly building again to practice breaking inside her many hells, her many languages
of interior monologue & some of them will fail
because they will see the way
she always stares at the nearby river of sleep, the way she’s not there anymore
because what she wants is not there because death is like protection from what you know
& maybe you cry there in the brittle evening whose silence reaches the pitch of alarm whose leaves imagine themselves
as smoke dancing apart in the sky, sifting over the broad bloody shoulders of the men who protect us
some crying
names they can’t say.
Of what was passed down, this much
we know: Sunday, near turn of century,
Henry’s wife and children came
home from church to find him spread-eagle
among the potatoes, charred bits of stump guts around his body like an aura. Dead from dynamiting stumps. Supposed to be laid up in bed
with a bad back, that’s why he stayed home
from church. But why he chose to haul up
from the blankets, limp and shuffle
to the potato patch, we can only guess—perhaps
his eye and jaw set on a sprawling oak stump
he’d been hacking at off and on for years,
perhaps his mind was churning on
the plodding-implacable day upon
day of a farm: birthing, feeding, slaughtering, hoof-trimming and shoeing, the summer-long tending of oats, buckwheat, and peas,
the hilling and bug-picking of potatoes—
potatoes . . . and that would get him thinking
of his only home, King’s County, Ireland, and
the long crossing from it way back, and how
it all just never ends, how one blackness bleeds
to another, how his escape from a wasted-
starving homeland launched into the bare-dark stinking hold of a Canada-bound British
lumber ship, where for moaning and retching
nights melting into weeks, he prayed for life
or escape, whichever came first, whatever first—
and even though his prayers were answered
and he made it to the sunshine and fresh air,
that long-groaning crossing slipped into the deep-snow cold winters and short growing seasons of a rocky, stumpy, two-cents-per-acre rented farm—how
the burning hauling cutting never ended
in this new world, how that battle roiled up again with the coming of each of the ten children—more clearing lugging sacking— sufferin’ Christ. Always meant to struggle. By the time he sank stiffly to his knees
to knife a hole for the dynamite, his mind
would have been a rolling boil of hate, a lifetime
of it, for sandy, silty soil, killing frosts, potato
bugs, wheat flies, horses that fought shoeing,
iron unbowing to form and shape, days
and days of rain, a wet cool spring, potatoes
rotting in the mud—potatoes . . . An Gorta Mór,
The Great Hunger . . . women and the young
foraging for nettles and blackberries, cabbage leaves
and grass, men digging a ditch, building a road
under the coolly economizing eye of Trevelyan,
friends an arm away crumpling like burlap,
too sick for work, too sick, weak to cross
the ocean in a vessel built to carry
New World pine for His Majesty’s masts,
to be packed into the hard-dark hold like salted cod,
thin bone shoulder to shoulder . . . the dull ochre clanging of the bell calling, calling one hundred cattle-like
to the soup kitchen—one quart of soup, thickened
with Indian corn meal, four ounces of bread or biscuit—then treading single file out the exit,
the bell calling, calling for another one hundred.
A quart of soup, four ounces of bread or
biscuit . . . we’ll never know if he settled on
his knees with gritted teeth, said, “The hell
with it, the hell with it all,” watching the running
spark hiss down the fuse, one, two seconds
too long. The hell with it.
November’s meager daylight seeps through the doorway into the barn’s dark shell and I hear the wind insist, whistling along the eaves. The snow line has eased down the mountainside marking the advent of cold. Sheep file inside,
inspect the corners,
and we stand together
as the horse steps in
by degrees, cautious.
He comes and touches
his nose to my chest
and the sheep follow the old ewe into the front stall where
they stand, out of the wind.
When winter closes in,
there will be no other place for me to come for this comfort.


Du Mu looks up from a letter he’s writing to us
twelve centuries ago,
a letter edged with a description of the four hundred eighty temples of the Southern dynasties—
what they did with their idleness,
with a need they couldn’t explain.
Old friend, the same wind
that lifted the corners of the rice paper
around your hand riffles wild white yarrow & black-eyed Susans
in the field beyond the burned church.
Here, as many empty porches & boarded windows as Southern temples. Tractors rust beneath grass, county roads dissolve to gravel,
the walkers on the bridge vanish. Where do they go,
the ones who move on without a word,
who leave toys in the back yard, utility bills on the front door?
Here, a little sunshine & a winedark spill of deer’s blood across the county line,
orange sun-spotted pagodas
of wild tiger lilies in the ditches
off the rain-tamped white dust of Elk Chapel Road, a straight shot to the polestar.
So much I can’t explain,
so much forgotten or unfinished,
if you can tell the two apart. Old friend, I’ll be forgotten.

Like leaves to the trees, the leaves come—
Serrated, palmate, lobed, entire.
Never a sycamore leaf to a birch or a birch to a maple branch. No errors, no revisions. Natural
As in according to its nature, the code inscribed In its green charter and by-laws.
Which is not to say the coming is easy.
Like a sparrow pecking among the gravel Or winnowing dust for seed,
Like a catbird eating ants from a witch-hazel wand Or a towhee thrashing about in dry leaf-fall,
The titmouse sings. From inside the nightshade
She sings cheater, cheater! teacher, teacher! Repeatedly.
Which is not to say she is wrong either way.

You mistake it for a college band flyer or haunted house ad— faceless grim reaper, no, hoodie without a face—and this is why you don’t understand when six cops burst into your classroom, point pistols at your head, press fingers where bullets would go, say
You’re dead
then turn toward your students but mostly your favorite, Lisa, who you’d bet a silver dollar on getting out. Guns aim: they die. Dead, you see for the first time how young Lisa is, how skinny, how black. Alive, you saw none of this, knew her by her smile. Front row, she’s smiling now, as though teeth could shield a bullet. The guns look at your students, and the cops say
You’re all dead
and you die again. When they leave, you lock the door, sit in the dark together, just like the poster must have instructed. After an hour, Lisa admits she’s pissed herself. You walk out to see what’s really going on. This is California, so the center of the building has no roof; a tree grows in the courtyard. On the first floor, Mental Health offices. Second floor, Child Services. Instructors crack jokes about one-stop shopping. You could shop here. You find yourself cracking. You think of the next two classes you have to teach today—will guns attend? You think of the girl who came to class in her bra. I paid $20 for this. I want people to see it. It’s beautiful— and truth, you understand $20 because you live here, too, so you tell her to take a seat, and you continue lecturing on how it was, the mothers binding the babies’ feet, cutting off first their daughters’ toes then their heels. You teach about blood and where it comes from. You remember Ms. M just back from Iraq on the day you read “Ode to a Nightingale” out loud. At the line, “Thou wast not born for death,” she threw a chair at you and shouted, You want us to feel stupid. So you said, Outside, now. And there she fell and kept on falling like a baby in your arms. You offered a different assignment, a different way of talking to each other. You told her what you couldn’t before: you don’t know what a good

chance is anymore, other than it implies something different might happen, and she asked, How can you not know? You’re the teacher. She used what you taught about descriptive language in her next paper on the effects of PTSD and being raped by her own unit. Again you see the gun, Lisa’s face, and tears seem the only substitute for bleeding. You feel so full of blood you might break open. Lately you cry all the time, mostly in your car. This is California, so you can drive away half of every day, but you’re not in your car now, and Lisa’s waiting in the dark, wet and ashamed. When you ask the cops, they say you should have read the poster. When you ask the cops, they say they were just having a little fun. And you believe them, these men you talked to just the other day about pumping rubbing alcohol out of your neighbor’s belly. We’re just fighting to keep the whole thing from going up in flames, and you thought thing as in person when they meant thing as in neighborhood, and you felt lost at your own front door. Now you see Lisa’s smile—a light that burns nothing. There’s a grid you want to get on, help others get on, lines like a road toward being counted as human. You’d give anything for your car right now, to do as you teach: bet that silver dollar on yourself and get the hell out. To be seen, recognized, not for dead but as bleeding—you were dead, but now you’re bleeding. You look at the poster the cop put in your hands:
Make Yourself Invisible. Your Life Depends On It.

Like ash, which sifts through fingers, then
is washed away, the emblem of her vanishing
ensures more vanishing. The outline beneath
the painted form came first. Or an early
study, blurred because
it was left out in the rain. Here
is where the elegy
inserts itself like something sticky
pressed over what she was,
this replica I worked to make, then
came to love, then after
it vanished had to start over.

Unconscious Ode
it is beautiful
to touch a surface
as if there exists
an underneath
that can’t be touched—
hidden, filled
with light of all kinds
like seeing a heart
on ultrasound, its feathery
valves opening and closing—
a shape, aberration
or movement visible only when something adjacent
is probed with out-of-date tools
since this artifact never
existed at all in the ordinary way,
its obsolescence built in
from the start, just as its advocates
might have predicted.

1
Today I won’t think about dying alone in a house with no windows, won’t remember my grandmother remembering us less each time, won’t imagine what happened
in Lebanon, won’t remember
that bloated tongue of the river
licking town gone, won’t paint quiet fields of dead horses in Hungary,
so many I didn’t think there was
a name for it, but there is, dead horses, I can’t not say it, can’t not
imagine a version of Saturn
eating his only son, holding him
by the ankles like a chicken
and dipping him into his mouth
head first like some kind of horror
one thinks can only exist in paint
or in dream, and I know grief
is a two-dollar word, I know
spent bullets like bodies of insects
after the feverish swarm, after
the frantic air emptied and went
quiet, and birds like gods picked up
the mess, starving mouths blessing
the silence. This is me starting a war with every shadow. This is me lying down like any animal in a field of snow.
2
A field is old fires as a building is a future toppling.
A woman goes to bed as what she wants to be.
There is the question of what to do with hours
when hours are the only thing one has. You know this
is wheat, but you don’t call it so. That stone in your hand

is not a bird. That light is only reflection. Pick a bullet up and it will tell you what it wants: to go fast into the other side of a thing. I want something to say about red barns
and needles kissing forearms. It’s too easy to make a tragedy of a body, to reach without prompting the word
holy, oh holy. Ruin, you are my brother. Don’t die.
3
Some days all you can do is whisper mountains
into existence, walk through town where no one talks about the silver of stars or the haunting flight
of bats. There is nothing you can do
about some bullets or the people they find.
Heaven is a person knocking on our ears.
Let children run naked through the house.
Let chickens hang spilling their red galaxies on the floor, pretty things who have learned the secret to flight
is not hollow bones or wings.
4
I’ll be goddamned if the birds ever stop
being a wonder, the scatter and coming back of them, the sudden space of what’s left.
A flag can be dead at the top of a pole, but this has nothing to do with the flag.
A bomb can light a face unfamiliar.
What has your friend lost that you won’t?
What is the purpose of world’s slow bleed if everything goes? Yes, pumpernickel, yes house. Hush now. There, there.

Back back before the days of instant replay things only happened once. If there was an explosion the concussion of it concussion of it had its moment in time time and then went away like smoke smoke in the air. Those in the area would turn turn their heads and that was their one chance to see see what they had already felt. Before the camera nobody knew just what a horse’s legs legs looked like in motion. Only an artist could imagine imagine
the unimaginable. Now the video camera is our artist stuck in a loop loop of the same thing thing so we believe everything happens again happens again. This time each new time it’s different it is. Pause and zoom zoom. Freeze freeze the moments. Call them real. We know so much more much more than we did before. We are so much more real real. When someone blows up, it’s time to cry cry. Cry.

You feel it coming.
An incommensurate anger.
The gesture your father made
like a butcher hacking through bone.
What must your face look like for your son’s to look like this?
There’s no paddle, no switch.
When you’re at the table
making noise with your peas,
you’ll close your mouth. Beg pardon.

The trowel of rain levels the road with puddles, mirrors that tame the now-filled depths.
Some pools rim crevice and potholes,
but straight down the center of the lane
two rails shimmer to denote the width
a world of tires has faulted into tread.
Could keep the car on course by habit alone. All direction asks is precedent.

The figures mount, peak, and dive into stasis, a frieze of youthful males in the raw that yet reflects, as does a chain of words, a sentence’s urgent roll into a single thought.
Such is flesh, even the undesired, that—brute as sun, untainted by veil—
it should lure the fervent eye from its tired enclave. And yet, beauty will never fail
to riddle the mind, impugn the soft contrivance, baffle instinct. The candid joys, in trance
with bodies on rock and font, close and dance
in verticals and pyramid, in measures,
that the compassing eye might guard the fissure— dressed and healed—between scene and desire.

Dizzy to rip past shirttail and panties
I lay down on my back
on rough clods in the old furrow left fallow scraggly spring grass
now golden around us I was as underground
as I have ever been halfway
in shallow grave a plow-depth closer to corpse
and I whimpered to hurry
hurry before a boy out hunting quail might kick
across the dry field onto us
in our scuff and hum a little bit of sky
over her new shoulder outside
the curtain of hair she sorry for my back
and bare ass I for the grit
and the grind on her pale
knees the wear
on us enough we finished without
any sweet linger a tangle without a moment’s hush
to hear the crows dusted we rose

Of what could imperial I be jealous?
The white rose and how the muted spatters of rain conjure red dots on its petals,
as if bloodstains would appear on the page when holding a poem over a flame;
of the black moor goldfish and how it glides effortlessly through rough limestone grottoes; of hydrogen, its flammability
and its abundance; of the migration
of monarchs, their winters in Mexico,
how the ones who begin it aren’t the ones who end it, like the three generations
that it would take to reach the nearest star, those astronauts anything but homesick.


Jealous of the one who does not exist,
never the one who does. Him? His dirty
Peugeot parked where you thought I wouldn’t see his French cigarettes on the dash at night
as I walked home on Grant? The mandolin
picker with his beach house? Who cares about him? But the one with iridescent wings
on his cock and a range of five octaves
he can sing with it, the one whose dancing evokes five forms of precipitation,
each more astonishing than the last, down
on the withered grass below your window:
I’ve never seen him but know he exists,
as the Devil howls and knows God exists.

You say it doesn’t mean a blessed thing,
but don’t you see—that’s what I want. That’s what I envy. The ocean ebbs, revealing
blue anemones, yellow barnacles,
a lone, iridescent abalone.
It feels nothing for the moon, whose being transformed it into this revelation
in tide pools. What human being would say
it means nothing? What it means is the most blessed thing imaginable. The hide
of a noble horse becomes glue that holds
the ribs of Itzhak Perlman’s violin
as it sings Mozart and Rachmaninoff.
Tell me what he does to you means nothing.

From the chariot’s
small lantern room Themistocles
looks at the crowd, the white sea of eyes, the legs before him beating
the air. In most ways today is unremarkable. The sun
is there, the sky
a patchwork of breath, the street
a knot of polished bodies hesitating between lead
and gold. This, he thinks,
is an ending. There is nothing in this world
left to bridle. He carries his weight like the crest of a wave.

Who can stop the monkeys in the trees from chittering and screaming? They will do it anyway, no matter my mood as we drift past the trees
overhanging the river. A thousand years later I hear their echo in a great crested bird here—he finally stops his crazy laugh
to pulverize tree bark on his way to pulling out a bug. I feel through my brush the vibration.

An ant crawls across the crown of the king of flowers. It may be just an old wives’ tale after all
that this least artistic insect opens the peony by nibbling away at the closed bud until its thousand petals unclose and cluster as if embracing memory.
In Luoyang the peony crawls across the second largest city in the world and opens up the city’s memory that it is beautiful in spring.
And in much the same way I nibble on these lines because I like them having no idea what will unfold in you.
If love could embrace you forever you would feel the red peony around you. If lost you were ushered home by the moon it would smile like the white peony.
The dewy eyes of the first glance of your first child
are a black peony and the ants scrambling away invisibly are every moment
you lived before that moment.

Under a collapse of honeysuckle
and its fury of bees, under a mulberry
canopy, its wavering thatch of green—
that’s where you’d find us when the voices rose,
playing out civility: leaf-napkins, twig-utensils, acorn-goblets, tea of wild scallion
and mud. Beside the garden’s tangled wire. Thimbleberry, chokecherry. Lulled
by the overripe reek of mulch, our own quiet in failing light. All summerlong
we colluded on a patchwork of dried leaves stitched together by stems—crimson, bruise,
amber, brick, cinnamon—to blanket us when those voices called us home.

In a far room a child is listening to music from the fabric on the hi-fi console
twice his size, no, three times, more now that there is music in it, and inside that,
the leafy crackle of vinyl beneath the needle as if some beast were rummaging the trees.
If I tell you the child is me, it is me
as an enigma now, a speechless witness
just inches from the black fabric that is, in turn, inches from a distant parade.
My father is away on business, and so
he takes the shape of records that he bought us,
or rather the family before I came
into the world a stranger, though I must have
felt less of one, somewhere, far away. The trombones are serious about getting
from here to there, and since I know them as funny in cartoons, I hear their laughter
in a military number scored for horns. It is November 1957,
and armies with their morning glories of brass march our streets every Veterans Day,
me the glad hat on my father’s head
and shoulders, bouncing in time because he bounced.
I still hear the trumpets’ high sentence, how they walk in time a flowered street
to reach their full crescendo as they pass. Always America in songs and pledges


whose gratitude is too powerful to be clear, like a boy’s shadow
small inside his father’s as it grows. I do not quite know what people love
when they love their country, but for me the music of affection begins with one
room, one face, one patriot, say, who served on a warship in the Sea of Japan.
Mostly his stories go so far and then
trail off when things turn dreadful or boring.
Hard to tell. All I see is my father before a photo of his destroyer drawn
across the shadow of the Golden Gate. How patient his stare, a long time now
entering the ash-white fog in silence. How small his body inside the visual
music of the harbor, the great wet chill that flags the mast, the pallor of surrender.

My mother’s people came from France, from Germany, came from money, came to New York, to Philadelphia,
went to San Francisco, to Alaska, were furriers, left us photographs, lithographs, tintypes of tiny ladies in huge hats,
of bearded gentlemen standing up straight in Union blue, little girls
in ermine, bear, elk, seal, who sat
in huge chairs with flashing eyes,
who died young. They left us stained glass windows in synagogues, left graves off the Jackie Robinson Parkway.
You wanted to be a window washer.
I wanted to ride in horse races across the desert. We met in the city. We met in a graveyard. We met
as my father’s body was cooling.
Our eyes locked in the yard
as his body was washed and shrouded, as crockery was shattered, two
blue shards laid over his eyes.
I was nearly a corpse, white-bellied fish floating down the James.
You were a bear, I was a wolf,
you were a lion, one minute satisfied, starving the next. I was a mossy place to kneel on, you were a candle,
you were a singer, I was a river,
I was a soldier, I was a black suit,
you were a black shawl, I was dust
in the sun, you were a window washer.

1
I climbed the mountain to where the old man sat nested in his white beard.
Look to the moon, he said, and learn that you will be shaved down to nothing;
you will be skinned clean; you will be eaten by sky and become only darkness.
Okay, I said. Point taken.
That was when I noticed
he was levitating
about an inch above the granite.
Can you go any higher? I asked.
Not really, he said, but I can do this—
And he gave a gentle push using only his fingertips and coasted over the rock like butter in a warm pan.
Would you like to try it?
I nodded, reached out
and gave him a firm nudge as I would a plastic puck
riding its cushion of air on an air hockey table in a suburban basement

only realizing my error once his bewildered face glided over
the edge of the cliff.
2
The next guy looked pretty much like the first: turban, lotus position, etc.
As soon as I arrived, he started speaking:
The moon instructs us how to be whittled, sliver by sliver,
like a shard of bone—
Got it, I nodded.
He looked at me kind of quizzical and suspicious
and maybe a little disappointed, like
he was just getting warmed up.
He opened his mouth to offer a bit more,
but I held up my hand:
Seriously, man. Duly noted. The first guy filled me in.
His eyes lit with delight. You know Kevin?

I smiled and nodded, like I was chuckling at what a rascal Kevin was:
Dude lives on the edge. Know what I’m saying?
It’s the Himalayas, man,
he said, his smile vanishing. We all live on the edge.
3
The jails in the Himalayas are not nearly as cold
as one might expect.
They are also unexpectedly generous with the yak butter and the secondhand tea.
So much of life is about managing expectations, I thought. I reached
to scratch my head, forgetting for a moment the bamboo slivers
beneath my fingernails and the iron cuff
that held my wrist
chained to the wall where I leaned
in the chilled alpine light.

4
Mindfulness, mindlessness,
I chuckled to myself.
I mean, really. Who’s to say?


Because a woman posing for a portrait expects her face, not a radio sputtering
disassembled circuits, a madman tatting
her collar like a hedge on the asylum lawn
loop after loop of lace and so many throats the notes would never find their way
it’s dangerous
calling this a body, art, what aria
ever sang out of the ear of the beloved triangle line line circle
what portrait painter worth his easel could believe as this one claims
this is the sum of what will be remembered when she passes out of vision’s range
as if the sum of 1 plus 3 were muskrat
just subtract a plum, then add a dirigible,
a spoon, Your Honor, this not
as you say, a delicate controversy,
not that model who sued over Aphrodite’s
shell: in question, should she have to supply it

was it essential to the pose like Eve’s leaf
I understand delicacy: woman naked on nothing
in the painted ocean but I am not a ship
radioing SOS, dits and dahs all run together, an abacus
in a windstorm what Salome
no matter how wild with love, desperate—
cursing at her mother, could lift her hand to die if she couldn’t first distinguish
the dagger’s fatal line from her own body?
With just a rifle, lean, taut
and though there’s no helmet one eye is swollen, keeps staring
which means the boots no longer move —in such a silence you hear
a marching song, still warm
from the foundry when this toy
was molten iron and step by step setting fires with ink from letters home
black, blacker till there’s no star where North should be—that
and why are you holding it so deft
helping it guide each night down in the dew you dead still listen for spreading out behind this dam
half hillside, half being built with so many unknowns rusting in place, one by one.
Up the telephone. Say The letter was written by a student. Down the telephone.
A few days later transmission intercepted
by History. Say Say something about the events
in the train on the way to Frankfurt. Let body equal crumple in an outsized coat
if air turns fair to foul as fast as Jew turned to Jew along the eastbound
track. Say Yours gratefully say this gentian say I would be more than happy say
Where are things leading with us. Up the telephone. Say nothing to the no
one there. Say And yet! Here! Say empty breath, wind on the line.
Down the telephone. Down the telephone. Say after all, say
a second time. Since body has sense before ear, lie next to rail;
say for weeks. Cover the ear
of the body as the train pounds by.
Remember in 1919 when Bohemia disappeared. Remember, Jiří, we were running together. Remember the walk along the canal in February,
when the world was beginning to get lighter. And it got darker, Jiří.
Do you know the names you wrote on that paper. Did you touch the old boundaries.
I pick up a twig covered in yellow lichen. You're walking ahead of me now. In the evening we'll see an animal among the trees.
Only a brief map.
Only the blue color you put above our heads.
I have taken all the papers with me to our new countries. According to legend the sea is still out there somewhere.
Jirka, what is the canal called? Are there still traces
of our steps in the branches? Do animals cross the lines we made?
I was waiting a long time for the story I thought you would tell me. You were waiting in the future. I didn't hear you come in.

Wind feathering grass . . .
horsetails touch. From a horse's snout a hummingbird's sound.
Wind in eucalyptus
spooks the horses; they reposition.
Lake silt in the horse's iris.
No one's seen the bottom of the gorge
or of thought or love—no one's seen the bottom. Wind polishing metals in grain . . . .
Sometimes horses stand and sleep.
The wind is still—5 sleep, 3 eat.

