Only. 

Only the snakebite of syringe. 

Only the preferred method of execution used by Vietnam, Nazi Germany, and Georgia. 

Only, yes, you are only as flammable as a photograph, now. 

Only as blood-pumping as black ink. 

You are only dementia-dream, now. Sleep like a library 

and we will gun down the men standing outside with torches. 

One of us: one of them. One of us: one of them. 

One day your name will mean mountaintop. 

One day we will look back 

like the snake devouring itself 

and your name will be the fang 

and the garden and the guts.

The black bear of a Bible
that belonged to my great grandparents
has gold-lined pages, paws 
dipped in honey.

Running through its forests
is like déjà vu every time.
The black bear eats everything. 
If you've never stared past its teeth,

you've never held your breath waiting 
to be ended. The largest male black bear
weighs almost a thousand pounds 
and can be found hunting at night

somewhere in Northern Minnesota. 
I still have nightmares of his silence. 
I haven't eaten fish since I saw him pick a salmon 
from its bones.

I say all this to
witness disappearance,

to show you that I don't believe
any more. I only believe

in the man tuning our piano,
his seersucker cheeks. Do you see

these, his hair and stubble the colors
of ridge-knifing rocks, his head tipped

to catch pitches like gnats
as he plods on the plangent keys again?

He has flayed it;
he pulls its ribs back

to expose velvet like old photographs'
red dresses, their pigments pressing through

dust, to unwrap gold coils
to straw and splinter. Love is bitter

and all there is, Zelda said, and you know
this to be true. I have had to show you.

I tell you this to speak it.
I tell you as I'd spit on the floor.

A driveway in LA.
Underwater. Under a sort

of weather broiled 
like sad beef. My feet 

are the distance to the hotel,
except pretty. I look at 

things until they become gold,
until there are sounds of butterflies.

There is a lake on the moon on fire.
I hold your hand and try to explain 

everything as if it were written by 
Dr. Seuss. I will not lose anymore

not in the dark, not in the park, Sammy. 
Though, I will win seven rings in Miami!

Your tears came out as small green hams. You stood 
near a window pointing to the fire on the moon.

In media res, I remember

either

southern Illinois or Louisiana

the backward hug of ochre paint peeling

off a dead-end grocery stop

and off that

cobwebs, a blast thereof invisible

an oily film 

coalesces w/ a wind

I remember

what beautiful summer laundry there was, thereof

When my parents wanted to have a fight, 
my mother pulled the pool tarp 

over my sister and me and we sank slowly
into the groundwater. My sister snaked 

between the sheets of clay in the flower beds,
pushing her skin through the petals

of geraniums, sunning herself. Sadly,
I never could flow that far south, 

never could divide myself around the plugs
of ash roots and the blocks of chalk, 

and I always found myself sloshing
in the hot water heater while my father 

slammed my mother’s skull against the pipes. Later, 
my father would fill the bathroom sink,

strip off his underwear and scrub them fiercely
with green marbled soap. This is how I learned

to love so well with the taste
of my father’s dick in my mouth.

This is how I learned to consider the lap 
of loose and filmy shit I was born to bear.

This is how I learned to conceive it.

I have defeated weather. My sweat
beginning to choke some strangers, my sweat

an instrumental. Gauging the distance I forget about the distance and nearly get down
inside this abandoned house. Ghosts keep tickling my feet

but won't answer my calls. Pleased to please the brides in their raw
unclean state. Dump all mannequin

parts into my bedroom, I'll fit inside of plastic or else.
Baby girl, yep! you'll need another minor fit to get this tick from the blue bloody shoulder we call

"that special breakfast." I'm so sick of distance
watching me shave. I'm so sick of distance questioning my haircut.

Even when my teeth begin to grow the executions run late. You're stealing all my spotlight.
OK. I will tickle you into submission.

Never forget the billboards and their lack of proper desire.
I lost the room. I have a purse and no need for desire.

I. 
courage (screwed up his — )
ache: (kneading a deep — [his/hers]); bank, banked: (desire [his], etc.); burn, burning: (need [his/hers]); chasm: (of desire [his/hers]); courage: (screwed up his —, etc.); cupped: (face [his/hers], “warmth” [hers]); deep, deeper: (s/he took him/her); desire: (consuming [his], confusing [hers]); dream, dreamed: (of his/her naked[ness]); empty: (bed, head, heart [his/hers]; fire, fires: (s/he set off dozens of new —); fluttery: (breath [hers], heart [hers], gut [his], hands [hers], etc.); gasp: (pain, pleasure [hers]); groan: (earthy, raw, etc.); hair: (his fingers knotted in her—, her hands combed through his —); hall of fame: (his penis would be in the penis —); heat: (e.g. stoking the furnace of); heart: (skittering [hers], hammering [his]); hips: (pants [his], slacks [hers] tugged over —); hungry: (heart, head, etc.); innocent: (beautiful[ly] [her]); kiss, kissed: (—him/her senseless); lips: (his/hers parted for); manhood: (earthy, raw, etc..); melt: (her body seemed to —); masculine, masculinity: (earthy, raw, etc.); moan: (breathy [hers], gruff and throaty [his]); muscles: (knotted [his]); mood: (morning suited [his/her] —); need: (s/he was wild with, s/he was a puddle of); oath: (he muttered an —, she bit off an —); regret: (to his/her undying —); restless: (the memory made him/her—, etc.); rugged, ruggedness: (earthy, raw, etc. [his]); skittered: (pulse [hers], etc.); shoulders: (he grabbed her by the —, her hands dug into his muscled —); shudder: (earthy, raw, etc. [his/hers]); sigh, sighed: (earthy, raw, etc. [his/hers]); strain, strained: (his/her body against); taste: (earthy, raw, etc. [his], flowers and sunshine [hers]); thighs: (clothing stripped from [his/hers]); wild: (need [his, known], [hers, awakened,] etc.); tangled: (pain/pleasure [his/hers])


II.
his/her need took him/her [not] entirely by surprise
s/she brought him/her to the peak
s/he captured his/her mouth
s/he could feel a storm brewing inside him/her
s/he could hardly be in love with him/her
s/he drove him/her to the edge
s/he fanned his/her flame
s/he felt him/herself unable to breath, to speak
s/he gave a deep sigh, and smiled-grimaced-turned away-turned-toward him/her
s/he gentled his/her kiss
s/he learned to wager wisely and to win, a skill that never failed to surprise him/her
s/he instructed as s/he obeyed
s/he made him/her realize the depths of his/her need
s/he told him/her silently of his/her love
s/he stoked his/her fire
s/he stroked his/her wild mane
s/he took his/her chin in his/her hands, and held his/her still 
s/he wanted very much to soothe him/her
s/she was afraid that even if s/he’d won that s/he’d lose

his/her limbs went weak
his/her need took him/her [not] entirely by surprise


III.
love: where to find 
after an animal rescue (a boxer in winter); after a kidnapping (imported Irish bookkeeper, imported Irish stable girl); after marriage (imported Irish bookkeeper, imported Irish stable girl); at the races (imported Irish bookkeeper, imported Irish stable girl); at the bed and breakfast (with the B & B owner, after a late-night raiding the fridge); at an art gallery (fairies are nice, wood sculptures are better); at a home-delivery (twins); in the diner (the waitress and the entrepreneur); in the attic (with the B & B owner, after a late-night raiding the fridge); in the basement behind a locked door (with the B & B owner, after a late-night raiding the fridge); on the coast; in a moonlit cove (with the B & B owner, after a late-night raiding the fridge); in the soft light of the bedroom (with the concert pianist and the handsome town doctor, former flames); in the kitchen (she cooks! she works! she’s raising a well-adjusted son!); in-between the two-by-fours that make a home (with the concert pianist and the handsome town doctor, former flames); on crutches (single mom, car accident); through the mail (rancher orders mail-order-librarian-bride-wife); with a star athlete (baseball); with a star athlete (baseball, retired); with an old flame (with the concert pianist and the handsome town doctor); with a rancher (orders mail-order-librarian-bride-wife); with the son of a pastor, himself a pastor, too; with a comic book artist (with hound, in a modest apartment); with a single mother of two (divorced); with a single mother of one (divorced); with the local chief of police (handsome, rugged); with the town doctor (handsome, rugged); with the owner of the local craft store (beads, beautiful); with the owner of the local craft store (knitting/crocheting, beautiful); with the neighbor two floors up (banker, sexy in buttoned up suits); with the new vet (smart, beautiful, probably taken); with the new nurse practitioner (smart, beautiful, probably taken); with the safety engineer (handsome, rugged, probably taken); with the architect (handsome, rugged, probably taken); with the temperamental artist (painter, beautiful, probably taken); with the temperamental artist (musician, beautiful, probably taken); with the town psychologist (moonlighting as an online dating business owner); with a loan officer (banker, sexy in buttoned up suits); while ice skating (with rugged, handsome engineer); while snow shoeing (with rugged, handsome engineer); after painting (smart, beautiful, probably taken painter of fairies); after delivery (pizza, babies)

Monday, 2 June 1851:
Trek through the mountain was arduous,
but with numerous compelling sights.
Dense mist here threatens to enshroud
everything.

Different green than in England. Why? 

Know nothing about their insects.

3 June: 
Tired today. Stomach. Didn't get far.

4 June: 
Collected one new beetle specimen. 
Highly developed mandibles, very efficient. 
Naming him Acrocinus Thomasiculum, 
after my young Royal Society interpreter. 
Good sort. Speaks like a native. 
No scientist but always scribbling in his book, 
nearly as often as I do.

                                                                      Mountain peaks beckon through clouds. 
                                                                      Along the path, nothing is hidden. 
                                                                      Eyes of the forest watch along the way.

5 June: 
Buildings in the temple complex not like any 
churches I ever saw. Peered into one larger 
structure while walking past. Rows of 
the Chinese, sitting motionless, without 
a sound. Appeared to be at peace.

Feeling I should be back looms over me.

Can't be there now.

Glad to stop moving for a time. Stomach 
worse than ever. But settled into quarters now. 
At home amongst fellow heathens. 

Discussed their religion with T. 
If they have no God, whom do they curse?


6 June: 
Received today by the abbot, a Mr. Hongzhi. T. interpreted, 
as abbot speaks not a word of English and I 
no Chinese. Tried hard to understand. Their creed 
is all about impermanence, and how to live with it, 
how to get on with life without being broken by past. 
That's the only part of it made sense to me.


8 June: 
If I had studied medicine, like my brother?


10 June: 
Found myself walking with Mr. Hongzhi today, without 
T. present. Unlike Englishmen who jabber away 
in our foreign tongue to people we know can't understand 
a word of it, this old gentleman didn't attempt to speak 
to me. Yet he seemed to be trying to intimate 
something. His gaze is powerful.

(Note: Must remember to investigate origin or use of 
different shaped skin around eyes. Why this variation?)


                                                                      Bird song awakens morning. 
                                                                      In the temple: chopping wood, carrying water.
                                                                      Outside the temple: all beings looking for food. 
                                                                      Everything continues on the way.

                                                                      While seeking the Robe of True Seeing, 
                                                                      these tattered black robes will suffice. 
                                                                      Incense trails away from the altar. 
                                                                      Not one grain left in my bowl.


12 June: 
1. She used to love dictionaries. Just the sound of words. We played mnemonic games. 
2. She accompanied me on many a daily walk. We walked hand in hand. Sometimes she sang a song she had learned from school friends.
   I can't remember the tune of any of them. 
3. After her final treatment, she thanked the nurse.


                                                                      Even in this broken old hut, 
                                                                      moon enters through cracks in the roof.


14 June: 
Tried to sit with monks today. They have little expectation for 
a foreigner, so I have a sort of license to fail. 
The goal is to still thoughts. I don't grasp how this is 
possible. The abbot has instructed me to count 
my inhalations and exhalations. I find my thoughts continue.

T. tells me their term for this restlessness of thought is "monkey mind"!!


6 July: 
Thoughts are starting to slow. Not sure what is supposed to be 
beneath them. Asked abbot (through T.) if he means I will find God 
or see Heaven when the thoughts stop. In response, he struck
his stick loudly upon the floor. What this means I do not understand. 

Can these monks really push aside the veil? 

What do they see?


25 July: 
Stomach was mild today, so spent hours in sitting hall. Thoughts dropped 
away for some moments. Hours passed as minutes.

27 July: 
It is like
It is as if
29 July: 
It is like a vast night sea. 
It is like being a vast night sea 
that fills all space.



4 August:
It was like a death.


5 August: 
I felt a sort of "light," not from long ago, 
but as if from beyond time, 
but I couldn't hold it.


I can describe it no further.


6 August: 
It was like
I can describe it no further.

                                                                      The body of illumination flows by like a stream. 
                                                                      Even the swiftest hawk cannot take it.

11 August: 
Stark nightmares. Stomach unruly. Brain 
too agitated today to still thoughts. 
I fear this Chinese peace 
is not enough for men such as me.


                                                                      To forget the self is to awaken as all 
                                                                      the ten thousand things.


12 August: 
Annie, you keep rushing in.

We have chosen to scar our skins here 
     in tin shacks where we conjure up 
more than Christ could on hot plates— 
     full of chemical psalms now 
and prayer-less waking.  We're the dead 
     you forgot.  We're the saved 
and the damned in the First Baptist pews, 
     where repentance is free but can never save us.  
We buy bottles of Drano we slowly empty 
     in the same way we do Duracell batteries 
leaking golden acid: an erasure of everything 
     witnessed and felt as the sky opens here, 
sometimes, during a storm—promising 
     after rain the good cleansing of church
or a stiff drink to stave off the feeling of emptiness
     gathering up.  We cough ribbons of blood 
with each drug-addled breath.  You cannot heal us, 
     Lord.  You cannot raise us up like you did Lazarus. 
As he approached you from the grave with insects 
     clinging to his hands, you could not believe it.  
The first time words became flesh surprised you.  
     You understood symbolically you were the Son of God
until you raised a man.  Then you physically did.  
     Similarly, the first meth we made surprised us. 
Our homes each exploded.  We stood outside them
     in the dark—choirs of sirens closing in, bright red
and blue light bathing us—and could not believe it.

Empty the summer of its sweat.
Empty the river of its silt
where Troy once jumped down
from the dam, making a strange stunt-
show of it.  I will bet you a dollar
and a quarter I won't break my leg,
he said, when I jump off of it.

Empty the casket of the other boy
who drowned and his mother's Bible
where she wrote her son's name
in the margins a thousand times.
Empty the parable where Jesus walks 
on water in a storm and replace it 
with Jesus drowns. Everyone drowns.

Empty the disappearing town
that is invisible to me, the one
I often thought was too much to return to
with its George Bush and its Baptists
and its single-mindedness. 
There is only one way,
its preachers say.  But then,
what do they know?

Empty the mineral deposits,
Llanite rocks and coal-black clay.
Empty the silver mine, its prospectors,
the dust of wealth still clinging to their fingers.
Empty it.  Empty the highways of their trucks
and midnight switchback Saturdays, 
their dizzy drunks and Sunday drivers 
who have come to see the flowers.  

Empty the fields so full of bluebonnets 
it hurts.  Empty the churches 
of their many congregations, 
pews and prayers.  Empty the cup 
full of grape juice, because it won't
turn into wine.  There are no miracles
—not here.  Empty the podium 
my friend stood on and preached from 
in the Pentecostal church,

his grief flowing like water from his mouth,
from his blue-tendrilled tongue 
at his friend’s funeral where he spoke
of the vanishing faith that he felt 
as he watched the boy drown:  
I could not save him from the undertow,
despite the fact that I tried.  
The floodgates were open.

Something living was here.  Now it's ash.  
     It's nothing: epileptic shock of the visible field.  
I hate to say I don't believe—but in this place, 
     I don't.  Looking up is an exercise 
in faith's futility.  The stars aren't proof 
     of anything.  What could ever reach them?  
They are fading like me—gone like me— 
     disappearing the same way I am.  
I cannot tell you why, and I do not want to. 
     I refuse to do so on the basis of this excuse, 
which I hold to: It was never starlight 
     I fell in love with, but the emptiness 
behind it—all that dark like the black 
     diamondback I found curled at my feet, 
petrified in an S signifying nothing—or, perhaps, 
     everything.  It seemed left there by someone 
or something—I still can't explain it— 
     like me.  But not me.  But not me.

There are cracks in my head. No safe houses in sight.	I am stuffed against my will, hung high up against the wall.
A gas tank half empty and miles unaccounted for.	Driving late at night I retreat to the hills, work out my problems with the sea.
This is wednesday, this is closest to the bone.	I scatter ashes on the mirror not on my face, you scatter ashes on your face not on my mirror.
Another open parachute, another empty stomach.	I read your letters. I raid your fridge.
My mousy lip. Quiet little things.	You are as lethal as a shoelace. I come as I please.

Jonas wants a lover who doesn’t try to eat his fingernails or steal his human skin. He’s so tired of sleeping with ghosts that he joins an online dating site. He goes out with Marissa, a doctor whose toes curl when she talks of cutting people open. He goes out with Janet, a bird-keeper who gives him countless sparrow eggs. He goes out with Courtney, a lawyer who makes him sign paperwork while he’s inside her. He goes out with so many women that he starts to wonder if he’s gay but decides he can’t be. No matter how hard Jonas tries he can’t become aroused by Mark Wahlberg’s six-pack. Jack Kerouac’s ghost tells Jonas that heartache is how sand becomes water and eventually glass. Jack Kerouac’s ghost says women are blueberries, ailing basil, I never liked them anyway. Jonas drinks so much flat beer and hatches each sparrow egg. He throws up bar peanuts for the baby sparrows and feels much better. The sparrows teach him Morse code by taking small bites from his organs. Jonas stares at his phone, hoping it will ring and someone with a heart of iceberg lettuce will say hello, meet me at the nearest hill, we’ll go sledding. He craves skin, the warm sensation of touch under blankets. He wants to sigh every T.V. purple and silent. Jonas wants to feel his heart beating like so much fog.

n her final weeks she is obsessed with windows,
     tracing the shape of every kind,
          inlaid and double-hanger 
     slashed, slung and midway
fingers along the cracks in the glass 
     and eyes judging the distance back to Earth
          from every height and at church, outlining heads 
     where pictures would be, she stares through
into the abysmal flanks of awning, 
     laying dimes in the bay sills,
          prying the panes of the jalousie, 
     sitting under the cupola playing
whistle-toe-miss-me, picking which 
     square to shoot through, hands outstretched.
          The light comes in and skims the rack, 
     slick cones under thistle
against day-clouds, quarry and pine, 
     spruce and willow tearing at the sky
          and there, underneath a monster 
     she could scream herself free
of everything electric. 
     She plays gin rummy under blake-moons
          and lies to me that she forgot French, lost her cat 
     and that her hands can’t wrangle the clay
into make-believe anymore. 
     Her statues come alive
          and I begin to believe the witch stories 
     of always looking for knee-bones
and lip-stained architecture, that everything 
     crumpled between her fingers
          belonged to that moment when.

Ellen, I will arrange my arms 
so that they are always around you.

Ellen Page tells me
Ellen Page tells me that I am
a well-respected man.

Ellen Page puts her hands around
her belly, draws me in. Closer,
I put my hands on her belly:

Come here orphan, I mean often?
What is this tender strangeness?

In Janesville, Wisconsin
I am dressed like a clown.

Ellen Page lets me
Ellen Page lets me know that
I used to be nicer.

We walk.

Ellen Page locks her fingers
within my fingers until
nothing makes sense.

Ellen Page puts her hands on
my belly to feel the kick.

My belly now rounded out
with an orange and white-striped
sweater, or was it green?

I don’t remember.

Ellen, you say you are beautiful,
but I shouldn’t be looking.

I can't write anything in birthday cards without sounding like a clueless asshole. I believe in time travel so that the idea might keep me romantic when I am old and mindless. Sometimes I eat dinner in the shower. My father once made me steady the flashlight while he euthanized a car-struck doe with a brick. I think of childhood as culture shock. What comes afterwards I think of as actual shock. I traded my Denver Broncos bandana for this turkey leg at the state fair, a $9.00 value. At the state fair people flutter about as if they are drowning in their own bodies. There I witnessed a man win a new convertible on an aptly placed nickel, then kiss his fingertips and point menacingly at the crowd. The last woman I slept with believed Genghis Khan had fucked her in a previous life. In this life she claimed to be a virgin, but it is a hard act to follow regardless. I have reached the point where I prefer Bacon Bits to the real thing. It is frightening that scientists cannot even agree on the terminal velocity of a falling human corpse. Look at the sun. I extend to you now this fine turkey leg in the name of bravery and defeat.

Yes, I lost my heart in the war. No, this was a metaphorical war, but my actual heart is M.I.A., which
means Missing In Action, which means I'm missing out on some action, some coitus action, which
means I wish you would still run me through a loom-and-spindle and evacuate my corpse from 
the trunk of a speeding car. All of this to say:
1). For my trauma I received the Purple Heart.
2). It is a distinction incapable of your mouth and hands.
3). I fought until my body stopped me.
Here's a game. You be that vulture over there, and I'll be this puppy writhing in its own blood.

The world’s a sorry business.
We sleep uneasily, and when we manage 
we grind our teeth.

The slowest erosion begins inside out:
the plum and atom, the fossil,
the mammoth inner clamor.

The wrecking ball swings back around.

Plaster lands like a telegram from another planet:
I’ll keep falling
until they knock me down.

THIS WAS THE BOY
who cracked the joints
of my ribcage, expanding,

whose call kissed my ear,
the boy who stood

where lightning struck just
after ducking under

the café’s awning.
He pointed to fireflies

darting through rain
and the darkness

once illuminated
by the crash, the crush

of electricity
between our lips

and the sky.
I will pull his name

from my teeth, scar it
across my thigh,

because this was the boy
who burned through

my eyes’ clouds, to find
my only sundial,

waiting for his flash.

No lamplight for this town.

batwings spread, welcome
quiet biographies carved into yucca –
blackened tongues unlock the honey
from behind our knees.

beckon,
we have forgotten 
how to wear shoes

Walking the fortieth led him here.

We must resist ourselves, must
persist in what we think we are owed.

           my lips are 
           lottery winners, unfolded maps
                are signing our peace treaty.

Here, we only dance to love songs
heard in mine shafts, and
I slide, I choke, I
put on a dead woman’s lipstick.
womb filled with ash, 
my little eye is growing.(10) ‘We went down to the lake to pour libations for the dead. It was a long walk so we started early, when the streets were empty, littered with trash from the evening’s parade. He looked tired. It was a while before either of us spoke.’

(11) ‘But, when we crossed Clark Street, a new light came into his eyes—“Aixma,” he said, “I never thought these jugs of honey would be so heavy.” And I said, “Piety is an unexpected weight.” 

(“Her voice is sweet and low, like music from another room—around us, always, are the voices of the dead demanding unending devotion—but her voice is low and sweet.”)

(12) And Mrs. Elhai said, “My daughter, Aixma, is like you—she cannot learn to let go, to live without thinking.—What kind of a thing is a thought, anyway? Nothing. Nothing.—I have learned to listen to the commands of the dead, to remember them without longing for anything but memory.”

(13) Between the living and the dead: a bucket full of roses; a fountain of unending light; a hired woman who arranges the roses in her free time; the master of the house who urinates in the bucket late at night when he is overcome with drink.

And Aixma said, “Half of us are like those roses—sunk in the unsaid—and half of us are laughing all the time—“My God is an awesome God. My God—.” Because our bodies are swollen with the law; because our bodies are like festival birds, stuffed with cranberries and bread.”

don't let the dream militia lynch you tonight on that last flight to Sao Paulo. your ex-wife was a peach till she wrapped that rhinestone fist around your jealous jowl. you should've been nicer to her secret lovers. in the airplane bathroom don't rest your eyes even for a moment. you'll fall asleep, that liquid lump of lavender soap in your stomach will grow like a foam boulder, roll up into your brain. you will hallucinate an army of eagles peeling back panels with their hooked beaks, mugging your clothes midair, leave you swimming stratus swindled at the hips

my humble advice: hunt down the last pink cloud of morning & fuck it into mist. don't drink precipitation unless drying of thirst. the ash-throated evening rises like reflux shit gurgling in the toilet, glugging up like ugly truth to the surface, like little secrets on the back of your hand— scratches within the ventricles of a trumpet

my humble advice: stop writing novels about your lover's eyelids. save your spring-loaded words for spiral scars. i.e. better bandages for deeper cuts. quit your petty passive-aggression. there's no use snipping the brakes of a bumper car. angels aren't break dancers, devils aren't DJs

in the bathtub rum renders your teeth Chiclets, tongue taffy. the mandible ridge perforated as to allow easy snapping. this anatomy lesson is free of charge. this taxonomy of twitch is terror. the next sawed-off alphabet will prove untraceable

that's when you hear the rusty snap-clang: bleeding to death from a bear trap in the middle of a minefield is no way to go. build yourself a blanket out of shrapnel to keep you safe from shame. slowly pull out those skyscrapers upon which your heart is impaled, shift them into your shins till they're teepees

you should really find a girl who keeps all those pictures of you, not just the ones that look good posted on Facebook. now you don't get no love at the clubs you should really take off that hat who you think you are Jamiroquai?

my humble advice: get yourself a new hat

the death of small hope comes dovetailing in like a horse shot through its neck crashing through your chandelier. the death of small hope swings like a porcelain piñata strung too tall in the tree, some stranger in a suit comes along & cuts down the tree, you crack the piñata with a stick it was empty all along. the death of small hope is the light at the end of the tunnel/ the galloping headlights of the train whistling martyrdom

my humble advice: don't try to make too much sense of it. like deciphering God's grocery list. like locating the love child of Carmen Sandiego & Where's Waldo. like capturing the color of mirrors

my humble advice: be more like Charles Bronson. bloody hands that wash easily in the ugly hump of midnight you hear the bathroom sink cough toenails, sheets grumble teeth grow fur pillow dribbles yesterday's dream residue. flip it over to make it fresh again, cool upon the ear. flip your life like you flip the pillow

my humble advice: don't get caught masturbating in the back of your mother's Ford Taurus to pixilated cleavage in a Nintendo Power magazine. the wolves of her eyes knew, swirled a net of shame which scarred into symphony. that birthday was the birthday nobody showed up. grandma was in the furnace knitting no mercy rapping give us this day our daily debt bleed us not into exsanguination forgive us our flammable dress

my humble advice: don't bring your samurai sword to work with you, even if it's Bring Your Samurai Sword To Work Day. leave that shit at home. don't ask the duty-free shop clerk at the airport if they have some dynamite in the back. they don't have dynamite in the back

my humble advice: don't apologize so much. love is not the only verb. our blown fuselage our tremble treble, our staccato shockrot radio. go drown her volume in the river, burn her bones in the ravine. honor the ceremony of red: leave home to find home. swallow that waterfall whole. let the cherry sleep of childhood die, dissolve like quasar

my humble advice: don't take my advice. take your own, even then with a sea of salt

Q: how many paper cuts must one human heart endure? 
A: as many as it takes, till the heart itself is paper

I am awake next to the lake and the lake
is asleep and has been sleeping
since the universe cracked open and you
invented canoes. We are quiet together
when the law is coming after us. It is so easy
to break the law when the law does not even
know it is not going to last forever.
What is going to last forever is the way
you steer our canoe into the tall reeds
like a thick beam of light. In here the law
is so unbelievable! The air touches us
everywhere! I say that it is a good thing
to be awake and young and not some
translucent gathering of very small particles.
But we are all made of very small particles,
which is what you tell me as you breathe
without thinking like you always do.

like a poem has to be
weird & true
like a severed dog 
head on a table 
licking its nose
in a lab in Russia 
or a scientist 
(in Russia)
putting citric acid 
on a dead dog's nose
marking on a clipboard
how many times
he could get the dead
tongue to come 
out & lick it off
like a blind date
weird and true
you just had brain 
surgery and something 
happened and you're 
suing? how interesting
or like a form letter
from your landlord
taped to the door
the poem makes you 
have to do something
like hide the bunnies
& sweep up their shit 
buy shampoo & soap 
to leave around 
so they'll believe 
you have a job
it alerts us 
the weird & true
makes you note 
the nearest exit
or think of which item
in your pockets
would make 
the best weapon	
I once watched
Eric Sprague 
the Lizard Man
snort a tiny lightbulb
up his nose & pull it 
out his mouth
then he turned it on 
and left it on
his living tongue
& opened & closed
his mouth like 
a lighthouse 
& not one person
thought to punch him
in the face & break it
though we all love
that sound

If we could make our own choices here, we'd make Lake Michigan our God, who formed when the frozen imponderable nothing went grinding over the void at one inch every thousand years, then melted to fill the hole it had dug. Then froze again. Then melted. We'd celebrate the birth of God by getting drunk on New Year's and jumping into him. We'd honor God by dredging him for mammoth bones and missing teenagers from Milwaukee. We'd pray to God on the coldest day of the year, a day so cold the snowflakes disappear into the white blur fifty feet above his head and the shoreline between the world and God is impossible to find. Dear God, we'd whisper through our parkas, we're all fat, God, we're all still fat and dying, just like last year. Amen.

save us I try to say 
straightening up 
your late aunt’s vase 
& putting the tulips 
back in their place
the cat now tackling 
a glint given off by 
the skylight like this 
tightest of oft-white 
buds before letting this 
overstrained other one--
a sprig splitting time 
between our skin & 
the scuffed up nicked 
floors of the cottage
really have it up until 
one of us having seen
to the coffee spills & 
stuffing has recovered
our voice just enough
to sound brighter more 
curious than the sun

I was in my house. I could move, 
I could arrange myself around things,
but I couldn’t move anything else. 

I’m capably strong and I couldn’t
pick up a glass, roll a ball, open a door.
A window was open. I folded myself through.

The outside was also still. To walk on grass
was to stand on the tips of it. The knifey tips,
sharp and unbendable, didn’t fuck up my shoes.

That was a nice feature of the way things were.
Nothing happened outside so I folded
myself back inside the house through the window.

I have like ten kids at home frozen at various stations:
dishwashing, televisioning, sleeping. 
I didn’t try to say anything to them. My wife, Karen

Hornet, wasn’t moving either. She was stuck looking pissed
in front of the closed basement door with a note
she was taping to it that read: Honey, I feel like shit. 

Can we get a blender and buy tons of stuff and try to make
a milkshake configuration that tastes like a stunning
new kind of mortal terror that actually, finally, after

all our terror experiments, makes us feel better?
We can start out blending mustard with bread
and cheese and bonemeal and crayons and what

happens if we put marmalade in it? Are there types
of marmalade? Do you kind of want to put types of beef in it?
Get several beefs. Love, Karen Hornet.

Heat never leaves. 
It shuts itself in a room upstairs
and refuses to open a window.

Outside, the oak backs away from life.
A child pulls at his jersey.
Across the county, tires fuss

at gravel. There’s no rain there either.
The sky knots every afternoon
and yesterday or this weekend 

thunder empties a neighborhood pool, 
jostles drying dishes. Lamps
blink twice, clock-radios zero,

but it won’t rain. Come dark
stars wring light from field dust.
No one resents it: stars don’t make weather. 

Every night you have to trick the dog
out from under the porch. He comes through
a hole in the lattice, stiff and slow.

He’s a deaf old son-of-a-bitch, but he’s here,
under a moon dragged by the dead
limb of a pecan. At the VFW

they’ve got a brush pile big as a house
they won’t burn. It is a house,
godless, condemned, about to go.

Another optic net dipped into the waters 
of Alice’s mind: blood-red valley plunges down 
to meet her—no, that was the trip to the Grand 
Canyon: kingdom laid out below the three of them
to map like the genes they shared. With Jenny
moaning under her, Alice works through the mechanics 
of the scene and feels the temptation to learn
something from this, to take something away. 
Were the climate in this realm warmer, she could 
dive to the bottom of the ocean and pull up 
a lesson, coughing and gasping for air.

It is white, but
not in a creamy way,
more like bone 
or the back of an eye
covered in gray, irregular bruises. 

I have covered myself
in hair just for this occasion. 
My smile hangs in the air behind me 
like a flag, and I’m starting to see 
the other side now—

I never want Jeff Bridges to know what we just did. 

You visited for the weekend and I am running away with you to Mississippi.

You visited for the weekend and I chipped my pedicure on so many walls.


That was overly specific but felt necessary, like the gong in Jeff Bridges’ driveway.


It was better than you in a hat.

Better than you on a Vespa,
though I have not seen you on a Vespa.

Better than Jeff Bridges
healing that dead deer with his hands.
A long time passed before she pulled him down 
on top of her, when she was in our world with us 
looking out at him. 
Oh to blush and not know it, she thought to herself. 
In a spasm, to forget—
What does one do with a simple soul? 
The dark side of devotion 
is a hollow heart. 
So she lay his hands
on her suntanned hips 
and pushed that ruddy fruit, 
parting his lips, into his mouth. 
She had felt, beside his, so many pulses. 
Each was different. Each shone. 
Like a bowlful of jewels. Sink your fingers in. 
The facets of cheekbones under skin 
as they grimace oh Baby, never change. 
Yes I love you. You remember now, don’t you, 
all we lost. I riding your saddle 
down an emerald road. Crisp November. 
Flecks of gold filtering through frosty trees, 
catching candlelight outside a hut at the fork of a streams. 
You groaned, we laughed, south of Galveston, 
crouching to our chests in the silty waves. 
That was you in every face, 
she didn’t say. She was seeing, 
in his scalproots, generations of trees; 
black splotches, on cobbles, of starting rain.

Spent the morning crying (she has pancreatic cancer); drove recklessly in a snowstorm; pinched a frozen basil leaf between my fingers. I could smell summer.

It is as easy as a car crash – a car & a body – a leaping body, a pedestrian body – witnessed from a cigarette sidewalk how a body is & isn’t. This is the summer I am so sad you don’t want to leave me alone for five goddamn minutes: you even shave my legs for me every morning before you shave yours & you drop me off at the Chinese restaurant next to the tattoo parlor where you work & I sit at a table in the back all day ostensibly writing ostensibly being but mostly just – not dying I guess which is enough I guess. I wash the cuffs of your shirts – blood & ink splattered – in the sink every day. You ban the words I’m sorry but I mean it anyway – the only Am I’m sure of. The moment when a woman is just a body & there I am frozen & want to walk out on you & the bar tab & walk straight back to bed please I’m sorry I’ll do better tomorrow please better tomorrow I will have a poem to show you a poem that lies about how tired it is, how it wants only to lay down beside the body & ask the woman her name.

She wrung her dilettante cloth, 
splurged a mediocre

pond. To be a salty fossil 
at bottom. Mirth never foisted 
the lady from her lot. That was kosmic

propaganda. Gomorric
lacks the proper ring. A fondest 
fib, that talent 
can’t transfer. Note:

keratin claws your nostils 
when kindled. Note 
her handkerchief, heavy with sulfur.

Everyone suggests okcupid— 
what we want from intimacy now. 
Everywhere the airplanes— 
their destinations and jet fuel, 
I just want someone who will make crepes 
with me on a Saturday morning, 
love me raw and worried, 
argue with me cuz conflict’s regular 
as pine needles. What whorled shells 
I hide in. Like the hermit crab 
I take what is not being used. 
Somewhere, acorns drop with definite thuds, 
another granite skyscraper is erected, 
a child grows without touch,
a man trades his body for drugs, 
the politicians escape their crimes, 
a soldier hangs herself.

Others say Get a Job, Go to College, Get a Trade— 
bookkeeper, lawyer, or Marry Rich. 
We are born when we are born. 
We have to dance with it, and whether corsetted
by church, cocaine, career, or collards, 
our lives are made from scratch— 
from the body, where the os opens 
or the belly is sliced, we are born at that 
time and place where the stars are aligned, 
new toes, new nose.
Maybe I wanted too much out of life, 
maybe I should have been more grateful, less sure.

Sometimes I’d be satisfied just to sit 
at the Chinese restaurant stuffing 
my face and not apologizing.

The girl with the scar across her face from the fire
is singing at the top of her lungs about the policies 

of the broken arrow. How the sacred pipe was 
brought back to the people by White Buffalo Woman

after years of its absence because there had been 
human sacrifice and the gasolining of the feminine

principle. All this in Rapid City, South Dakota, 
where you can see the sacred Buffalo hoarding

something of their mystery in silence amongst 
the Black Hills. I want to howl for the policy of the 

broken arrow, here at the counter of the Big D Oil Co.
where I see the boy flipping his brother off as they

page through motor cross magazines while their 
white daddy in his Stetson juices up the big F-150,

takes a big swig off the liquor bottle in his hand,
and he smacks their mother across her forehead 

not once, but three times, after she pulls open
his hunting jacket to get the cigarettes they share.

I want to howl at the top of my lungs for this one act 
of ceremonial love and affection between them, 

sing for their sacred tobacco, the hoop dance they do
for Wakan Tanka, for love of the poisoned lung,

for love of the medicine dance of self disgust
and the tablets they buy for someone’s nausea.

I want to sing for the girl who has a scar on her face
as she rocks by herself holding Wakan Tanka’s power,

sing for White Buffalo Woman and her sacred pipe, 
sing for the rusted F-150 and the snow tires already 

clanging beneath it across the exhausted blacktop. I want to
sing for the burned out liability of people who don’t 

give a shit. Sing loudly for the Black Hills surrounding us
and the pine piedmont where up road these people live.

Sing for the girl rocking herself to Wakan Tanka
and to White Buffalo Woman bringing blessings of beauty.

I want to sing for the trailer park and the medicine wheel 
that it is, sing for the praising of valued items they break

in crowded quarters, bacon grease and splattered coffee 
spread like engine oil across the kitchen counter. I want to 

sing for the doorway that is opened, sing for the bundle
of child-woman holding her belly like it is sacred, sing for

the girl with the scar on her face rocking to Wakan Tanka’s
power and to White Buffalo Woman’s sacred pipe.

I want to sing for the rifles and guns in their trailer home
and all the angry buffalo roaming in it, and sing for their 

fifteen year old daughter, alive and under the bed sheets,
a broken arrow, sick to her stomach, and pregnant.

She shaves each side of head like a desert. I swear if I close my eyes it is five years in the past. But I can only travel for a second. Even the razor is quiet when I return. Stubble feels like sand, she says. Yes. My eyes closing, staying shut. Oh you beautiful girl. When was that—before the light bulb burned. Before the cactus died. Do you remember, her voice trembling. And she has parted the seas the wrong way, the wave left rising from the middle. If I pull her eyelids down with my finger, we will be there together, if I. How hot is it right now, my hand passing through what used to be. My mouth parched. And damn those eyes always opening.

What to extend, then 
dream house, prairie fire 
This is our position 
What more can we cull 
as we work on nothing else 
but our bodies
as we become caught 
and quieted down 
It is never easy to locate 
that which is always traveling 
Everything is potentially dangerous 
sailing to the windward 
of something else 
weathering another ship 
Anything to feel 
barrel-vaulted with you 
I follow you now
imagining that what we form 
is a crowd 
All that I wanted 
to extend for you 
too ephemeral 
to imagine 
the next few years 
will be rings and rings


This is one big sentence
This is another
What moves as the light goes down 
the sunbox haltingly near 
You go into the woods alone 
and I forget that there are woods 
and that I can do things in them
First you see the family
and then you don't see the family
The snow bunting of march 
shoals in hollow places 
This house is all I see 
It’s just science,
like the mammoth’s head 
the face of a boy 
hearing for the first time 
And we were not in love 
but round vessels in the snow 
blue sweaters asleep in the hallway 
Fall is no fall
so here’s hoping 
that it is willing 
that I am willing 
and that I am imagining it 
Idleness in some places 
Where the universe is spreading 
and thirty miles will do
I want to be embroidered 
as if then I could adhere to anything

From rubber city to motor town, 
every exit ramp was a garden of tires. 
On the balcony of your new apartment, 
we watched hookers work 
the Shamrock Motel. The blond was in and out 
before you finished your glass of Boone’s. 
The redhead’s Chevy shook 
like a clothesdryer, Ace of Base pumping
from her blown out speakers. Your favorite 
wore her teeth like a crown. Queen 
of the parking lot, she flagged 
down the most beautiful men. You 
smoked Pall Malls and I tried 
to remember what you looked like
happy. (Once, we crawled 
behind Fat Willy’s Rib Shack 
on our hands and knees. You liked 
the way cement bit your palms.) 
All the Detroit it would take 
to make me feel this rare.
Haven’t I loved you all along 
the turnpike? Haven’t we turned 
our mattress to bring winter
one too many times? 
What if I was for sale? 
Would you watch me shut the door,
imagine me throwing the deadbolt
and loosening a stranger’s necktie? No,
in this parking lot, you would close 
your eyes before I disappeared.

Push pines ached into the wind, 
sending shadows inside to Pollock 
the wall with splintered dark. Moths

hid in the light, dusted wings 
shook themselves dry. 
Some mornings I found them 
collected along floorboards like pressed flowers. 
Not tonight. They had something

to pray to. Mom's cries stumbled along 
white crown molding and through the ceiling 
Dad had already slurred out more 
than I could take. I heard

glass bottles knocked over, more 
than we could carry, all of us.

Hushed beside the windowsill 
my hands banged against the shadowed 
wall. Finger prints removed themselves

from my skin, circling the house, a forest 
of trees peeled to their cores and flattened 
into paint. Morning would dissolve

everything left, between 
wood-grain and panes of glass. Strange 
to still hear her voice, crying so clearly 
years later.

Mr. Esposito has no front teeth. I believe
God just forgot to give him any, the way
he speaks, like a wad of clay.
It’s no wonder I can’t understand him!
But I try. I’ve given him a name.
And that’s only half the story, which
I’ve been seeing a lot of lately, halves
I mean, walking in and out of my building.
Ms. Brittle says the body is one part
the lesser of our lives, and the other
comes with some reward.
Everyday (am I ready?) every day another
one-armed man walks past my window.
All of them tuck the empty jacket sleeve 
in a pocket, so it’s hard to tell. But I
can tell. That’s what bothers me sometimes,
the knowing and not wanting to, the half-
knowing. It’s not Mr. Esposito
or Ms. Brittle. Really it’s the person
who lives above me, who
brushes his teeth when I brush my teeth,
who watches the same TV channels
as me. I can hear him up there
walking around, flushing the toilet—making
love. I’m not sure what it is
he wants.There is a type of safety that makes me talk & a type that makes me quiet. Because our bodies are mostly water, it could be argued we are monsters. The immortal jellyfish are a lie: what falls apart in us falls apart in us. I don't mean anything bad. I don't mean anything.

Because the body has a violent need to let go of itself, I dream you're drinking again. If god spoke in arithmetic, we'd all be fucked. The part of me that always thinks the world is about to end is equal parts milk & need. Listen: the first ear was carved out of a sleeping angel's breastbone. Nothing will ever be clear.

All your hieroglyphs are feathered / It's so appropriate it makes me sick / Head of vulture / Head of spoonbill / Head of pintail duck / If you know where I'm going with this / Raise a wing / I am twenty variations on beginning with god / Enthroned zoetrope of heads and missing limbs / I do not blame you / Inconsistency is a hard sin to love / I gave up blaming the ocean / Because we are not sailors / We are whole hosts of escape / Never breaching salt water / It is so cold / Being always an object in the sky / Without worship's cobalt fizz / At least I have laid down phonetics / Primitives shouting at you in the dark / Is there an elsewhere left for you / O inopportune sun / Tracing figure eights in light / I know you won't believe me / When I tell you / There are texts that have excluded me / My ninth alias is contested / You must carry on / Like hurt has never touched you / Or like gravity is still theory

here      my thumb sprouts               a canyon: grand
& many miles       to the river vein.    meadow
	is night sky      & all the dandelions   

	stars.
we walk       among them dapple-        bright
&.     knock their heads    awry.

a callus            is nothing  except         dust-
     never a medal worn         & rusted. spurs
	a reliquary
gift with          the sights of long          past
	stallions.
the people         are not people
they are horse          & silver bullet.
	-those people
will carry their saddle            to the grave.

tobacco.              is silence:     
	the dirt in nails     cut       to the quick.
silence

ferments our bones. drink
			beer
to remember                       rain.

sugar
	sweet           tea. now we
		caramel      in the sun,

cowboy—            bring back      the rope, 
	there is no
we:

loneliness
	is a hectare                     where the roads
     are littered

				with off-white
				crosses.

I live among miracles, out of scale. 
Microbes are my shepherds. I will 
build for you a pastoral. I will put it
on a slide. I am looking for spiders,
like grandeur is a spider, like a thing 
can be put in another container like
a love can be given to another person 
and remain the same. And somehow
it can. Bed-of-Toyota-truck gardens, 
sold, full of mushrooms: the awe is 
such that it filters down, and spreads 
out. More beautiful than a meadow, 
that which makes a meadow grow,
says Delilah, with a watering can:
The problem with graveyards, says 
Gerard, is that we mark the graves. 
You are living in post-2009 America
if love is too conceptual. Words.
Juju tells me he works in a penitentiary. 
He says his hobby is watching birds.

Our whole family could see 
the neighbors' kitchen,

filled with flames,
and we could also see them

one floor above the blaze, 
having sex on the sofa.

I was only eight years old,
but I knew it was going to hurt

to watch them stop 
and answer the phone

and run naked down the stairs 
to save their home—

no place safe and
none of us unashamed—

with a few powdery clouds 
from a little extinguisher.

On the cabin's canvas 
Roof, the praying mantis 
Shadow is the praying 
Mantis, and it moves 
From one pane of light to 
Another

                  Softly behind 
Our eyes, a quiet ache
Opens bright yellow sun 

It is morning

                  Our feet
Search for the one cool square
Of mattress, the whole fire 
Inside juniper blue

Ours to join this sky so 
Utterly full

                  The Horizon's 
Beveled edge, our shadow
In the hands of a small
Boy, train tracks through the 
Desert field, the dry grass 
Become glass in the light

I am not a guest & yet here you weep over my feet.
Religious hair. Empty jar all night. The moth which doubles as both 
the small soft ear of the moon & a powdery pharmaceutical.

You once told me the greatest grief 
would be to find the same beautiful plates 
cracked in half here as everywhere.

Appearing in an all-but-forgotten entrance, 
misled down a hallway of helpless discoveries,

you stand in my light, your mouth
inventing a cup to catch spring, a favor, a stone that means something.

I catch you staring at the out of season berry in your cereal: 
more a machine than a miracle.

I reach out to touch you, your shoulder 
is a clue that leads me to the next room 
& then to the next.

,that bodega
over there 
as close as you'll come
to now, 
if 
now's 
something that sits amid four walls. 
The blue-purple covering the hovering 
blackbird's neck, the alignment –
BLACKBERRIES –
fresh ransom to passer-by.
No one toting rosary,
tallying CARROTS by Hail Mary,
Now
is only 
now
3, possibly 4 x per week.
Zero time
to write sins on your cheques or cheques 
to your sins. 
The deep technique of KIWI,
its fuzz erotic from byzantine humidity, 
sour from thought on how to 
pronounce their location of origin; 
here comes the texture of a clock.
The cardboard sign that bares
JUICY ORNAGES [sic]
your name, more ripe, 
the gusto, my terror –
hey –
Boar's Head turkey,
slivered by moonlight.
The briquettes – turn right –
bouquets 
of Japanese Lanterns that rise and
fall
caught by a fuck-ton of Boricuas, 
thoughtful bankers. 
Are you the undertaker of last week's sunflowers?
Do
you 
load the scroll of Lotto?
Will that bee 
sacrifice itself for you
as it comes for those SPECIAL MANGOES, 
those GOLDEN DELICIOUS?
Hold still, 
wring speed until it's sweet,

Along the street, strangler figs coil up lamp posts. We take a table outside our favorite coffee shop. The water comes up to our chests. I've worked at my duty, learned to admire anhingas hunting from roofs of drowned minivans, how your submerged shorts billow around your thighs. You knock back an espresso & hurl the cup onto a pile of shattered crockery that rises several feet above the waterline. In a thousand years, you say, they'll write that in our culture we were so desperate to stay dry we smashed everything we had. I've worked at my duty. I say, Not desperate, just very nervous because maybe we didn't pray enough. You take my arm. We lie down on the pile of shards. You whisper, Let's say that in our culture this is where we sleep after we pray always to mean what we say. My eyes won't close. My duty is to shout praise while locks rust shut, canals flow over, pythons take the side streets for their own. The deputies' boat passes, every rifle with its man. The wake breaks over our shins. Beside me, your chest rises & falls like a new & perfect machine.
   I want to be new again
so I can do all the same things
again, with the bricks set back, 

lawn in its last minutes, we never
think of these things leaving us
but they leave us. We know

the train we're on will end
at a log station in Wisconsin,
all of our clothes in paper bags,

only books with old covers,
forget new ones, we're staying
forever we thought, it was back

when we were magnificent, or
didn't know otherwise. The best
way was to bury ourselves in

small rocks the size of peas.
You understood why I loved
the story of stone soup, because

it was all lies, and I believed
something was nothing. Just
figure in the weight of salt

generated by one angry brow.
It's the belly of the candle
that does all the flickering.

That's not true either, please
bring back the cat that cut
my chin with her back claw.

Swing my suitcase like a warm
rifle into a lake. Who needs
a real ceiling when both parties

tuck their own limitations into
bed? Our structures already so
unsound. We could not abide

the sharp pilings of sleet
you collected in your copper 
frying pan, and we both ate.

When my apocalypse theory was born, I was wearing a wig and crying a lot. All sewn up, all sold out. I carried a rope, a rape whistle in my pocket, but my vowels were still sugary and soft like warm bread. My apocalypse theory was just beginning to see the error of his ways when I placed a bullet on the table. Said go for it. Here is the lamp. Here is the desk. In my bedroom mirror, I practiced a Swedish accent. Drew a perfect line in the dust on the dresser. Here is my bed. Here is the end. There goes my baby. Over and over again. I bought a fake compass at the end of a shiny gold chain. In my apocalypse theory, everyone was always falling down while running from something. Everyone was always falling.



*



My apocalypse theory always says California like that, slow and full of vowels. Like it's a state made out of pink cotton candy and dead letter offices. Made out of water, room temperatures, still in a glass. By now all my insides are outsides. All my outsides tethered against me like enormous stuffed animals. I fear going mostly because I fear I will never come back. I fear coming back because it's mostly like going over and over again. My apocalypse theory loves the revision. The overwritten mix-tape. Loves my insides, the actual inside not the made up, made-for-tv version. My apocalypse theory always says California like it's a threat. 



*



My apocalypse theory needs more white space. More space around the thickness of things. More space suits and dirty go-go boots. To say it was a party would be a lie, but sometimes it was like a dinner gathering of your very best assassins. Knives in the bundt cake and everyone eyeing the cadavers. I needed more rope, so we made a game of it. Made a harness out of bed sheets and lowered me down. At the end of the week, I had eaten my way through the beginning of things and was starting on the house. Had sharpened my incisors into tiny points that hummed when I touched metal. Everyone kept throwing up all the broken doll parts. My fingers were slick with all that sugar.

I was 22 and living in a brownstone walk-up on West Grant, where I parked my car three blocks from home, where I tramped around town in platform leather, where everything smelled like warm gasoline and spiced rum and Vietnamese take-out;

the building was called Brentwood, a fancier name than it deserved, all of the rodents and pigeon shit and peeling paint and leaky faucetry, and I got so drunk sometimes I couldn't make it up the stairs but for crawling on my hands and knees, slumping against the fire doors between flights, watching the paisley casino carpet swirl around me, underneath me, above me, a blue berber monsoon--manifesto carpet, I remember calling it, like this was where one might go to write theirs;

right there, perched on the observation ledge at the edge of the fourth floor hallway, bare feet propped on the chipped radiator, laptop askew, hung halfway out the open window for one bar of stolen Internet, fingers pecking out Morse code melodies on the keyboard missing five keys--then six, when J jiggled free and jumped a jolly jig down to the street below;

yes, from that same window I could see the Basilica spire slicing into the skyline like a soft white scalpel, and the cathedral bells never ever stopped clanging, not for a moment, not for a prayer, not for a red-letter hangover, not on Halloween or Thanksgiving or Christmas or New Year's Eve or Good Friday or the whole of bloody Lent, or Easter, when I threw the seven rotten eggs that'd sat in my refrigerator since October out the window, watched them split open against the sidewalk, black and blue and yellow yolks, sharp sulfur mixing with curried mock duck and gasoline and Sunday best's perfume;

I dove off the ledge, swam through that enchanted carpet, buried my head in the toilet bowl while Jesus rose from the dead.

If getting to love is a desert 
(even though we love the desert), 
I am not a mountaineer.

Life happened once:
the site of climax took all winter 
to get shadowed.

Along the valley you just tire 
of loud home-coming parades 
that never stop in your town.

The best material for signal fires 
is a surprise retreat.

A sudden lake 
made our brains

grow. We spoke 
when we stopped

panting. Later 
a man drilled

into a jaw
and confirmed nothing.

BIG BANG> I am a useful theory if you are 
wanting to feel like a miraculous insect. If you are 
asking questions, I am offering answers. Only
you are not asking if I have questions of my own.
I want to find out what I came here to know. That 
is, I want to discover my initial condition. I am a 
point on a line in a circle and I could be drawn 
anywhere. Stop putting me smack in the middle 
under bright lights that make me tremble and sweat.
I hate to be the center of attention.

UNIVERSE> I am starved for stimulation. I
am so hungry I could eat a moon. I am completely 
against the consumption of horses, but I can admit 
my own hypocrisy. There are hooves in the glue I 
daily use to keep myself together. I am made up of 
tiny fragments in temporary cohesion, but they
are biding their time for a day when I will not be 
looking. They are waiting for their big break. I
can taste their excitement each time I say the
word scatter.

LITTLE PLANET> I've had another message from 
the bees. They want their honey back. At all times,
I can hear them debating their little notions of 
consequentialism. They are threatening to leave this 
world for another. They are building structures like 
space craft and calling them hives. They are filling 
them up with model citizens and ancient languages 
and preparing for a long pilgrimage. I don't know 
where else to turn for pollination and I am on the 
verge of losing my good looks.

Sure, we're impatient for the good 
new vibes of tomorrow. We have time

but the clock ticks like spiders creeping 
toward an amoral prison, our only fault 
our one known life, our only life what

we elicit laboriously from frozen memory.

Not being in the best circumstance for this 
kind of disaster only leads us to believe

we are better, we are brighter. Only we are

the bad vibes, the manic vibes
making the worst designs, and space is
not a blanket but a wishing well, and everything else

being what it is: what we will never be.

The man with the diamonds in his hair

waits for me to board the train. I board the train.

He boards the train. The man with the diamonds in his hair

is impossibly clean. I think he means business,

whatever that means. I think that means money. I don't want

to know what that means. The man with the diamonds in his hair 

watches me with ease. It surprises me, inspires me

because I'm the type to go so small and tangled just looking

at somebody's feet. But he watches me gently. Slowly, calmly.

He watches me like I'm a music video for the sad song

of the week. The truth is I'm busy sitting here. And I don't care 

what he wants from me. But I get to learn why he gets it.

Go back to being an anchor

not an architect You know how

I almost fall trying to find the tops

of things      like trees      like time

like me & time in the tallest tree 

Drinking coffee in our hands & trying 

not to be insufferable this early

Talk to me about sinuses      how

to be naked as a window & proud 

Lousy with citrus candles & hating 

every moment      I met a blind cat 

sniffing a fedora      a silver timepiece

So refined      I felt like taking a chainsaw 

apart to know the full extent

of my inadequacies      In a meadow

we don't mention running      cowboys 

in the West      how like our eyes are 

without realizing      Instead

we are wearing sweaters      breathing 

like animals      waiting with stars 

behind our knees & dreaming

of more sandwiches for tomorrow 

Promise me we will be always

singing for no reason      Memorizing

the sway of breezes manufactured

just for us      For we are trying so hard

to be something silly & good      whatever 

that means      Probably      Hopefully 

Something important

Of all the earth-rocks Anna could have swallowed she chose the toad. Anna throat-warted and warding off ghosts. How like Anna Anna could at times be. Nose plugged with vanillin and tobacco smoke. A door slammed so carelessly closed. Always sea dragon chose over sea horse. I prefer honesty and keeping all my toes, Anna said, poising hammer over hound skull. She sneezed three times into her cup of ice, turned three pages of her cookbook, and began to saw open her thigh.

Let's be Anna. Let's be honest. Anna braver, a bit more brash. Would have kissed him, that's for sure. Would have in the tent and on the brown carpet floor. Warm her hands between her thighs on the car ride before placing palms to cheeks. That's not very Anna though. Anna zippering herself open and spilling out her Anna-trash. A bike frame, a bucket, fish bones, and buttons. Unfilled and ready now. Spills out smaller Annas. Spills out love notes and stones. Anna spilling. Anna ready. Anna already over. Anna ending herself. Perpetual Anna. Always Anna ends.

In Siberia they stripped you, peeled your suit 
from pale shoulders, searched the pockets before

fingering the backs of your knees, your fine slacks 
forgotten in a dusty prison corner. It's no wonder

that they reveled in your hirsute calves, your darkly 
matted thighs, bowed bones allowing for your escape,

time and again, from the manacles whose ghostly grip 
was test, was daily undertaking. Did they joke with you?

Did they stroke your shoulders, pull your cock a little, 
braying at the size of it in the shriveling Russian winter?

A small man, half a foot taller than your wife, and what 
they could not expect from you was victory, escape.

Inconceivable, that they had grazed your furred chest 
with curious thumbs and not taken in the glint of you,

the swallowed key burning in your soft stomach. Sensing 
only your heat: from shame, they guessed, brushing flamed

cheeks, but it was guile, or something like it, shifting 
beneath their hands like borrowed fire.

Dear Portia, you can love anyone 
given enough hours, but our hearts 
always beat like this: I have / to leave, 
I have / to leave, I have / to leave. 
I heard the doctor tell another man 
the heart is an organism within 
an organism—it can feel & account 
for itself. / I've spent years 
trying to regrow in the dark. 
Dear Portia, do not confuse this 
for a discussion about time 
or light. Dear Portia, bring the bucket 
& wear your white crocheted dress 
so I can tell you the pattern reminds me 
of the bones of every small thing 
winter unstitched. The heart saws through 
its cage / though it knows it will dry out. 
Dear Portia, I am never sure & you 
are always right: the heart is 
that friend we are always concerned for, 
but can never do anything about. 

See instructions on right cover to remove. See back panel for complete list of kit contents. For other uses, see fine print. See reverse side for details. See if you can grab the little green amulet when his back is turned. Did you see that? Please see attachment. See to it that no bitter root, springing up, causes trouble. You see, we can only slide into our trench coats and amble out into the rain. See San Francisco in style. See full-length Feature Films online for free. Like seeing the moon through a wet frond in an ancient Chinese poem. Seeing as the light shines through her splayed fingers, through his pale-veined cock. See how painless that was? When she left, slinking into the dark of a canopied rickshaw, I'd hoped that she would see me on my balcony, reading The Unconsoled, as though our whole liaison had meant nothing to me. See memo (enclosed) for more information. For unit specifications, see Appendix 2-B. The exiled general's last attempt at intimacy: grasping the waitress's thin wrist as she sets down his coffee. Excuse me, sir, I cannot permit you to reenter—this ticket has expired, see? Your mother or grandmother will be here to pick you up shortly. Try to see the concrete wall as a kind of refuge. See if you can stand outside yourself, as outside a black curtain, without peeking in. 



Enough space for privacy, Dad's stereo, 
Mom's garden, kids, even my rowdy dog 
and make-believe: it was a fine house 
for a family. Empty forties littered ditches 
on either side of the long gravel drive,
but two acres of woods kept us separate 
from old Cadies next to trailers, wangstas, 
the McDonald's shut down for vending 
more than criminally unhealthy burgers,
the dollar store that reeked of diapers 
and burnt rubber, the Rite Aid shoplifted 
into empty shelves and slumped guards. 
It was a fine house. The man with the pail
full of knives and rusted garden tools
taking up fort in the front flower bed 
must have thought so. In one version, 
the gold in his teeth snarled at us, 
my brother and I, as we raced up the drive, 
chubby legs leaping over mud-puddles. 
My brother studied him, silently fished 
the house key from his backpack, 
unlocked the door and locked us back in. 
In another version, it was summer, 
and we'd been sent outside to weed beans 
or play save the princess and came running 
back inside to tell Mom there was a man, 
a stranger, danger, a pail full of knives 
to carve us into ghosts if he wanted. 
He never did. The cops came hours later
and recognized him. There were handcuffs. 
He was real as the hostas and pink impatiens 
he crouched amongst: I imagine he chose that bed 
for the shade of the nearby maple reaching 
over the roof. It must have been a hot day 
to not have a roof or tree. It was a fine house. 


Mom's in the passenger seat of the family minivan, fear-
braced against the door each time 
I stop or turn or accelerate, yammering about my cousin
again: Such a little hussy.
And her parents, my aunt and uncle, uninvolved, clueless.
A four-way intersection, 
early evening traffic stretching, my red light speaking 
its cautions. How many abortions, 
how many adoptions does it take? Someone ought to
just spay her like a dog! 
So much depends upon wanting the right things: 
to be alive next to 
an alive body; the car not on fire, not splayed open showing 
its violent machinery; church 
pews not filled with bewildered mourning.
Mom's mouth is full of wicked names for girls 
like me. My body, full-shame—
full-fury I can end as easily as not.
I count the cocks I've been touched by [eleven] 
and thank each blood-filled one 
for never planting anything noticeable in me. 
I've never been good at wanting the right things. God,
take the wicked out of me or me out of it. 

In what felt like impossibility, I opened my red ham hands, 
meat embrace to that new world,
and scooped out a space for you to dwell.

You dwelled and dwelled and bigged me up,
then turned your back away from mine, turned your spine,
went cold and still.

So it was a space and a nighttime. Void.
Except the writing that started coming straight at my eye.
I should have known from that fact alone.

Might I write this lightened my step?
Might I also point out how I am flipped on my belly,
and writing now?

I might, but nothing of that would light up 
the place on the map of that new world
where my extremities are still red and numb

for the whistling ghost of you still to come,
how you will meet me silent and eyes sealed and without tone,
how you will not drink the milk I will pour for you,

my own golden milk,
or how I will have to take some needle to the air
and try to sew up this space into a pocket,

a balloon, a rag-doll mouth stitched
to pat you in and keep you,
my floating little talisman, my not-quite son.

You were going to love me best.
I was going to love you best.
Might I say I can no longer tell the night from my Day? 

 I grabbed your leg which was hot with my hand which was cold.

          I had a cackle of crows nip at your ankle.

          When you turned to look at them they hid, leaving only the sound of a shadow.

          I blindfolded and spit on you and screamed that it was raining.

          I lit little fires just out of reach so you couldn't feel their heat and I smiled.

          I read a book to you in a language you were trying to forget.

          I kissed each of your toenails but wouldn't look you in the face.

          I worshipped you as a goddess but called you by the wrong name. 

          When strangers passed, I noticed your cheek blush and demanded an explanation. 

          You sang a song that put me to sleep.

          ...

          When I asked you again the next morning, you ignored the question. You kissed me and said, I was having the strangest dream. There was a bird behind the moon, but he wouldn't show himself to me. I looked at you in your colorful jail suit and kissed you back. You closed your eyes because this was supposedly a love story, but I kept mine open. The bird behind the moon peeked at me. I tossed him your jail key, and he flew away. Later, I apologized, but on a leaf, in writing. I swallowed it and now it's hidden in the place before my tongue begins. 

Knife like this, my grandmother says. 
We are standing over the body 
of a slick-finned red drum whose insides 
she is teaching me to navigate but I am far 
away from here, aboard that vessel 
on the creased map in your study, inked 
like fish ribs against the dark 
vein of the Strait of Gibaltar. 
I am thinking of all the skeletons 
that have pressed themselves 
between the layers of this earth. 
What I would do to the fossil record 
if I could.

Pay attention to the angle of your blade -

There are things I said 
I'd never do. Leave you 
at port. Return to this place - 
wear gumboots, sleep late, lie 
in wait of what's catching up 
to me. I am always running 
my hands over the bones 
of these metaphors in the absence 
of skin, imagining scales, 
what it might feel like to hook 
my thumb under a spine and lift it 
cleanly from flesh the way 
my grandmother can.

Like this, she says, just 
like this, and with her finger 
to its belly the fish spreads 
into filets. My eyes silver 
over from its thick smell. 
I cannot contain

myself - this body. Yours. 

The lake is flying, 
a combination 
of summer flounder 
& thunder cloud 
singing praise to 
the mother, the 
movement, the 
murder. Collapse 
into it, balloon at 
downtime, flora
of the flame. Swim 
like a fish walking 
on water, hide your 
name beneath its 
skin, fracture its 
life with your soles. 

I begged you not to go
but you left me. I was drunk; 

it made no difference.
We'd buried the apples, raked 

the ground with our fingers, 
left the fruit as it sang to the flies,

lilting and dirty. 
Our parents were the birthplace 

of the exotic—they'd told us
so little. Still, we knew what

our mouths were good for, 
the sucking and the spitting. 

What we swallowed in private
was always so much 

larger than expected. 


For two weeks I waited for the other sock
to turn up so I could reunite it with its friend,
fold their cotton bodies together & place them
in the drawer just like, for maybe an hour everyday
after you go to work, I keep searching the house
for you. I want to lie down in your hair,
to mangle your heart with my teeth. Nick says
he's cleared for launch again, not just hunkering
inside his own old heart. This is good for the roses
which are meant to indicate on every map
the location of something lovely but unreachable.
The roads don't go there, they circle.
It's good for Nick too, but that seems beside the point
since soon even my computer will have feelings.
It was about this time of year, but a different year,
that I spent every afternoon delicately chewing
alfalfa sprouts & some kind of paste stuffed
between slices of multigrain bread while reading
about old gods on their floating god island, their forgotten
beards, their metaphorical bridge to humanity.
Today I watch one woman walk through the rain,
her boots ridiculous & wet, her heels so perilously
towering over the worms on the sidewalk.
It can be instructive to have occasional glimpses
of something more divine than ourselves
but sometimes it's better to just stay out of the way
& alive. Every morning in the past, I'd bike 
to the nearest diner which was maybe twelve miles distant 
& wait conspicuously for someone to change my life.
Today my job is something that didn't even exist
back then when I was nothing but a myth,
a story in a book no one wanted to open.
I drank flagons of ale & killed everyone near me
but in the delicate twilight I tended my goats 
to demonstrate there was still something good about me.
My axe was shiny but my hammer could sing.
The bubble sheet inventory could never have
predicted a future like this — where we get lost
& found a few hundred times before lunch,
where no one believes in me anymore. 

Who wants to make somebody cry, to see a face lose
its structure and collapse, in night under clouds lit 
yellow by streetlamps and buildings, or in day under 
the relentless gaze of fluorescent lights. Yesterday 
was Tuesday, and today is Wednesday. Underneath 
our feet there are new fuses that web in every direction, 
from church hall to soup kitchen. Consider the power 
of the Constitution. The lyric, the tilted script. Unity 
among the disparate masses. We could have been
a nation of poets, but instead we're a nation of clerks.
Over our country, an impossible map to follow 
to figure out where the next problem will burst. Please 
forgive me while I let it out, while I break into a small 
fit of tears. I am not weak, I try. When I die, everybody 
in my world will die, everything will be destroyed. You, 
the same. The exterior of the building is a marvel
of curved glass, colorful metals that provide support 
and race gloriously up the structure to veer off at the top 
in sharp angles. At night, spotlights mounted on it cross 
each other, form structures of light against the sky. 
Tourists take pictures of it. Residents look at it strong 
against their skyline and feel swells of pride. But 
inside, offices, water coolers, the general paraphernalia 
of suffering and work. Lights and webs. Help me, we 
cannot win. A little bit of night music. A little bit of spin. 

the moon is a good speller
taboo some night to some people
taboo probably to some animals
only to befriend both categories
only to move shadow from one sphere of time to the next
only to make a loan to the forest to the unseen eyes asleep
   or participating in the loan by waking

just in time the sky closes
just in time a boy with roses calculates one breath of no one
reaching nowhere

Think the stone
I'm throwing might
take my life, if
it comes back on
me I'm dead.
Not as a hopeless
child playing poorly
in a bean field
with a forest for
a boundary - no

no, Neruda - I'm dead
as an adult who stoned
himself to emphatic
death by choosing to
stone another, and
another, and another.

The dream might as well have said
Put your dreams in a box,
odd space a woman brought with a
drawing and a simple book
as if, was as if she had an answer
she would call it
oh what was it but some dreary
dark baton
oh what a space the woods can be
oh what a place to save a branch
or two or three
and know only to yourself the box
you're in, dream-wary, like some old
supposed neighbor friend warned
as you privately dismissed him.

We believe in a daring oology 
with endless calcifications. You want to know 
the root of things, to point backwards toward 
the roaring cretaceous. I want something tiny 
to hold in my hand. We should discuss delicacy here,
but you mustn't misunderstand: it means more 
than gastronomy, though the transparent-thin bones 
of a rainbow trout can summon all the same ennui.
It's too simple to say life is fragile and I am fragile
and I don't know about the world. Easier still 
to spin on this axis drunken or sleeping 
or watching the cat watch a cat outside.
Fronts move in and fronts move out; ground water 
adjusts. An early cold snap sweetens the citrus 
or it doesn't; we move on and mistrust strangers 
who point out rot in our perfect oaks. 
It pains me to hear such accusations. 
I expect majesty to go on forever.
You ask is this like the twin fetal fawns
and I know almost.

I want the shape of anything that changes. 
The tide and its increments, each wave an adjustment,
cumulonimbus tragic and borderless. I want to cup 
my hand along the edge of something and instead I sublimate,
my head a weighty idea bolstered by submitting 
to some kind of magic. Fog is romantic but not as romantic 
as believing yourself inside a cloud. Which makes me more grateful? 
Which more afraid? Fog, I know to find you in a field, 
you bedfellow of frost; I know to pin my eyes open 
on late and early drives. Cloud, you come and go at will.
Mountains jut out only to recede with time. Glaciers
freeze and melt, hulking and dormant. We are so like
this fickle topography—growing hair and teeth
only to lose them again, our height over time parabolic,
our faces stretching and sagging without focus or grace.
I could say I want the shape of anything stable and wait
for you to tell me what I mean. I could seek clouds
where they rest, on mountains still in their heydays,
I could be a cool buzz on my own skin. 
Maybe the trickiest thing I could tell you
is so much seems permanent at the time.

We crept out toward the center of the frozen lake,
far past what the old signs advised. We knew that if we quit moving
we would fall. Cracks leapt from beneath our boots and a few of us turned back. 
Those that were left walked until we could no longer see the shore behind us. 
We would stop every so often and point back, it's back there. Every step
was some sort of miracle. The ice was on our side. We walked
until we came across two trees in the middle of nowhere. They were thin
black lines sticking out of the thin black ice giving way beneath our feet.
This will be where we put the next town someone said, and everyone agreed.
There would be rules. Things we had to do, as always,
but we would need to be delicate. Quiet. We would need to walk in circles.
And the circles would need to be larger sometimes
but smaller others.

Gunshots rang out 
through the city—

it's not a new year 
or a new type

of celebration. 
My wife imagines

a splinter along
the heel of my foot

and soon I feel 
it there, thankful

for the way pain 
makes the sun

seem strangely 
singular. An illegally

parked car seems 
more legal this time

of day. Most rooms 
have rugs—I'll take

mine with an urn slowly 
fragmenting or maybe

just disappearing 
into a flower.


Here in one of terminal C's rocking chairs
I'm supposed to be more comfortable
in the misery of beefed up security but
this morning I'm reminded of how horse
ranchers keep donkeys to calm the herd
and scare off coyotes and cougars though
the cheap animal may get snagged and
shredded it won't be without heinous brays
sharp kicks and stomps and even if the ass
falls he still slings his weight around
from the dumb loyalty for every other
hoofed animal in the field and isn't that
better than losing a thoroughbred colt or
your dogs which are so eager to run out
to a swarm of yipping coyotes in heat
but in life there are few warnings no
shrieks in the night and most often I find
myself in the big metaphorical quicksand
of uncertainty because that sunk feeling
in my chest is the most identifiable form
of truth and suddenly the terminal floods
with people from the flight I'm set to board
and I realize none of us are thorough-
breds in a place where everyone must be
a sheep and the airline rep announces
that TSA has to check boarding passes and
IDs a second time but this guy in a bright blue
shirt and his oh-so-shiny badge struts by and
he's a gangly coyote dressed like a donkey
with a nametag that says Jeff and not one
of us feels safe not one as each slip of paper
gets his nod of suspicion saying we may not be
headed the right way

That year nobody came for the leaves
and after the wind blew them into piles
they caught fire and not only trees and
fences charred in the autumn drought
but more than a dozen cars and three
houses on South Main alone got lost in
the fire's music which sucked the words
right from the firefighters' mouths and
the words from their wives' mouths and
silence spread that way until the news
anchor texted-in sick and people shuffled
through the grocery store aisles and
even the preacher after a series of wild
hand gestures gave in to the piano then
the choir on the risers failed at their songs
though their breathing kept coming
measured and in unison


I was the 
sidewalk
the people 
had to tell, 
there was so 
much need 
around me 
I'd look up, 
sometimes 
you were 
the bell I 
leaned to 
because a 
landmark 
fell, all of 
my shoes 
made 
churches 
when you 
looked
up high,
no newspaper 
clutched us, 
my last 
window ran 
to hear

90
but be contented when that fell arrest
because all of us need saving, Jim.
my hands are only half the city
they once were. the rivers flooded
with warm merlot one night, son.
these hands were all i had to save.
street vipers gave word to lite us
because my best friend wrapped 
in cot couldn't get out alive, i swear.
because night was colder then
& he came to me, head in hands.
his own son's clothes all cinders—
because we can't save everyone,
Jim, because we can't all eat alone.

There is a place we come to, a place we come to, a place we end or begin. It's a lot like sleep. In this place, we are more sense than we are bone, more drifter than foot and boot. We learn to come the ways without bridges. It's a lot like a dangerous lullaby, one that lulls you into water, a nice shallow shore, and you're attached to a string, each thought a filament around you, and each filament connected to something else, you hope. We all have to come the ways without crossing, each of us, come to them at our own times, when the crossing is just ours. A nightly ritual, one before sleep, toward sleep.

The woods are full of pills. 
The trees, the leaves 

are things to be washed 
down with water. 

These things are meant
to climb over and fall beneath

one another, tumbling toward
an edge. An edge made of ourselves. 

Mirrors glued to mountain walls;
we look into the earth 

and we take away something. 
Crystal and rock. Mostly rock

too dense to slip through, 
even with all your atoms shaking at once,

all of them carrying little parts
of you elsewhere. 

Certainly there are many
examples of the awful consequences
of man's ego, but my favorite
is the 1900 Galveston hurricane,
the horrifying self-assuredness of Victorians
and the unflappable certainty
in an invented forecast. Imagine watching
the great bathhouses fall into the ocean
the way you, tired, fall into bed
at the end of a long day, socks
still clinging to your ankles.
Or the sisters in St. Mary's, tying
the orphans in long strands
with clotheslines around their waists;
when the water came up, the sea
merely slurped the noodle-chains
and pulled everyone into the water.
Later, men stood on the destroyed beach
and knew they could have listened
to the reports from Havana,
warned the town, dashed off a telegraph.
You can always do something.
But to have such great unflappability,
such supreme self-confidence—
once I knew someone who was always
right. I envied how easily
the world cleaved to him, or how
he thought it did. While I worried,
he moved with the grace
of animals who know why
the sun, water, fish
are all placed in easy reach.
Then, that animal is eaten
by a larger animal. But its last
thought is I'm going to beat this!
and even though you've seen
this episode before, you root
for the zebra, the baby
warthog, the gazelle bending
for a sip of cool water. The ego
of the middle food chain. The easy
stupidity of man. And the howling
storm—here it comes, listen,
you might even hear the Cuban friars
crying at you, please, get off the beach,
my god, you can save yourself.


The goldsmith throws a hawk to the ground. She was caught up in the restoration of darkness. In black suits, we don't really know what the research sows. Friendship and déjà vu continue as our anthems. This way of living lies heavy—there has to be a witness going downhill fast, knitting us together. There will be a run on survival and ovation, a chance to get a common life, a complete switch. If you are one of those people, a picture circulating like a wineskin, switch. If they don't call it wonder, switch. It seems that the thrill of existence wounded many households, a circle of orchards, dependent on the dole of the world. Fallen men we preserve. Our highest law is thinking—levels of the human heart. All of this is admirable, of course. Unclean water is a call to listen very closely, to spout other voices. Through sinkholes this side of heaven, the spine is unimaginable. And the blind. You never claimed calamity. You saw as a whole. This spontaneous outpouring prevailed in both. You move in the sense. Released from lives of prosperity, we are learning tribulation. It's the holy things that curse.


Like life breathed into sand: a good long time ensues. What could be the enormous face of a wolf pushes past the tops of pines and maples; the spastic circuit of a bat halves it. I decide to make a fire: it fails to shape the problem of human consciousness into a more approachable form; it succeeds at making ash. It succeeds at smelling like the first dusk of existence. Who am I to say even one word about the image of John Coltrane praying at Nagasaki? My summer lives on the making of lists; I crumple them into full moons, mown yards, sick dogs licking their chops—run and see, run and see. Your absence, Amanda, is a vocabulary my muscles can barely tolerate. Once we were stones flying in place at the stream's bottom. Some foot bumped us together. Some hand tossed the evening into motion. Battery life: I know this will be interrupted, at some point sequestered, the message clipped, the view curtained, the object obstructed. In the meantime: fiddle and sax, figure emerging from a shield of wax turning circles—smokeless, fair, inviting linger and idyll. So proud.

I'm on a small white boat with three wounded chickens. At times, they are finally still and quiet, as if they had died, but then they again begin squawking and shaking. One of them is missing a wing and the back half of her body. Another one looks as if it is inside out—its head just hangs there, its eyes blinking. When I try to kill them with an ax, I cut the boat in half. I cut my legs in half. I cut my head in half. I cut my entire body in half. I cut the sea in half. I cut the mountains in half, and the sky, the clouds, the airplanes, and all the people in the airplanes, all in half. I cut the world in half. I am adopted by a family that lives on a farm and one day my new father asks me to kill the chickens for dinner. He puts the ax in my one hand. I do not remember exactly half of everything. But he should have not put an ax in the one hand of a boy exactly like me.

When people want to ride elephants in war, they will only ride male elephants. Female elephants are not ridden in war. This is because male elephants are more aggressive, and female elephants will run away from male elephants. If you are riding on a thing that runs away from other things, you will never be able to kill anything.

I was riding Agnes the Elephant on an airplane. I was riding Agnes, and Agnes was riding the airplane. It was the kind of airplane you jump out of, with a parachute. And before we knew it, we were in the air, me, Agnes the Elephant, the red parachute above us like a torn flower, the white belly of the plane above that, another kind of elephant in the sky, and a naked woman on a horse. I want to throw more dinner parties. That was one of my thoughts. 

Three policemen climb over a fence. I am dead. I am on the ground. I am pretty in a white dress. We live between getting up when someone is at the door, and not getting up when someone is at the door. A bed of sleepy women move like cats. On the other side of the fog, you are naked in a vat. You are a memory of mine being erased. So this is my death, not yours. Someone is at the door. 


  I will be the murderer 
          of my own murderer

          and the murderer 
          of the murderer 
          of my own murderer. 

I was in the desert at a person's backyard party when I heard a pack of coyotes tearing apart a herd of cats on the other side of the wall. It sounded like children laughing hysterically at first. What could they be laughing at like that? The person said it was coyotes killing cats. It's such an awful sound said the person. Then the person took a drink of wine. We can do so much damage, and so quickly, with just our hands. I looked at my hands while the cats were ripping. They looked like the hands of a vengeful king. How long would it take before I was drinking the person's blood, swimming in it, dying in a pool of it? How is your wine? I said. It's good said the person. How is your wine? said the person. Mine's good too I said, even though the person and I were drinking the same wine.

I am a boy. I am playing with a toy boat in the dirt. You can't see me from the tree. The tree is full of leaves and you can't see into it or out of it. You are bleeding onto my cowboy hat. It makes a pool. I put the toy boat in the pool in the hat and make a sound like a mother who can't find her child, who has run into the woods, and the woods go forever.

 you ask
          how to fall

          in the woods
          always 

          with a
          candelabra

In the desert, Agnes the Elephant and I are wearing hats. There is a long line of people behind us not wearing hats. The unforgiving sun is sitting on their faces and necks. The first person in the line asks me where we're going. We're going into the middle of the dark I said. Where are you going? He looks confused. He looks like he is completely made of salt. We were following you he said. Then you too are going into the middle of the dark I said. He didn't seem to want to go into the middle of the dark, and he didn't seem to want to tell the second person in line where we were all going. But, of course, the second person in line asked. He told the second person the truth, that we were all going into the middle of the dark, and that person told the third person, and so on, until the last person in line was told something far different, some distorted version of the truth. But that version is just as much the truth as anything else. Where we're going, it is dark. And we'll be in the middle of it. Dear last person, if you believe that, turn around and see what happens. 

It has been said that some moments 
take on significance
because of when they occur
for example the last minutes
and the first ones
So now I must tell you
it's time to blow up the moon
which yes will leave
a dark space in the sky above 
where once the sun's light 
illuminated lunar rock
in a soft blue haze
Only of this I am sure
But just as a new moon
hangs invisible
for a moment until in days
it turns again to glow
a newer moon will drag itself
back into the poem
& unimaginably so
b/c even though
the moon is inevitable
it's far too easy to forget this fact 
in all our heaven's blackness
Like a prayer on page
folded & unfolded then refolded
as a form of saying
I know no other way of living
but through the constant reshaping 
of every word I feel
always surprised to hear
some strange sound
falling from my mouth
onto someone else's skin
  [scene]

After sex, a world without music. Doll parts, tough hair, tiny fingers. I do some magic but nothing disappears. It's a nightmare in which people finally understand one another. I look at the audience and I am the audience. The world is sick, the baby is sick. Real humans rise out of context. I exist anywhere. I am not who I was supposed to be. I am the mailman. I am footless. I am the red dress girl, neither home nor missing. 


*


            [scene]

A face in the dark is the size of the dark. The stranger is dangerous because of what she knows. The world overtakes the world. Smoke rising from a cup of tea, airplanes flying low. To make nothing, I draw a circle around a given space. Stars are a thin line and we see a thin line. A knife, if sharpened. It's not unlike goodbye. An elephant drifting on the ocean floor. 


*


            [scene]

Cowboy's boots but no cowboy. A baby for breakfast. I don't know why and why should I have to. I'm alive in a similar bathtub. I'm mouthing all the words. My father is so proud and he tells me so. My despair smells like buttered popcorn. I follow a map which is my finger pointing back. I grow up and ghastly. Birds caught in a concrete wall. 


*


            [scene]

Everything hurts when I am young. You have mistaken me for someone else. The legs are not my legs, the face I shave etc. The doctors move their mouths as if wanting to speak. The touch of a stranger's hand. It's the same carnival minus the bear sex. A family we all belong to, playing house without the house. If you'll be the girl, I'll be the girl. I am measured by the length of a knife. I am sorry for the things I've done.


Indeed it is cheating to spread the baited net! I spread it, however. 
When you, liquid-mouthed beggar, leap upstream I'll strangle you.

I turn on my tiny light in a cave, suck moisture from the ceiling + 
thereby ruin what structures naturally accumulate.

All full of salt my tongue is hot and ruinous. We shell dioramas 
in our mouths. We do not touch. Resemble none other than

my mother. My mission I repeat I'm laughing. 
How wretched your pinkie is curled into your fist.

The baby is a broken piece of lightning. The baby falls from me, 
pin from hem. She has a pearl in her stomach I cut out.

I wash my poison hands in the rain, worsen what will become 
of our weary river, Dearest. Still when you speak I grow

heavy with you. I know no duplicity. I am a pillar of powder. 
I know Dalia's name as I know your body

spread within harumphing landscapes heart the size of Iowa, 
heat of a city I wouldn't visit god in—

The two of them had punched each other 
over a span of sixty years — uppercuts and sucker —
in times of war and fifty percent off sales 
and famine — in Boston and wearing galoshes — 
during the ballet and post surgery — jabs 
and haymakers — they were thorough and loving 
about these fisticuffs — drawing blood 
and giving blood in turn — breaking three jaws 
total, or one and one half jaw per man — 
a busted spleen — an embarrassed picture window —
then one of them died and the other tried to beat 
the shit out of his tombstone — first with fists — 
then with the stubs of first with fists —
then just gnawed at the thing with microscopic success —
a race between his teeth and stone — a debate 
between his sorrow and tolerance for pain — every day 
he was there and bloody, there and screaming — 
and every day people who had lost someone 
saw this man and understood how wimpy 
their lilies were — that their handkerchiefs 
were flags of surrender — and bit the earth —
and brought shovels and earthmovers — 
and prayed to God to give them the strength 
to hate God — and God pondered — God searched
the soul of God — and God said yes, I give you 
the strength to hate God — and they thanked God 
for giving them the strength to hate God — this 
was love — the circle of love — and they bit 
the earth again, only deeper — and the earth bit back


When I got to the ocean, the ocean was cold. 
I threw my scarf in to be a pal. 
A guy in a wetsuit wanted to surf 
but the gray waves were not very athletic. 
Four fat cargo ships with American stuff
were erased by the horizon. Freezing 
but I took my shoes off and stepped into the past. 
When I feel I don't love anything 
I try to get to the ocean. When I think 
I have a bad molar I try to get to the ocean. 
When I fail to use the subjunctive 
I try to get to the ocean. Sometimes I succeed, 
other times I put glitter above my eyes 
and tell the moon I am a princess, 
come save me. My batting average 
for getting to the ocean is not very good, 
but viewed as a blood transfusion, every step 
toward water is a homecoming parade. Waves 
go whoosh, my heart goes whoosh. This 
is all the evidence of good parenting I need.

If I'm stuck here with this moonface 
it is not a best moment. All night 
I'm collecting water glasses 
and flooding your aquarium.
I've snuck a thousand tiny tubes 
under your door and still the ocean 
is wrecked. I have learning to do: 
wipe my spit off the mirror 
take my organs in stride 
grow a gunmetal heart in the bathtub. 
When I go to the kitchen I can't stand it. 
I pour my drink down your shirt and say 
What is the duct to your memory bank? 
How gigantic am I with my hair dripping? 
You look at me inflated. I'm dressed 
impractically. I'm ready to be slapped 
with this umbrella that won't open.

Nothing I shout will make it 
across the arctic tundra. I am 
still here in this dust bowl 
brimming and shaking to some 
wrong rhythm my ancestors
left behind. I could travel 
thousands of miles to you
and stand here broken-jawed 
no longer bright and bleeding 
but I am not vigilant. I would 
rather stake all hope in what 
is to come than float through 
the world like some idiot 
slapped by grief. Amen.

By exhaling in unison, we grew our breath in crystals. We blew a glass throat. Our vowels spread like static in the plural space. Their hollows twinned. Their ions echoed red. This was when we learned that the oxygen in snow can be used to summon speech. This was when we started sleeping in the memory room. 


Frost finds an aphid's wing and the machines release an unintended song. Its pitch is paper. It echoes wrong. As the echo travels milky cables, the machines grow steam. I search my pockets for pink wing fragments. I taste a pill's ink. The seeds I scatter on the snow perform my only memory of a map.


I shift in time to catch you speaking orange steam. You make a fox expression and I experience a new range of heat. An unbreathing pause wraps around us like fabric. The steam tastes like salt. It makes me speech-tired. I am already used to all of this. The seeds in my pocket. Your pearled tongue. The embryonic echoes taking shape between my teeth. 

Playing with animals
makes you feel alive.
Running from them
does too. 
I'm wearing my t-shirt,
and you're wearing 
my other t-shirt.
Some of the wolves chasing you 
have on matching jerseys.
But they are not worse 
than my ghosts.
Some of the ghosts chasing me
are repelled by the feeling
of having loved me,
and not loving me now.
Everything in the whole park
is quiet at once,
except for our running,
and then I notice
we are in a park
I remember 
from when I lived 
in Brookline.
I want to ask you
if this rose garden
means anything to you.
Is an emotional comet
tearing across your gut?
I mean to ask.
But you're too far ahead,
and now you're gone.
You with your wolves,
leaving me 
with my morbid ghosts.
Then the ghosts stop
to catch their breath,
and I do too.
There is no sound
in the park now,
and no you.
I want to pretend 
to be brave
but who for?
I can't tell you.
It's too dark to tell
if night has erased 
the whole park
and left us here
with the ghosts.
But it isn't the ghosts
which are the problem.
It is the dying.
It is the distances
between us when we do.

Even in death a herd animal
doesn't like to go it alone 
so around and around
the field the dead horse goes
until there are two, three, 
four to travel together. 
Enter a certain weather. 
Fall of failing and of failing 
to see it through. Enter 
birds starting up unmercifully
in the dark and the nonstop 
whirring of the little machine 
you call heart. Enter 
the copycat hallway,
the same caliber loaded 
grandfather's gun, the ball 
bearings and black backpacks 
exploding in the sun. Enter 
this season's dresses 
fanning out in mermaid tails
so all the girls' legs look 
pegged on below the knee. 
Enter legs pegged on below 
the knee, the bewildered 
girlfriend, the shutdown capital, 
the sweet stench of uneaten hay.

Above the mule's head explodes the dream
of a zoo. Whole notes are held in the nude. 
I find the myth to explain this is just
a shopping list of prophetic voices 
underwater or heard through a mirror 
darkly, as if angels sing harkly in spite 
of their black matter existence. Keep this 
piece of ontology, crumple that one 

down into a cannonball-sized spitball.
Make secret plans to throw the good fight
into the pool of sunlight loitering 
perpetually in the middle of my 
apartment's courtyard. It's hard to be here.
A newborn just stares through the air. 

The trees glowed in water 

I had half an ice arm

I waved at the sun for warmth and connection

This melting chandelier of mine

A fever grew from my ankles up

A planet fell out of my mouth

My organs bloomed, parachutes in the night

Snowbells rang along my teeth

My verbs were all in disagreement

Swallowed up in the turbulence

In the rotten rumble of boiling eggs

I held the cold along the eyelashes of cows

I held my rosehip head, splitting in two

To remain perpetually aware

A feather suspended itself in air

The fish sitting too long in the sun melted

Into a sea, cell after cell

My prized imperatives, my root words: gone

Long live the day
All of the obese bodies mimic strange
Animals that mimic strange animals. I
A node in a simulacra of fat, a cartoonish
Mushroom with doll eyes, budding up
Optimistic until it collapses into pebbles
Made of meat. The eyes roll into the skull,
Flutter, and everything is oily porcelain. O,
A matter of pork porking sex fluid around
Rocks, and stones, and horrific trees. I
Is about as distinct as a cell in cellulose
Butter spread on a hairy thigh. The brain
In the leg secretes its own fluid. The fluid
Moves slimy with all of the blunt agility
Of decomposing antelope guts, schizophrenic
As a fanciful death coil producing a rare
Music whimsically in a nocturnal luxury.
All of the mimicry is strange and obese.
All of the animals reflect each other's oil
Sheen. Simulacra at the speed of capital pink
Spewing the material of a skull cage. Opening
To decay, to jizz confusion, to fat thinking, I
Think. Mimicry and fat boils its cruel illusion.

Here, the body exists
as burnt logs, as butane
leaked across the grass.
Ignite, the skin says
to the illegible sky.
There are seven ways
to cross between streets.
A dirt bike ramp made
of cow skulls. A tire swing
attached to pine needles,
& five cardinal directions
from one space to the next.
When we were young
& still fraught with heat,
the bonfire collapsed, rolled
us nearly to death. Listen
when the winds cry foul,
when smoke pushes you
against dream. Which
ash sings of violence
is a question the grass
does not want answered.

all week I did wait for the bruise 
in the ceiling to harden so this morning the super
could spoon the rot 
into a trash bag and from the top of his ladder
spackle fresh plaster above 
the little tree in our room my husband drags 
sometimes into the shower a furious 
baptism to ward off white flies I plum forgot 
the soul was even a thing until I read a line 
in Lucie's book last night the soul like a trinket be 
I saw something then a ghost the light 
of my bathwater knelt 
upon the wall an instance of weight 
my hair submerged in that deep 
strained to rise

Bad ocean. Pretty breakfast. I am away 
in a town where all the men are required 
to wear long johns. Pretty bulges. Bad 
attitudes. It could be worse. It could be 
dire. I would just like to eat my fancy 
bacon in peace. To be alone with my levity 
& delusion that by writing of imaginary 
travels, the food & foreign men, I can go 
beyond myself. Oh stiff unbudging life. 
How many fresh starts now have turned out 
false starts? How many dead-ends have I 
walked into, am walking in, samsara-stuck
& stupid, god, good people, can you tell me 
how to stop, how to give up, forgive? 


[8]

an earthy matrix the work
and the tunnel will take
many years to complete our backs
growing stiff as we crawl over
soft husks of animals
who never reached the sea

patience does not protect us
from darkness we absorb 
the resonating arcs of black light
until its signal 
threatens to overwhelm
the sound of our blood

*

a path begins to shape itself
bulging forward 
each moment flickering under our feet
venomous over our heads
a great tongue-shaped mass
without rain

the loss of life is a small 
loop ascending 
from this valley


[9]

lakes covered with cinder
trees covered
with a metallic black coat
the last soft sounds of mammals
teeth and milk

no plants protected
even in deep ravines
just dark dense stone
warm to the touch

*

chemical fog
eats our hair even as rains
run boiling we trace these lines

our electrified bodies swell
light comes from the best parts
touching we cannot utter
a single word
to describe the air but beneath
our ribs our lungs
keep breathing


[10]

our arms and spines move
with the mountain's weight
forced back toward
the desire that birthed us

tangled woods wild moors
deep lakes rising in open air 
we remember them best
before nervous energy
turns to words

*

ash moves down
our throats this world was fertile once
it will be again the grass
the flowers open and spilling

dead tissue is an essential 
instruction we can use 
to read the field
not just matter changing form
this is a ritual
a repair

One time I tried being naked on the internet. A friend and I wore underwear in a shower. In the photo, we are smiling. Our eyes are closed. Another friend shot, her hair rolled in soda cans. She was going somewhere later. I was only half naked and a little embarrassed. Another day, on a sofa, I held a record over my chest. Fingernails stained fuchsia and chipped. The room's needle static, glowing and dreamy. These days I clomp around the house, bending back my leg. A nude heel dangles from my ankle and then I come back. I put on my red jacket and walk to work. I walk as if I have never been naked on the internet. As if I have always been naked on the internet. I want people to believe their bodies are good. I have this friend who looks good. She says she is a feminist because she is naked on the internet. I say, friend, I'm not sure that's how it works. There are stores for shoes, stores for lingerie. Is my friend a feminist because she is naked on the internet or is she naked on the internet because she is a feminist? See all this skin. These places for loneliness. The sounds we make when we feel good. I would give a lot for one of those robes. I walk around in tall shoes and this blue corset with a name that makes me dangerous. With this name I have no age and no care. With this name I have no regard for the law. The law does not say sorry. The law says get inside with our skin but do not leave home without it. We carry these big bags, selves and lipsticks inside. The trains let us on and the trains let us off. We wait for the next. Our bags overflow. These people, this pretty. We stand on the platforms, dressed like we are cured of pretty. I would give anything for one black garter belt. One stunned video camera. A pair of stockings with seams up the back. A hot set in a hotel room, a professional crew, expert mouths saying, "Give me. Give me." But not my heart. Not my heart. This wide-mouthed tobacco jar filled with a bank's worth of cab fare, filled with your eyes. I would give anything for a red lipstick tinted the correct ratio of blue to violet.

you look like a dog
but this is a problem worth solving 
problem-solving is an adult skill that i possess
your "snout" and your tiny eyes are a dog's
you're a dog without ears       who doesn't have ears?
everyone has ears          small-eyed dogs take a really 
long time finding out 
what space to walk in
on all fours
to walk on all fours       oh how i want to 
follow the dog for some time
be jealous of its aching trot
be jealous of its       trot
i imagine myself walking on east 10th street toward the east river       on all fours	
your streamlined walk
and how love is	
a religion and running is a religion
the east river is the perfect place to dump a body
the cantors pour the wine into the glass
the eunuchs heave their phantom parts
it's safe to say that i have the most irritating phone 
in the world      and that i was full of grace last night
diagnosed with twins at 59th street station 
obsessive rants on      sky cleavage      butt cleavage       breast cleavage
the other night he couldn't see the hands in front of his face
and i have twins somewhere in my heart below my face
and who cares
you have a baby
and diagnose him 
with taking care of you
sometimes i think of when i'm old
and sober when i'm making out
and making out is languid in the birth of sleep
your friend is a housewife
and perhaps even
is a pill problem
i make the same mistakes all the time
some of which
are fixed by technological advances
computers
your dog face is still a problem
but there are many types of dogs
some are quite fluffy and don't have dicks
all men are dogs i suppose
but you really look like one
i don't mean to be cute or sweet
adults still get into rifts
and fights 
and need to return to center
their centers are achieved
by recharging a phone
i found a charger that did not belong today
but i couldn't find the russell edson book
that i took out of the library
but while looking for it
i found more potato chip crumbs 
in my rug
than you'd think possible 


We are a people of hands in our pockets
grabbing & wanting & stuffing our money
deep inside our jeans.

We have a forefather. He is a tintype.
Posed at his pharmacy storefront,
face blanched empty for the century of light.

In our countrysides there are ice blue
lakes, lagoons hot & still as broth.
We family & document.

My sister falls & bruises her eyes.
Sends me the picture. My palms
on the laptop's plastic casing

feeling for the image
of a face like & unlike mine.
We want to be a people

of beauty enough 
to be its own small currency.
If our ancestors had a hero, they built him

of bronze & silence.
I stack my coins.
A monument to themselves.


During the blackout we held the stars 
before they fell a fire rain marked the skin
our bodies formed a cross on the cool cement 
Carmelita will you leave I said 
there is nowhere she said 
the dark was a big balloon on her face 
she held ten moons at her fingertips 
the boiling pot hissed a crab escaped 
felt through the night with its tentacled eyes 
freedom moves sideways comes in forms we know 
like a crab in the city headed for the sea 
I had to burn to keep it from boiling 

I dream the jogger killed in the park 
runs circles 'round my bed I dream 
chupacabras look through my windows
I dream and count worlds formed 
on the cracked ceiling paint 
there is a circus it is also Istanbul 
I mumble Carmelita there is a place or two 
she cannot hear me 

Carmelita is at the graveyard 
stabbing her heart with grass blades 
the compass has one cardinal 
it points to the path that gets us closer 
I climb the mango tree after the monsoon 
rain I reach the golden sap 
the drowned mosquito the drunken moss 
my left foot slips 
to join Carmelita to be on cool cement 
to fall through the blackout to become a star 
to wave at Carmelita from up there 
to see the lanterns in her mouth 
the fireflies dancing in the shape of her head 
to prove there is a place or two 
look there goes a crab she said 


Tonight, I would disappear if you would 
only put your hands away.
The trailers on fire here, country 
music boxes for the moon to tinker with. 
That moon with one knee 
bone deep in each of us, each of us 
half of this altar. 
The moon on borrowed fire 
with the snow of minor wishes.
The moon using you like a shovel
to bury January in what I'll admit years later
is my blood forever. For now,
I'm a bracelet of words for you,
for if only and since then,
a bracelet of words for the black gravity
of your bones asleep 
with nothing but your jewelry on. Tighten me
until you feel your heart thud back.
Silver then green then a sentence 
that ends in your name. Then 
another sentence ends in your name.
When you feel me fall through you
like snow into roses, no, slowly 
start to roughen your dark edges
like some rusted tongue 
in the ribs of a bell,
hold me like the news,
where more and more of everything's on fire,
where the prayers fall through
the fingers of language like ash
into your name and other ornaments of failure.

Now the land is all eyes 
shut.

Our poor 
take off 
their hats.

Our dead 
stay dead.

There are precedents. 
And progeny.

In the mist
of certain mornings

or at the feet of 
the swinging dying

you can pretend
this world is anything

until it is 
beautiful again.


When you come to you are in a makeshift 
submarine built entirely of buckets
held together by melded teeth, held down 
like a turtle shell as you walk the surface 
of a great lake bottom with three others 
stepping on the bones of old battles,
sharing the intimate air. You'll want
to find another coast but when you surface
and the light hits you the whole town
is standing on the beach looking curious.
You won't remember how you got there
or who these people are or what keeps
rattling in your pockets. You will want to wave 
as is your custom. You will want
to show them your wrinkled hands.

For every dead king there stands another
and a child to tell how rooms grow small: the first spider 
remakes the same emptiness: the slow wait
as flooding dissolves before anyone
can save the strawberry finch in all this
ash: a sigh in oaks: April where all goodness shows:
your mother in the tears of La Llorona: you
come to let me know you don't believe in
thieves: wraiths revolving around the loon's cry:
I cry harder into the dream that lingers: for the dead
you determine: cancer: what are you after:
hand-holding is for fear: no water runs through here: 
take cover: heat the stove for warmth: first days
like Vietnam: palms made of chalk: you spare me
then blow away: saying this is the way: wash up

the dead-woods quiver.

have you heard bellingham at dusk?

it collides with the border
crossing.

yes, whatcom.

yes, trail-flare.

yes, the pickford has moved 
& the horseshoe is empty.

i won't let your father
see the blood-spray.

i won't let him near the car.

we are giants.
we fill the bay with wreckage.
One moon for night.
One moon for day.

Fear has a mothering instinct, too.
It'll heal you sideways / it'll tell you a man
can continue to exist when he ceases to be
what he never was.

The heart cracks open like a clam shell.
Say a prayer for light. 
Say a prayer to Our Lady of the Perpetual Want for Cures.

You wouldn't help yourself if you could.

The aftermath begins with asking for a question.

The question begins & does not middle.

Memory is a boardwalk with small lights you do not tell the first man
who walks beside your post-heartbreak body
which has become an origami body.

(To fold is to unfold a previous pattern/ to see
is to unfold a previous pattern.)

Look you do say the stars are sprinkled
like angel spit.

Heaven, that moonshiner
wrapped in silk, tastes you. You belong
where you break it says. 

You feed your mind its spin-off minds.
You put together new fires.
You pluck gravel until it turns to petals
& back. 

Say hey heaven I'm hungry.
Say hey heaven, just hey.

v. To hide or to be hidden.

n. The endless sister.

v. She has anchored the dead and endeared them.

adj. She calls them each scavenger, lupine
mist and fume, soldier, forest sinew, brother. 


To say the fields are bloodsick is only the beginning. 

Yellow jackets hang on thin chains like wind chimes 
and ring venomous. In a town where no one dies,
you changed everything by dying. I can't blame you

for the brevity of things and yet—      Brother, come.

As morning bled a slit of curtain,
breath slid slowly from the prone body. 
Shivered liver. Dogs yapped farewell. 
You felt no wagons on the horizon. 
Wraith, you are full of sad verses. 
Forty years to approach near silence. 
If I cut the grass around a trailer
do I admit I live there alone?
If grass around a trailer is already dead
did you leave a message in diesel?
Dear longed-for communicant, 
this tract of dirt stashes a curse. 
As morning beckoned your eyelids
to lift, a quiet song hushed, died. 
Empty pill bottles transfixed us.
I shiver in a window. At nothing. 


   Two teenagers turn around quickly expecting to see blue sparks or a person walking toward a house in an open field.
               The rest of the day moves slowly while a paper lantern floats off and a young girl with graying hair bends down to kiss the sand.
               There is a wound somewhere filling up with the sound of silent letters and the feeling of being too far away from a bridge.
               By the time the fireflies come out someone has died on their way back to a great body of water but no one has been able to sense their absence yet. 


          *


               Two teenagers come outside for a while and sit in the sun where people talk about what they're going to do with the rest of their lives.
               In the distance the white car they're all driving travels along a suburban road at a tremendous speed.
               When they get to the beach there's a window that's not attached to a house and the ocean makes the sound of footsteps running up stairs.
               They stop to take a breath not knowing that somewhere they are being thought of under moonlight by a twelve-year-old with a face like evening. 


          *


               Two teenagers in bed with someone they have never seen in the light open their hands and dream of the souvenir shops.
               They stop thinking about what it's all right to like while a rabbit stands among trees watching over them.
               The colors in their heads and the smell of the backyard are like an old friend pretending to kiss a shadow trapped in glass.
               They want to say something about walking across the world from one sea to the next through the all the emptiness that's been taken out of them. 


   [1] 
S-H-E-D-E-V-L. 
I, on the other hand, 
make sure to wash my mouth 
whenever I say something slippery. I am washing 
right now, ma chérie, with a pen
in my left hand and my page on the rim of the sink 
and my right hand is reaching toward you, 
you in the mirror, to pull your hair out.

          [2] 
The terror of having to realize the unrealizable: I am a baby 
on the kitchen counter, one of many. My mother continues 
to unload us from a crate. The counter is littered with knives. 
No one is hurt except all of us are hurt and yearning 
to sleep. It is cold. Keep this in mind, it is cold. 
My mother, the woman, she is wearing a chain 
of children's molars. A man wearing the same chain 
appears in the doorway and begins to eat us one by one.

          [3] 
My mother in a blue apron. It is springtime inside 
and outside the kitchen. I hear the dog screech from the yard, 
his "body" is caught under the lawnmower 
my father is driving. I tell my mother to get off 
the machine, to let this one live, but he doesn't listen, 
he takes off his apron and steps outside, 
sees the dog screeching and by now, it is still springtime.

          [4] 
You are in control. The day is yellow 
in the sense that the grasses are dying. There are animals 
dying every minute, waiting, even after their deaths, 
to be adopted. Pick up the phone. Pick up the baby 
and set it in a meadow. Wait for a bird to settle 
on its head and take a photo. Mail the photo to your mother. 
Write to her, write, Just this once, just this once, 
would you please come to my recital. I promise I will do better 
than Jenny. Take the baby back into your hands 
and promise me, promise me.

          [5] 
What makes us go all the way to the bottom. The brother had severed 
one of his fingers attempting to slice a fig. The mother took him 
to the emergency room but only the brother returned. Since then, 
I have had to be the woman of the house. I am proud to say
that the brother's fingers have grown six inches since I took over and the father 
is very well near portly. I promise to fill them up. I say this every time 
I pass the emergency room on the way to bed.

          [6] 
At least we have our authenticity. This is the last time 
I'll ever lend my skin to a man who tells me he'll give it 
right back. Keep this in mind: it is cold and my eyes 
are too bloated for my head. I have had to squeeze them dry 
at day's end. I do this in the bathroom, where a lady is safe 
to take her apron off and her eyes out.

          [7] 
I say to Michael, I say, Michael, 
Why don't you go out and find yourself a woman. I say, 
Michael, any lady would be lucky to let you have her. I say, Take 
this cake and take it into your arms and find a woman.

          [8] 
You are in control. Take this stallion and ride it 
to your demise. (Read: the sunset, behind the stars, 
the green green garden.) Compare my flesh to yours. Look at my hair: 
my neck hair and my toe hair. (Read: I am a woman and a woman 
is a woman.) My unconscious is under siege, 
papa bear. Take up your arms 
and throw them around me. Bring a bouquet, 
bring your big cowboy hat. Show me how to kill a horse.

The girl at the altar has stalled. 
She carries sugar and honey 
To build a new archetype. 
That is her job.
But are there other ways of 
Fixing it, she asks?

The girl scales a summit
Where she throws out 
50,000 years of a system that 
Ruined life for most of us.
A tipping point. 
Her pointing finger. 

It is now the future: 
The enemy is still 
The enemy.
The enemy is in charge.
The enemy decides things.

It is now the future 
And simple fantasies 
Feel like acts of defiance.



Women Should


How do you tell
This story?
You stand in a field
Painted with silence.
The field is not
Allowed to speak.
Then the field is a silent trick.
Then the field was never there.
You should go.
You should go up the path
That lifts off the ground.
The traps in the field
Dictate your every move.
So you do not move.
Have not.
The field is a translation
Of suffering and you are
Curled on the ground
In submission. 
You receive a message.
It is not from a man.
It is not from the saints.
The message says
You are the new living.
It is a birthday.
And love is more powerful
Than this list of things you wish
You'd known.

—quick-listed
to the longhand of playbor 

          or

in border parts I
lost a country     quick of
the nail and bitten through

I confess no green
flower   am wood flower

          as in

wish I hadn't      a slow leak
can happen in a bicycle
tube     inside a girl
inside a tube inside a girl 

          I confess:

I know now it
is possible to be full & empty
all at once      I confess I
no longer want to confess I 
confess a flattening

          or that 

property
is a measure of elimination*

I  limn  red  I
confess  I  rosary
I  baby  I  limn—

then well she said
well well

—I confess no flower I
confess I no longer
want to I    the brutal ex
hibit the habit I, I

Say you have, for instance, a costly tiara in one hand and a heinous sylvan death mask in the other; you're wearing your euphemistic helmet and ravishing suit, you're soaked in the blood of your enemies and gooned on fistfuls of painkillers, and you're telling your Samoan jokes to a ton of tipsy middlemen in their lousy seats a mile from the main stage; your microphone teeters and there's a sound like broken toys playing on a tape somewhere, and FM radio squeals a rock opera, and in this tedious human minute a stain spreads out from your feet, an oily, pale, unseen void without humility, a really vast, humongous, jury-rigged moon to set you on fire; you screech that it is the death of the millennium, the mother of all sins, on this site of pious madness, this aching capitalist rhyming new rock symphony; you're laughing and joking but the tofu cossacks are saluting your killers and their underlings, and the nameless oval is tapping out a tune in your name, a sinister death opus, your personalized inhuman elemental throat pulse, culminating in the turbulent hive that rakes your ego in an eponymous aria of polyvocal helljets; you are variously opened, shot from a cannon, posited to be, honestly, not; and you are not. 

Last night I woke up 
and bumped into your death
in the dark.
I can't blame it, exactly,
I've been unkind, 
bound the thing like a roast 
with butcher's twine,
and left it to rattle 
in the lockbox beneath the bed.
It had grown lonely, it had resorted 
to attention-seeking behavior.
It crouched beneath my keys
to pounce as I left the house—
and often, it coaxed 
the telephone to ring out,
to shake off hard-won silence
with all the stupid enthusiasm 
of a wet dog. Your death
misses the assuasive days 
of the short leash, misses 
the nights I seduced it
to play on loop 
until we both collapsed into sleep. 
It's barbarous—I tell your death—
this mounting infidelity,
and there is no word yet 
for the kind of shame
that twins my breath
to every moment 
that you do not breathe.


I felt the moon in me 
cut like a tooth

the owl in clinical 
trials will survive

the summer 
the vanishing skin

the tongue continues to roll 
a murmuration of paper and fur

the conductor of bleeding 
will make you an altar

bring your unstrung nightbirds 
your bottle of drown

here is my breath 
I smear it on my shrieking

it is the only natural predator 
of lips and planets 

Sideways angled sun

I rode my bike through you seven times

Wilderness rings funny to this tongue

You said you could feel where I ended

There were a lot of apples in the bag

Nothing felt ripe anymore

Kept putting my hands on fruit

I can't feel anything you'd say

Lots of rain on a Sunday

Paper bag chrysanthemum on the tracks

Fantastic suitcase 

Whatever you left with stays gone

I've lived half awake before

Car clipped my kneecap

Knit hat pulls over

Cupping my ears to block

Traffic ceaseless

Luncheon for administrative 

Assistants call myself 

Secretary I like the 

Self-deprecation I wear

Crowning heads every

Existence stilled 

My years as endless

News feed only the 

Fiction matters

Always thought I'd be

Lead singer instead

Acting out my glories

Stage my rebirth

All grown up 

The distance between

Hatch an egg

Sit on your face

Reason the names

For paint I can't come

Back to you anymore

Stop kissing my cheeks 

Your mouth has said

What I fear most

Death is a vital

Ingredient in my hips

The bones you've licked

While I shook

Cocktails to ice 

Blacked out a name

Blacked out another

That's not resistance 

But moving over

On the bus

Cable repairman

Bicycle helmet

Line about birds

Put the grass back

In my mouth

Let me see

i. 
freelancing

I don't know what she wanted 
               that summer we stitched our dresses 
                              into ourselves but I know 

I kept looping needles into my skin and smiling 
               at a camera, sweating a little
                              in the small of my back. Each stitch 

made me feel a little better, 
               or so I told myself. Each made 
                              a tiny contusion in the sky; a hum 

in my backteeth. Each was a footstep,
               a new black spot on a lung.
                              I know I got jacked three times

and was only drunk one of them.
               I don't remember the faces of the women 
                              I slept with or the men who robbed me.

I know each hour clicking over
               was a little needle of gin.
                              Once I waved my hand through the air

and combed the clouds straight as Venetian blinds
               just so the slats would fall splintered 
                              on her body as she posed

for a selfie. Most days started 
               with an idea, then continued with twisting it
                              until it snapped in two. 



ii. 
last exit

I want to know 

a girl well enough to know 

when she's drunk 

just by the look in 

her eyes. I'll bury 

my head in the sand 

of her graveyard at the edge

of our village.

What that girl leaves 

in her glass I'll suck 

of the rinds. I'll kiss

someone else with 

her pith in my teeth.



iii. 
girl working the bumper sticker booth in the Harris Teeter parking lot

A whitegirl like a plane going down but still shining.
Whiteboys who died curled inside yellow ribbons 

shellacked to the back of mama's sputtering 
Olds. Girls who fell over 

state lines and got up running. Girls pouring Domino sugar 
straight from packets to throats. Learning how fast ice melts 

against wrists or last drinks. Forgetting how quick
hydrangeas & fruitflies bloom. The past 

just some seeds in her teeth. Dead cousins 
she sold to get out of work. Deadbolt stories 

spat out like come in her teeth. Forgetting 
the future like keys. Forgetting those months 

she let a man tie her up for money 
and another for free. The past just going to the matinee 

to find the parking lot dark after. Her skin just a ghost 
I've gotten so used to I'm not afraid anymore. 


ACT ONE:

lights up on a woman. she stares into the audience.
she gives birth.
                              
- black out -



ACT TWO:

lights up on a boy sitting at a simple table with two glasses 
of water pouring the water back and fourth. he does this until 
the water spills into his hands or on the table 
or until it has all evaporated.
- black out -



ACT THREE:

lights up revealing the stage is a huge glass of water. inside 
the glass there appears to be nothing but water; but in 
generations time the single-celled organisms will split 
and evolved to be visible to the naked eye.
- black out -



ACT FOUR:

lights up on two young men sitting on either side of a simple table.
they pour the contents of empty water glasses back and fourth.
all they know how to do is stare at each other. the table grows
legs and leaves, their glasses slowly fill to the brim.
- black out -



ACT FIVE:

lights up on a blank stage. the audience's breath troubles the
red curtains in the wings until it appears the whole theatre 
is breathing. the moisture from their breath condenses
on the scrim until it begins to drip. it's beautiful.
- black out -



ACT SIX:

lights up to show a black river. the river carries silt 
then sediment, then boats, then bodies. so many bodies float
in the black river until there is almost no river left. the banks
of the river are coated in a deep red that grows.
- black out -



ACT SEVEN: 

lights up on the second young man dressed in radio wires 
and electricity, he climbs into a bath and the bath says,

bath: i am half full and still spilling over.

the bath says: i'm sorry

says: give me your cells and in a millennia i will make you again.
- black out -



ACT EIGHT:

lights up on a cemetery. only it's not a cemetery. 
it's just a hole and it's raining and the rain fills the hole 
and it has scared the mourners under their umbrellas 
when some strange light rises up from the dark water.
- black out -



ACT NINE:

lights up on a man sitting alone with his water glasses.
the stage is filled with water glasses. the audience too,
beneath their seats or full inside of them. we drink, everyone
but the man drinks.
- black out -



ACT TEN:

lights up on stage. it's so bright
it's terrifying.
- black out -


What we do we do as scientists: take/give back, take/give back until everything has wound its way through us. Cut out negative space. Tie flags around the birds. It's simple, habitation, as long as you keep your finger on the dial. Sensitive as a nipple. In the cold, everything is harder to know.

Which is why we venture out, day after day. 

Why the shadows know which way to run.

In every direction miniatures of our bodies poke out from the snow. We placed them there. Aspiring Edvard Munches.

You call this entertainment? We call it keeping track.


I long to see a lemonade stand setting up at the crossroads. Hell, I long to see a crossroads. Children waving a hand-painted sign in the hope that—

The hope—

It has no substance yet.

I would be cruel to wish this place on children. I wish for it anyway. The landform is a lesson in blindness, in the fact that the stars and snow and wind know nothing of you, except that you block their way.

Then fly the kids back. Television. Peanuts. Jet fuel leaking into the burners. Their milk-white minds searing the bone-white sky.

And Hank and I, unbeknownst to all, hanging on to the landing gear as it pulls up.


Scan the snow for objects of love and wonder. Boil seal meat, stirring with both arms. Keep the bed unmade so it cannot be forgotten that each day is a new day under the ever-rising sun: God forbid the sheets keep their creases. God forbid an inch of sanitation tiptoe in. Wrestle your urges to the ground and gut them. The snow outside the front door turns a merciful red.

The only way to get to the Dark Sector is to trudge. Titanium fills your cheeks. Formlessness tackles you and rubs snow in your eyes until you are blind and you can see her. The earth's pages turn. The dim promise of a new year lingers on the horizon but you'd rather someone cut a hole in the sun and fished you out, fed you to their family of five, and loved you for what you are, a mass of mostly bone. What flesh you have you owe to the winter. Your shape is the shape of stone. Your smile is someone else's whim. Your trust is back with Hank. He hovers above it, crouched as if over a grenade. The living room lifts him up with its luminescent fingers and plucks his ribs out, one by one. My hands are shaking at the thought of him bent there. You think the cold is cold. Emptiness is only a beginning. Emptiness is a simple, ready receptacle.The valley's voice who sees
whose ears saw

a Word That walked
the song about the lapse

Piper, pipe that weeping pole
the light from out the earth

I the same mass
more down and away
I pluck & wilt & vanish
I stained the hollow floor
I wrote Every clear day

I saw the skies
Had seen the green bells
A loud chapel lark around

The white haired gates
Laugh away the oak
Over the Garden they laugh

I saw tomb-stones Ecchoing
the black Sun walking around
briars bind mothers' laps
like birds darkening

I had lost all sense of rhythm, what was
countable and not. All my buildings
were small, all the bodies I could stitch

together would be made from snake
scales one-by-one. There is a weight
and it hangs from some necks heavier. 

I had no good faith, just bad algebra
and shoddy understanding of architecture.
There is a museum of dead animals

called the heart. There is a chorus
of flaming ghosts still singing at the end
of each aria. Small archives of what

can be hung from what: fire, stocking,
cast iron, hook. I woke and believed
the second story higher up, 

somehow, the tops of houses risen
tall on skinny legs. If there were witches, 
I'd count my blessings on shed hairs,

cast-off skins. I'd ask for a body 
that had forgetting built in. The question: 
whether the monster's skin remembers 

being touched on its old limbs. 

This time of year
the pooled light spilling.

We were afraid.

A world of 
turning to feed and be fed.
Of saline hung in bags.

Knowing now
what I know, I would never.

That last morning
she did not move from the bed.
At which time we carried 
her to the hospital.

All that goes into preparing
is not enough.

She died while receiving
an X-ray. Which later gave
information. Which showed 
a tumor pressing on her lungs.

What passes for knowledge.

I still remember 
the body laid upstairs and
entertaining a stranger in the kitchen.
We put all that aside for.

The fact is, I have shredded
the records, erased all evidence
of her passing.	

Do not claim you are sorry.

I kept returning to the body
to see if breath
was lifting the ribcage, to find out
if some mistake had been made.

By which I mean

the sun and how it
broke into white slats
on the floor.

 Winter, and every tree
                                 has lost its head.

Grey-silver birds
bicker on a stricken twig—

               they fly up and cathedral vacant space,
                        all subterfuge 

                                      and sunlight, alchemical 
as distance: swerve and jig                                (amid the lace

                                                  of a white 

new gown)
                                           before relighting on a swaying 
               branch. The ice 

                        sharpens into teeth; hangs
                                                                        thinner 

from the eaves. The bare 
                                 limbs dance. And evening 

laces up. You waste away. 
Each day, 

               a breath-mark on a mirror.



 The eagles arrive at dawn.
            We're touched on our shoulders by the chaplain: his service for ours.
            There's no body for us to remember over. The box in the driveway is empty.
            "Best we can do," the eagles say. "Doesn't make him any less."
            The chaplain crosses himself for him and for us and for the heartland.
            They're gone and my father and I are looking over the empty box. We sand down its rough and drape over it the flag. We drag it to the yard where once there was a garden with chains and the pickup. We unwind the hose and soften the dirt and the clay beneath the dirt.
            My mother watches through the window us dig. I think it kills her. We hear her body drop onto the kitchen floor.
            My father lifts her apron. Palpitations in her chest. Heaving in her abdomen.
            I ask my father if it's a new brother kicking.
            He stops me from pulling the knife from her hand. "Nothing left worth saving or protecting," he says.
            It's the same thing his boss says when the steelyard's shut down. The union's broken. The corporation's multinational.
            My father opens a beer. "What can you do?" he says.
            I don't know how to answer. I'm too young for war, let alone blue collar.
            He repeats it at the popping of the tab of each new beer. "What. Can. You. Do?"
            I'm an American in the heartland and I know it means someday leaving.
            I steal the pickup from the yard and take the highway named for my slain brother to another highway named for a number. The zero means cross-country, both coasts, but I don't make it out of the heartland.
            I'm stuck on the side of the highway in the city famous for poisoned birds falling out of the sky. I leave the pickup to rust. I walk along a road that leads to the river in which the bodies of the birds float upstream to the Great Lakes. The water's green and thick as melted plastic. It's growing season. Algal blooms have made everything toxic. Nothing's safe to drink except drinks.
            I'm sitting in an alley with the first thing I see move. She's got spirits. She pours me a glass. "My last didn't speak English," she says. "So he killed."
            She pours another. The glass is dirtied up with past lips.
            "Tell me how many fingers," she says.
            The drink's dry. I've got a mouthful of desert. I've had enough.
            "You ever cut a man for the insides of his pockets?" she says. "Can you tell me what's inside your pockets?"
            I've got nothing.
            "Why am I even here?" she says. She empties the bottle. She leans into me and whispers in my ear, "I think it's the c'mere-stranger thing you do with your eyes Can you show me how you do that?"
            "I think I'm the stranger," I say.
            She screams and I'm surrounded. My arms are pulled behind my back.
            "Do you know who this man is?" the surrounding says.
            "He's a stranger," the woman says before striking me with the bottle.
            I'm still alive on the floor of a hallway in some place I didn't mean to be.
            A man taps me on the shoulder with his boot. "Forget-who's throwing a party," he says. "You coming?"
            A door opens.
            "I don't know anybody," I say.
            "Nobody knows anybody but Jerry," he says. "We're all brothers somehow."
            Jerry's dressed up in dress-blues drinking straight from a bottle. "Enough with the music," he says. "Put on the television."
            "It's all war," someone says.
            "We don't need no more war," someone else says.
            We surround him.
            "Never mind," Jerry says.
            "You should know better," we say.
            "I know plenty. I fought for all of you."
            "We don't need it anymore," we say. "We need more of something more." 
            "We need a life like pictures," someone says. "Television the way it used to be." 
            "Wear for us a lampshade on your head like it's a sitcom," someone else says. 
            "Do it for us," we say.
            We ask forget-who where she keeps the lamps.
            "There aren't any," she says. "I only burn oil here."
            We find instead a vase with no flowers. "Wear this," we say. "It'll fit you." 
            "The hell it will," Jerry says.
            "How far won't you go to make our lives livable?" we say.
            "I've tried," Jerry says. "I've got scars to prove it."
            "But what is enough?" we say. "Isn't there more you can do?"
            Someone sneaks up behind Jerry and shatters the vase over his head.
            Jerry's cut up bad. We're delighted.
            "There are red curls growing out of your pores," we say.
            Jerry's all choked up like pledging allegiance. "God help us all," Jerry says.
            We laugh. It's a good line by a good man who's tried. We're grateful for him. We pour him spirits out of our gratitude.
            Jerry slumps onto the floor before he can drink.
            "Like the pictures," we say. We pour the glass over the parts of him broken open.
            "My floor," forget-who says.
            We've made a mess of everything.
            We carry Jerry to a tub full of cold water. We stick him in headfirst with all of our gratitude. 
            He doesn't come to.
            "But look how clean," someone says.
            "Clean as god would've wanted things," someone else says.
            The clean makes us uncomfortable.
            "I've got just the thing," someone says.
            It's an old bag of topsoil someone bought from the Walmart. We tear it open with our teeth and fill the tub like a holiday weekend with good times until all that's visible are arms and legs. 
            "I've always thought him lovely as a fir," someone says.
            "I've always thought him lovely as a spruce," someone else says.
            We perch tight on Jerry's limbs delighted and delighted like who ever would want to leave? 


  I went out to get detergent, the brand my mother uses, the brand I use, too. You know, the orange one. Unscented. There was a brief time—some years ago—when I tried different scents like lavender, fresh breeze, tangy citrus. I was trying out different brands, eager to become my own person. I remember a candy corn-shaped blue one. A broad red one with a high-up angular handle, strange engineering. There was a cheap, green one that seemed never to work as well as the others. Now, I've settled. I've, as they say, come back around.
            When I got to the store, they were out. I stared at the negative space above the shelf where the detergent ought to be. The tag below it gave the title of the product, the price ($7.49) and the corresponding bar code. But where the product should have been, there was nothing. A small gray ball of lint and, for some reason, a broken rubber band. I considered walking over to the accessory department to look at the displays of cheap jewelry, just something to have made the trip worthwhile. Instead I shook my head and hastily made my way to the sliding doors. It took a few pulls on my keys to get the chugging engine to remain on. I sat in my car. I could see my own breath.
            I began driving unsure of where I was going, if I'm being honest with you. I reached the turn-off that would lead to my house but just kept driving, as if someone—a spirit—had possessed me and taken hold of the wheel. A few minutes ahead, I then made a sharp left, cutting two cars off abruptly. They both honked at me, which I resented because I hadn't meant to cut them off. I was not malicious, it was only that I hadn't been sure if I was going to stop and turn and had been overcome by a now-or-never kind of impulse—I was afraid that if I didn't turn into the drive I would just keep driving straight on the same road I was on until my gas ran out. They didn't know that though, those drivers, so I tried to relinquish my anger. I slammed the brakes in the parking space, my front tire bumping slightly into the cement block at the front (the one that disallows rolling through in order to pull out). I walked into the second superstore of the day.
            As I walked, I found my pace becoming more and more brisk until I was just trying to keep from appearing like I was jogging; I didn't want to seem like a lunatic. A smile broke across my face when I saw the right aisle. I felt relieved. Better to get it over with now. Yes, yes—this was right. No, no. They were out of the detergent there, too. What's the word for how I felt then? Crestfallen. What happens after you go over the crestfall? My hands were shaking, ever so slightly, and I held them up to my face to be sure. I felt mildly faint at the idea of having to get back into my car and drive all the way home, probably 20 minutes it would take me. It occurred to me there was a third place to check, not a superstore but a tiny convenient store on Vine St. I had bought detergent there once. It was overpriced and dusty and probably stale, if detergent could be stale. The price, I remembered, had been listed not on a neat tag on the height of the shelving but on a small white rectangular sticker stuck directly to the bottle.
            I felt torn between the satisfaction of tenacity, of try-try again, and the satisfaction of giving up. It wasn't that important anyway; it could wait. A day, a week. The errand had been invented already anyway. A better person would have stuck it out and gone. Finished the job. Wash, dry, fold. A better person would never have to think about it again, at least until the next empty bottle. But I had this feeling that started as a joke that all the detergent, unscented, orange brand, was out of stock in this entire county, or at least in all of central New York. All of New York, maybe, the entire state. Or maybe they still had it in the city, because the city had people who would pay. People who always got what they wanted. I say this without self-pity: I was not one of those people.
            I got back in my car and drove home. I almost slipped on the ice in my driveway. Not slipping—something going in my favor—didn't seem to fit with how my day'd been going and I felt resentful again, I refused to feel grateful. I climbed the stairs, kicked my shoes off, got into bed, and pulled the airy comforter over me. My breath was hot, it fogged my glasses. I took them off and pushed them off of the bed. I reminded myself to not step on them later, when I would get up. Just move them now, I told myself. But the comforter was beginning to create at least a little bit of heat, working like an ineffective greenhouse and I was wont to give it up, this tiny bit of peace. Parts of my body felt extremely heavy then. Not my eyelids as you might expect but my arms, my legs, my skull. I drooled awake. In my sideways view, I saw an orange stain on my sheets, probably from hot sauce, from late-night snacking in bed. It was probably from the night before but it could have been older than that. A bad habit I know, or a lack of a good habit, rather, but it had been a long time since I'd washed my sheets. 


To begin, carry trauma like an amulet. Kiss its three sharp corners. Shine its ugly armor. 

Recall the chalk clouds. Recall the scent of symbols scratched deep on motel walls. Remember rising damp, the face in the mildew that told you do not be afraid. 

On the unclean bedspread, summon your sixteenth birthday. Snuff the candles, ask for time re-written. Ask for the package left unopened on your dresser. Wish perfected childhood. Wish unbroken skin.

To make a Tulpa, carry books to bed. Lie on a lumpy mattress & dictate your woes to furniture. Lie & map imaginary houses. Map topography of bodies. Think: how will his paper limbs assemble into flesh? How will it feel with one half of the bed depressed?

To make a Tulpa, practice self-negation. Hollow your head and light the neon Vacancy. 

Consider the shape of your hand as you teach yourself falling. Curl two fingers: beckon closer. 

Crown yourself with polished trauma. Balance amulet between your eyes & watch the dark soak through the floorboard cracks.

Kiss residue from motel's plaster split. Tongue holes in sacred symbols. Kiss his three sharp corners.

Unopen package. Hold self inside imagined houses. Wait for tenants. Wait for occupation.

Break your skin on faith and mean it. 

then the room of small things 
I grew large. Respite again

in a globe of bad proportions, 
of indeterminate growth,

how flora unfolds without 
a plan (you don't know

how it looks or when it stops 
until you find it dead—)

Where the slightest tremor may catch 
in a mirror pitched just right, where

it's natural to mistake 
a sheet for a meadow

because there's nothing else to bank on. 
Except when that old sleight

returns me. Always abridged 
and eclipsing fast

like the noon train,
the only one that comes. A faithful

and shimmering vehicle 
around which to draw oneself.

Like a bed not meant
for touching, just carrying

worn weight forward:

I buried the guitar in a shallow grave in the backyard. I returned to the house and lit several candles arranged haphazardly on the kitchen table. I sat and watched the wax melt and pool. Red pools. White pools. When the candles finished burning, I walked outside and dug up the guitar. I removed the strings and hung them from the branch of a large maple tree. I took the guitar inside and smashed it on the floor. I gathered the splintered wood and put it in the oven. I turned on the oven and watched the wood through the small window in the oven door. After several minutes, it began to smolder. I opened the oven door and removed the wood. I carried it outside and set it on the grass. I fanned it until it caught on fire. I watched it burn. I ran my fingers up and down the strings that were swaying back and forth on the branch in a light breeze. It began to rain. I stood there for a while. I mimicked the act of playing guitar. The next day, I bought a new instrument. I put the fingers of my right hand on strategic places along the neck. I strummed with my left. I began to weep. The song I played is called what's wrong with me.

Do you think this laughter is someone's mother, a fossilized sound dug up by the wind? There, collecting water in mute pockets, the grief-protectors wear down. Someone needs to investigate to see if this is true. The erosion police arrive. Their notepads are soggy. Their fedoras brim with rain. They say, That sound is not laughter. The case is closed now. Now they just want to go home, where it might be quiet. They want to go back home, as if home means childhood. They bend and taste the dirt. This, they say, is a grave. All of this. Everywhere.

More alive
the body unlit.

Body made visible 
after dawn.

Seconds of kissing 
a man & I touching.

Body the gods decide 
should riverspin.

Arms and legs 
invisible in seconds.

When I wake, a gun 
nesting in my place.

Proof a man sunk 
is a man inanimate.

Yet surely somewhere 
dark there I am.

Chest disintegrating 
lips: a feast of blue.

No skin to feed
the earth so I face up.

Bones green from a long 
bed of moss.

Memory a shorn path 
through the forest.

Yet still regret is silver 
and more silver.

Body beaming light 
through the trees.

I want to remember what it feels like to hurt
and be hurt. Paint me wild hydrangea orange,
a truck in the 70s flashing down a Montana
highway without regret. Paint me the glowing
skull of a cigarette. We try to be good
to each other until we aren't. I want someone
to paint and mop their hair in splatter. Run it
across the walls and furniture. A man 
or a woman may place a baby between ruffles 
of trash in the alley and think it comfort. 
Paint hate and call it exactly that. I am so afraid
of who we will become. Trees burning
from high noon sun knowing nothing 
of smoke. Let's stay up all night 
until the moon is a mirror of silk
power. Let's bloom into gods, sea
anemone. Someday we will all wear 
tarpaulins and drink rosewater and break 
songs from the river's laughter and know why
blue begins as crystal then suffers from peen 
hammer. Let's paint our insides blood, fuse red.

  As the kingdom we imagine has a train, and the train has a station in our house. As the glass spun gold with you who swim your lives together,

               as the gold of our life to come. As every new flake draws another mouth to the surface of the water. As each ripple is not sound, but hunger. As the difference between silence and the word

               after. As these are our words: circle, stillness. Spiral, pause. Every new day is a machine of transformation,

               even the newness of the dead, as though the water held us moving by the wire of. As one drawn to another by the wire of. Another whorl in the spiral. Another arm. A new line drawn in the palm. 

I have never kissed a boy in the rain. These are the smallest
things. I wake up in another country and my hands are cold
and I will never understand how to live like this. Something
about my white shirt, soaked through. The way you turned
around and pretended to know my name. Do you want this?
I'm almost home. Questions with no answers. The right way
to accept an offering. Red umbrella in the rain. I understand
how to fend off ghosts. I understand how to read the Bible
without letting it mean anything. You followed me through
a city and I didn't know what that meant. We must always
be careful. White shirt in the rain. People watching people:
a sort of performance. I'll admit that I was scared. I'll admit
to most things, as long as they'll make me seem more human.
Admit that most of us have no idea what we're doing. It feels
too honest to be wrong. Analogy: I am a wolf and I founded
an empire. I am a fox and I skinned a rabbit. You will never
know, but I am so thankful. There are things that I will never
be able to repay. Things you will never know. The umbrella
hangs in my closet and someday I will give it to some stranger
in the street. Signs of life. A thick blue rain. We are all so safe.

In the house of the LORD I take off my person
I take off my woman and say thank you for having me
In the house of the LORD I wash up for supper
I sit at the table and the LORD gives me a feast
I say perhaps only a little perhaps just a taste
The LORD says in the house of the LORD
you better eat up so the LORD brings out two rivers
I swallow them whole and they fork in my belly
and bifurcate the seams of my three dimensional form
The LORD says make yourself comfy
The LORD brings out the great lakes
Says here are your homes and we laugh
I eat them in order—Huron Ontario Michigan Erie Superior
I savor the fish the algae the ancient sediment layer
I say LORD I'm not hungry anymore
The LORD says my child I know exactly how hungry you are 
So the LORD brings out a forest and I make room in myself
I fill up the house of the LORD with my body
The LORD says amen and amen
The LORD opens every closed portal
I expand through many times and spaces
The LORD says let us bow our heads
and consume our earthly containers so we do
I say thank you oh LORD
and the LORD says it was nothing at all


Numberless the stars fall glass jewels their white flowers ignite
dark objects strung with corruption nomenclature ashes. The
swans burst pouring strings of code and the
						trees burn

Face half eaten pixilation scepter jewel-soldered to his dented
byte and wordless slithers beneath the plushness Settee mewling
father (King-decryption is a snuff film future feature self of 
Proliferation scraping the hard cavity blade gently between the
black-veined bar of his corroded ribcage) Pathogenic pouring
gate the gilt-fringed cushion bursts and blood-suck insectine
Replications swarm a quickly fleeing Princess twined the sixes
Starving Princes knotted one-by-one by slitted kisses and
A single golden wire

Mountains rise creating a geologic bridge across the multitude of
Universe the antiprince the antibody the asters folding
intimately together into velvety neon-puncturing tunnel space
six Swans lastly complete their circuit descent into the valleys of
her celestial bloodletting bodiless. She pulls the nettles from her
mouth (and the golden-horned moon shatters) to ascentI have no memory of Washington fording the Delaware
to return the Lenape girl's lost corn-doll, but clickbait
flows to the ocean and would never lie to me.
You won't believe how the cherry tree begged for touch,
every gleam of blade-light and lightning
aimed at the tree scorched the ground saying Yes, Yes,
and it was true come next harvest, the new generation
of cherry trees bubbled up from the dirt.

No faith but in motion, I've no trust for the stationary,
the microphone that throws its voice beneath
the billowed hem of curtain. Is that a TV in your glasses,
or are you just bored to see me? Farther north the sirens bleat
out to no response—maybe the dropping of a few pine
needles—but the satellite signal comes in strong, the dish
supplicating on the cabin roof, the stunted Y of its form
a Yes for raindrops, cold and many, much data.

The mounted moose-head is such soft violence,
wears such a humble crown, washed of blood,
an earthen hand and its pair cupping the sky to praise.
Eyes large and empty as post-its. Note to self: Don't ever die
where your remains can be found, mute, where your limbs
can be stationed in service of interrogatives, pointed at the gold
cone searchlight of headline. You run-on sentence,
unstoppable corpse of suggestion.

In pockets
of Alabama
in spring
it snows.
A man plants
a cherry tree               [legs of a skater alone on a pond
the night                    grinding in rhythm, left to right]
of his daughter's 
wedding,
and they come
while he sleeps
to the sound
of his teeth.

As opposed
to what's 
domesticated,
wilds
will never
lie to you
if caught                   [who is that laugh in the fridge
like this:                   door's rubbery seam splitting]
a doe, staring,
sapling limbs
half-ground
into splinter-spittle
behind black
mouth rims.

Motion
-activated
back porch
shine falls
at the scar
barked feet                 [fur on the crotch of crumped
of the blackgum              jeans where cozied the cat]
trunks, thick
bramble
demarcating
yard's end lit
in cataract blue.
Still, he sleeps.

They always
Come hungry.
The doe
passing frost
frothed down
the trees'                  [balancing a cotton tuft on the
dark rows.                   tongue, for just one more hour]
A bride's
twitched spine.
What could be
less permanent 
than being
only a daughter
to men.

Part of me has lived forever
part of me is already dying

when I wade into the late August
stink of a pond I must touch again
some part of last summer's algae bloom

how exhausting to start and start again
better to continue

flea eggs live dormant in the sofa
through winter's long cool
and hatch in May

an invasion
never sleeps

if I were glass would I also
be ocean would I also be
driftwood a doorframe

if the same bit of ocean 
licks my skin twice
does the fabric of the universe tear

and make a new gash
for me to walk through

how long must I stay 
in the universe's outer threshold

what will it sound like 
when I leave

He loves me is the sound of a flower. Somewhere right now a single truth is staring out at you he loves me not. Throw yourself down in the field he loves me from right here the sky is wider and really does contain everything he really does. This time of year is not so cruel, not knowing is cruel he loves me not. Lying in a field of choices tilting in the sun is cruel. How does a flower know he loves me. Out of an entire field of imposters he loves me not, how does a flower know the truth he loves me. All the field's ears perk up he loves me. How exactly does a wish work. First it must be whispered he loves me! and then once all the petals are off a wind will come he loves me and you will float away and the world he loves me and the birds, all the soft white birds below you. 

Now an army of dogs, gnawing, stamping mud into linoleum. Now a fire-breathing dragon. Now hats and coats and cloaks, now the clock forcing my hand. I could set fires or ferry a bucket. Glass buttons on a violet dress or a burning armoire in a flooded house. To leave, as in suddenly. Or to tidy the mud room and set plates for supper. Someone speeds toward me in a dark blue car. Someone else paces in a room made of windows. Door number one or door number two? I'm the girl in heels who spins the wheel; I'm the contestant and America's watching. I'm in the mud room, dirty from wandering. The women who want me are always so clean. 

We're face to face on the banks
of a dried out lake, a letter
in your upturned palms. You tell me 
to take it, but each time I try,
it melts into your wrist at the spot 
where the blood beats loudest.
You turn your pockets inside out 
and show me my name, sharpied
on the cloth lining. Every hour
on the hour a tour group leaves
to explore the dusty basin: 
strangers, masts of ships,
rotted wood, fossilized bones
of unidentified fish.

I don't want to peel the carrots or wash
the knife or write poems anymore about
how he fucked me or wronged me or stole
my book about heartache and Mallarmé
and the muteness of the body. I don't want
to pluck the stray hairs between my eyebrows
or wait a reasonable amount of time to write
him back or lather the conditioner into my
scalp while I think I hate myself I hate myself
I hate myself like the little engine that could.
My new book says you cannot stop thinking
even if you think you can. I think I can write
to this new guy. He's a 92% match & likes
Judith Butler & bacon wrapped dates & has
a pretty good grasp of syntax. Am I a snob?
I'm sick of making these little well-behaved
poems that sit and eat and shit and talk and
fuck at all the right times. At parties I tell
the same story: how he dumped me on the last
day of our Parisian vacation and played Angry 
Birds on the plane ride home. I stared down
at the clouds until they were no longer clouds.
I couldn't say what love is anymore but could
use the word love in a poem and really mean it. 
I'm mean sometimes, I'll admit it. I press my face 
against the window just to feel its voicelessness. 
Across the street the leaves on the tree turn at once 
in the wind like a school of fish, and I think how 
everything shifts, how he flipped onto his back
in his sleep, how the light touched our bodies until 
our bodies were no longer there to be touched. 

First, build a wall. 
Any material will do:

brick, salt, cake, flesh. 
Now, sit on one side

and think about what you have done.

My father photoshops the word "waterfall" over the waterfall in the photo. In case I didn't know, in case I had forgotten. I admire the word waterfall, a clothed thing. It clambers over rocks, turning natural tricks. If only I could forget about the megachurch over the hill with air-conditioned legs inside. If only I were thirsty or had a vestigial pail. It's like whale watching, waiting for my return. Or like waiting for the rain to put out fires in a megadrought. Palm fronds rattle their accordion hands as I open up my megamouth to spit out my share of ashes. 



The ballgame crackles from a tiny television set and shoves the sky into a pocket. My father stares at the air as if there was a ball there. There's a gelatinous substance on the steeple, there's a gelatinous substance, I'm sure of it, though I've never been up there. Now I'll never know love again and love will never know me because the world is a scheme and a scheme cannot lift a saggy liver-spotted hand from a hymnal. 



The little light in the microwave oven comes on when I open the door and it's such a relief not to think about how little things work, like the frozen things invented by men with degrees in taste who study the desires of the tongue and approximate, approximate. How I heat them! Behind every curtain, behind every cupboard, a chasm yawns open to expose the underworld. We shouted verses in the common room until the doctor said, "Shut up or the moon will turn purple and the world will end." Is there an anecdote in here that is worth its weight in salt? I throw a pinch over my shoulder for good luck getting out. 



At night I want to be told stories about bunnies. Bunnies that go to school, wear clothes, fly planes, play instruments. Bunnies that hop to school each morning carrying clarinets in hard black cases. The bunnies try to play a song together, but they produce only squeals. They ask their music teacher, why is this so hard? There comes a pause as long as the fence that keeps the rabbits on one side of Australia. Certainly talking was hard at first too, the music teacher said, but you didn't stop talking. 



My father leaves me sections of the newspaper. The politicians gnash their tiny gray teeth and all the other men brandish their weapons. I scour the obituaries, but they have no specific plans for me. Only the comics suggest a pattern that can hold my interest. I'm convinced that the secrets of the universe are hidden in the folds Lucy's dress when Lucy says, You're an idiot. I have been deceived again by a five-cent therapist. Where is Snoopy going in his aviator glasses? The doghouse in my father's yard is big enough for me, though the dog is dead, and what does that mean? 



The bunnies study the surface of the moon and try to determine whose face it is. Their first and only guess is God's face. The moon is big enough for two of us, but God said he wanted me off the moon. How could I believe that God would ever dream of giving me so much room? Now the rose buds are blooming on the fence out back, but it's like calculus, trying to make an adage out of nothing. The sugar in the sugar bowl hardens into a rock to represent one idea of patience. It's like the blackbird that fills a parabola with pebbles to get the water out again. 



My father does crossword puzzles in his armchair so he can fall asleep inside a word. He doesn't worry that he won't wake up again even after all the long nights he watched me charge around the yard like a rabid thesaurus. I burned through answering machines and conspiracies. I composed poetry about the apocalyptic drought. I said anything in my head and in my head was Holy! Holy! Holy! and Arkansas and Blake-light tragedy. Did I tell you Ginsburg visited me? He stood beside me at the dinner table and said, First thought, best thought. But he was talking about death, not poetry. Was I dead? No, because the plates kept coming. 

It's that rough need to quarter lonely. I've built a house for my poor flaws, falling over balconies. A collection of threads in milk. A handbag of milk. You pass over your hand.

Here are the palms cupped forward asking for poplar trees upended. Here is the formal swinging gown cut open to reveal mismatched zippered fishes. Here is the curling herbal promising a mind's return. The clicking here how it frees me. These are four of the paired mysteries. The fifth is a swan.

I am in some place that was folded and placed in a corner inside me. Is it the peculiar angles that I am living in? Is it the fact that I have only two books? It's in the turn around the corner from the bedroom to the kitchen and it is on all the bridges. The objects turn back to look at you.

Here the laws fall out of paper cups of chocolate. I am stationed to the left of my bright company. If I were selling all of those things then I wouldn't have the kind to sell them all on. Corner-shops of marvelous eyes. Corner-shops of love. The inside of the air beckons.

Who knew that when she placed herself in the distant object she would grow larger. 

Beethoven lays his head on the piano. The listener looks away. 

A circle of sportsmen close in on the doe. 

The sky is hostile, the sky is hostile, the forest
one of many sounds that won't move.

Stuck in the arm of the unclouded day, I whyed and I whyed;
I asked the moon to eat the sun

and the river, for once, to stand still.

Under a cloak of fake night, the thief bypasses what's open 
and goes straight for the locked door.

While Vronsky pours a drink, Anna watches the oncoming train.

Unclose your eyes, wanderer: that's a way, too,
of refusing relief,

a way of sharpening the knife 
while you thunder out a song. 

Body of wood, be my voice.
If your breath sees mine, the fall is coming.

I will never know my abuela,
but I know her eyes.
She dug her mother's shoes out
from graying snowbanks, pulled

that black-shawled woman from glass.
Fingers, stained with banana leaves,
blistered under hard twine.
Men lined up outside her door,

dragging hungry wives and children.
One said, ella es la reina de Harlem.
One said, she's a beggar's filthy palm.
She never fed them all.

They groped the doorframe and pried
the lock, but all she could say was
duerme duerme duerme.
And she'd dream too, of fawns lying

by roads outside the city. That they leapt
towards her, their eyes black or missing;
she feared the impossible angle of their necks.
I know she woke from this dream

with a son in her arms and her womb
on a table. I know she did not ask for this.
And yet: her body, with its dimpled crags,
she admired. She even admired her son,

with his roped knuckles, and the daughter
who was not her daughter. But the space
between her belly and spine was still
empty: a discarded ring.

My loneliness solved
imagining God cut

too. Our confusion,
our soft violence.

The Mississippi
in one hand.

Our loneliness erased
by its endless flaying:

iron ore & clay
crimsoning the banks

gaped wide. Watch
the slow unearthing,

the warm ache. This is
our communion, you & I.

If you give me a river,
I'll give you a blade.

A beautiful woman has sex with me in what may or may not be Hell. 
The walls of her apartment are red,
and she understands nothing, being drunk again on wine

from the bar downstairs. After she falls asleep 
I conduct a Hell-themed experiment.
I light big black sugar ants on fire
with matches, which to them are flaming trees. 
I've built a model of Dante's circles

on the coffee table, and I assign each of their corpses— 
separate the gluttons from the whores
from the traitors. Some float in red rivers of blood
and fire. I staple others together
in a permanent sex.
Dante claims it's winter in the worst circle

and I agree. Satan is a dead bat I stabbed
and stuck in the freezer, his wings now cased in ice. 
I wake the woman and ask:
do you want this to happen to you??
To Satan, you are nothing but an ant.
And his wings are cased in ice.

She says she doesn't give a shit about Satan,
and I shouldn't worry about myself. She kisses me 
and falls back asleep.

But I am alive, and Satan is small
and dead and his wings are melting. I can move 
the ants around as I please. The woman is asleep. 
Still, I walk downstairs, into the bar,
kiss any
man with a cross around his neck.

When night she plunge to bone violet cricket saw she hear each song eaten slow she breathe in salt dirt skin she turn as hot as noon and when her veins swap blue she call the hollow home she bring the shadows down.


          *


Lack, I left to follow no more crumb as star I hunker I coil I remember only a room and in it something blooms burns I mistake moths for plums I grow blue always thinking of those crows somewhere south, outside. 


          *


Edge-blown or end-blown, purlicue. Dear xyster or mother. I'm aflutter, an odalisque, all languish. Water-lilies. Hollow. Limn me, epilimnion. I'm floating, lithe. Transluce. Illume. Elsewhere, a desert.

I will mount 
a bright horse.

I will know what it is
to shift and quicken.

I will hound ahead
without with or roof.

Where I will go 
(eager door, cloud-thicket, in),
my hide will ride.

Body my fallen sky,
my treasure-dog,

be good when dead.
Hunt without danger or sleep.

Body, when you are all 
I can do, how I will lie. 

How I will house the wind
in my eye.

Your mom belongs to you like the bivalve
of your heart belongs to its right chamber. 
Much like the night belongs to frog ballads. 
Like the poison belongs to lovers—sure,
star crossed and doomed. Your daughter body rests 
part way between the push, the wait, the pull, 
between the grief and Chaka Khan. She checks
her face, mascara poised, her round mouthful 
of O. Cigarette lit, her cheap snifter 
of brandy on the edge of the tile sink. 
She grins at you through the fogged-up mirror 
in her light blue, sequined tube top. She winks.
She prefers you happy and her song's on. 
So, smile and sing along. Soon she'll be gone. 

When the last of the bison die,
Grandpa sends me to fetch the good fog.

I glean the gutters and gather wisps of cirrus
strung through the trellis in the garden.

Grandpa rolls morning mist into optic nerves.
He sends me over the fence for a beehive.

Honeycomb whistles and hums in my hands.
In the workshop we catalogue our supplies:

a bicycle chain, a hornet's nest, sap, and soot.
Here is the body chronicled for us, blood shed.

I watch Grandpa reassemble the beasts from memory.
He bows ribs from fir and stitches the coat of fog.

I carry the light of the moon from the lawn,
shards pruned by the maple's shadow, the horns.

There is nothing I cannot uncover in the mud,
in the woods and eaves, where we search in need.

I fall asleep in the rock of the willow, tracing bison
through the stars with my finger. Grandpa builds.

When the night reaches its darkest, the house rumbles.
The herd tramples up the stairs and bolts out the door.	

They grunt and spit. They fill the yard. In the basement,
the dust still rising in the air, Grandpa sweeps the floor. 

The man you call father was a fireman, a farmer, a pharmaceutical salesman. We blinked fast and you were conceived in an avocado, fully formed, all tequila and open sky. At night, I'd take off my skin, put it back on. Pull the shades while he flipped through the remote looking for porn. So it went like this for a decade or more, all of our closets emptied of their bodies. Full-frontal. Everything burning all the time. Even the pets, a sizzle of white fur or black tail. Everything good until the neighborhood children grew restless at night, took to foraging for oranges in our fridge, Started the rumor of a baby made entirely of bread. He was dead by then, your father, replaced by a bartender, a bookbinder, a beautiful wretch. At night, we'd take you out and roll you back and forth on the floor until you couldn't stop laughing.

I can't keep a blender working without breaking it, but oh, how your anger astounds me. At five, you live in the space between the coffee table and the floor, reciting Shakespeare and smashing all my plates. At intervals, balancing every dish in the apartment on your head and plummeting down the stairs. It's scary, how much you wander, for your age, gone down to the docks hunting shiny objects to fashion into weapons. Every fake Rolex a noose to strangle some loathsome doll who has it coming. Morning, and you trash every lightbulb. Some chubby Susie on trial for embezzling tiny bottles filled with imaginary milk. Some Ken doll done Barbie wrong. The stuffed rabbits prodded, witnesses to the carnage. The creamer sours and I burn the toast to black. You fill my cup with imaginary tea while I lean toward the spoon you've held to my throat. 

You are heavier than you look. Constructed of bone and air, you hook you fingers into the soft parts of my neck. Ride shotgun over landscapes filled with rusted out cars and rotting trees. In the beginning, you were small enough to keep inside my totebag, but now you want more. Warring with strangers on the internet, riding roughshod over dreams filled with other feral children, setting fires and fucking up machinery. In museum, you keep rescuing the poor taxidermied animals and bringing them home. The living room fills with patchy leopards and moth-eaten zebras. There's a box of beetles under my bed. A cache of dead birds in the fridge. They sing at night the way all dead things do, like their lives depend on it. 

The lake is one of us. The unruly, ambiguously grayish mass of it is the sloshing, perturbed body of our family. The beaches, each, individual relatives: some boldly announced, well-maintained. Others almost accidental, accessed by various forms of trespassing, full of the mark of reckless behavior, littering mouths and misplaced stones fallen from steep embankments. Forever permanent in their dislodged and broken state.

There are beaches I go to when I want one particular kind of experience or another. None of them are comfortable enough for a lazy afternoon of sunning and languor. Some are pocked in a mean carpet of awkwardly shaped stones and broken glass, decomposing seagulls and graffiti that teach you words and images to match the unspeakable curiosities and terrors you've harbored since you were old enough to start paying attention to certain tide patterns of behavior.

Sometimes I am eight and I go to the official county beach with its windstripped wooden sign and my Dad's there with me and we have our towels in that outdated pattern and my bathing suit in its outdated pattern because we don't own anything new. But we are not interlopers. We already know the fleshy, sullied scent of the beach. Fisheyes plucked by hungry gulls who themselves will later putrefy against the cradling lull of where the waves meet the shore. We know that this unsavory peristalsis is the lake's real enterprise. Not furnishing the comfort of the Sunday afternoon picnic. Though the beach tolerates us and allows us to leave our own concerns to decompose, ugly and raw but silent as they leave our head there against the warm sand and are swallowed for the time being. We don't un-see the fish or the gulls and we wonder whether or not it's anyone's job to clean that kind of thing up.

Uncle Ed will stop drinking for a spell if my Gram enlists him to help cut the lopsided vanilla cake that his wife made while also drinking. The birthday sign is windstripped by a hurried cousin's hand, earnest but full of pressure to set the whole afternoon off right. And us at the party in our outdated clothing, knowing the brined scent of Jim Beam on his collar might be uncle Ed's chief enterprise. But the sign and the cake tell us to do our best to trod on the awkward rocky surface because everyone is hungry for the warmth of that particular kind of experience that is birthday.

Sometimes I'm fifteen and my brother's friends cyclone through the parentless, permanently dislodged safety of my home and I grab everything I can up into a threadbare but sufficient backpack and wait for the whitecapped curl of their laughter to flood from the kitchen. Then through the living room, down the hall: a malt liquor soaked rush that covers the sound of me angling my body up through the unforgiving metal window frame of my bedroom and out. Into the moon-policed night, I run like when I was eight and saving the whole neighborhood from defeat in the roiling final seconds of Capture The Flag or Kick The Can. I run until I am swallowing blood. I run until I am picked eyeless by the hunger to forget what I have seen my brother's friends do. I arrive at the tunnel that runs under Route Five and drops me off at the tiny snarl of beach. I eggshell step over rocks like incisors and bitten nails, rocks the angle of broken ankles, chipped like the laminate on the door to the bedroom I can't sleep in—rocks whose only comfort is their familiarity.

I walk until I arrive at that large concrete slab suspended from its fall into a precarious but permanent slant like a silent lip. I curl underneath it and think about what good fortune I have for my arrival and for the protection from rain. I am not an interloper here. This unnamed beach is the imaginary body of the person who hears me, sees me, witnesses me and who is bound to me by blood.

Sometimes I'm at that spot some miles away from where I live, a campsite whose name is a mashup of the two towns who claim the land: Evangola. I'm ten and running barefoot with my cousins. My largest toe is crusted in blood from routinely stubbing it, because I'll take the time, again and again, to run back to Gram's camper for another band-aid but not to put on so much as a pair of flip flops.

The lake curls like an eyeroll under the arched brow of the embankment. The trees braid in and out of each other, bent bizarre and desperate against the wind and gravity. They grow from the side of the cliffs and point their branches into the sky or against each other like tipsy revelers stumbling home or wondering where they laid the cake knife.

We climb down the embankment. The trees help and hinder our limbs at every foothold, interchangeably cautious and reckless. Finally we're on the shore. My cousin Stacy says people die out here. She says teenagers hang themselves from the trees. Babies fall off the edge of the cliff. Sometimes they float away to nowhere or sink. People disappear out here, and they're never found again. I stare down at my feet, the bloody nail beds, the lacerated arches. I wonder if the damage was worth the arrival. Stacy asks if I want to smoke a cigarette. I say we'll go back to the campsite smelling like smoke and everyone will know. Stacy says no one will be able to smell anything over their own booze breath and she's right. We share a cigarette and Stacy commandeers the conversation into boobs and boys and I say vomit and Stacy laughs and says I'm such a kid even though we're exactly the same age and even though I meant it about the cigarette.

Dad calls the lake America's Largest Toilet Bowl. I wonder, does this mean it's okay for me to piss in it and will people know if I do or what. I find my own way to mitigate the telltale ring of warmth that surrounds me when I do pee, which is to walk around in very broad circles or even kick my legs a bit because a smile and a heft of choreographed movement will mask a lot of bad behavior. But that's not just why Dad calls it a toilet bowl.

He uses 'toilet bowl' as a stand in for dumpster or trash can, like how my mouth can be a trash can or a toilet bowl when I'm talking smart which doesn't actually mean smart, either. Toilet Bowl means a place where we've lost the effort to care about what goes on. The lake is a floating assembly of chewed up sandals, syringes, pulpy paper cups, Budweiser cans bent like a spent relative into the cushion of a steady easy chair. The lake holds the abject of every single afternoon in the dissonant melody of collapsed time. The lake is the photograph taken in Gram's den that captures both the moment before the candles were blown out and the look uncle Ed and aunt Margo were giving each other behind the smiling preteen. The lake is a slack line of adjectives that refuse to sink under the surface even when Dad's packing up the car and you haven't finished your milkshake and your Mom has decided she's walking home and only one of these things can be thrown in the trash. Then Mom's gone on whitehot feet and Dad and I enter the purgatory of the front seat with its scalding vinyl chastisement and then we remember Mom has the car keys.

My Dad's usually there in the smart mouth moments to give me a precise and highly effective reminder about why I should care about what comes out of it. But no one's there on the beach to give anyone else a reminder about why we shouldn't all enact our own choreography to distract from the part we take in turning the lake into a toilet bowl. Or no one seems to care. I am punished for using my mouth to house garbage and the lake is punished because the people who came before us set the example for us to do the same thing.

I wonder sometimes who tucks the lake in and puts it to sleep. I wonder if the excarnated bodies of the gulls and fish eventually get picked up by the sprawling tongue of the tide and lose their remaining substance to the water that fed them in life. Or if they disintegrate, like the truth behind a tongue, lodged in the muscular wet sand where the water comes in to change the silt of the conversation again and again. The water is pushed by something greater. The water can't help it. I wonder if someone in an orange vest with the beach's name ironed on to the back of it arrives at the end of the birthday picnic with a tidy shovel and metal dustbin to collect everything ugly and then I feel bad for thinking that dead things are ugly. I wonder what is fair, and what purpose it serves for me to register the scent of the fish or uncle Ed's fireproof breath with disgust though I know the lake will always produce space for both. Sometimes the providence of space itself, not fairness, seems to be the truth of things.

Sometimes I travel back five thousand miles to the lake and instead of going to the county beach or the campsite beach, I head for the tunnel that runs under Route Five. As though it were still 1994, someone has recently unloaded all their wisdom through the red and yellow mouthpiece of a Krylon can. I amble in the dark down the craggy slope, aware of how my body holds less space for balance now, twentysome years later, and hope that the damage will be worth the arrival. The lake has divorced the moon for a spell and the night does the work of erasing its expression from the moving photograph. But I can hear it, like a cat burglar inside a bedroom, the wind announcing the water's apnea. I wonder how many more steps I can manage before my feet get wet.

I stand in a place that feels like the edge and listen as the lake both belies and betrays its diagnosis and I wonder if the collective corpus of plastic left-behinds and once living things change the way we hear the sound and what it might have sounded like before. I wonder at the rhythms we can't help but undertake and what greater thing guides them. Still I hear my cousin telling me about fallen babies and suicides and I think about how water is considered the arbiter of memory but yet wonder if it is still considered memory if no one remains to speak it. I draw up the image of the birthday photograph and wonder if uncle Ed and aunt Margo's expressions are my memory or theirs and which one was more true and if each of the three of us feels like we alone hold it and if the photo even exists any more. I wonder if anything ever drowns and sinks or if it just moves into a deeper space and waits. 

Sunday sets its white fire
in rhinestone. Liberty walks home her legs move bone 
to bone. One part of her brain
is controlling her feet while the other drops
off the tree of heaven. Decidedly the husband
will never return—She passes little gardens, clipped
grass, houses like wads of paper, a church
in absent-minded shadow, a blind
curve up a sudden hill. One by one the trees stop 
breathing. A shooting star vanishes, 

never to be see again by human eyes.
She would like to kill herself but she's told she must 
go on, at any cost. Obedient, Liberty 
thinks to herself without wonder, to the laws 
of meat, like gravity or Christ—
How you postponed this reckoning Liberty thinks, 
by believing you lacked a desire
to know. Here, while you are listening
to a leaf scrape air, your heart
mudsmeared 

Hollereyed the moon tries on gas station, soda 
machine, locked toilet, linedried bedsheets, a caterpillar 
fording yard dirt. 

A naked buckeye in torn bandage. In one
glass juice, whiskey in another. Photons fall. The radio 
talks back. She is crying now, her head thrust, one
hand on her forehead, the bare syllables collecting like 
water over her breasts. 

He is gone. 

(A couplet makes a stab in the dark.)
(The just enough-ness impulse that would keep her breathing.) 

The black silhouette of a cat rearranges itself on a road that loses 
itself in landscape. 

(Why not why.) (Tell the truth or I'll jump.) 

Lord Liberty thinks, it is so easy: to say someone loved you. Pawned 
himself, limb after. Pulled his spent pronoun through.
Light, at his back. 

Let us be clear: I am telling only one story & I am telling it 
on a good day. 

Liberty is in love; you stand in front of your love.

Thinking I have my reasons. (Who are we.) (We are not.)

But the truth is: there are three exits (more       than enough.) 

Those first six months on Orange Street—
the landlord who didn't know I lived with you

so if I approached while he was there, changing the door-light or clearing leaves from the stone
front steps, I had to walk right past 

and make my long loop through the neighborhood until he left. 
And the smell of coffee and breakfast in the hallway on a cold 
                      morning, and how each time

you went to the corner store you'd come back crying, having stopped again
to pet the stray with the missing eye, having spent the money you meant for cigarettes

on a can of milk and a bag of treats to leave the cat. Those first six months: New York, the warm fall, 
trying to decide how to live, how we fought and fought and stopped and sat 

on the front stoop talking about the young family that moved in to the big house 
across the street, lived there one month, and disappeared—ghosts, 

you speculated, a sick parent, a job in a different city, divorce—and how we shrugged then 
and stubbed our cigarettes on the banister and went inside, because the cold weather had come 

overnight, and we had the heat on for the first time, and together we were just beginning a life. 

It's when the gastroenterologist says,
"you have the esophagus of an eighty-year-old" I remember
I've been sad longer than I've been alive, so

maybe this all does make sense.
Hearing those words, I think,
could I trade my esophagus with Mama's?

Could she trade her mind/memories for mine? What is
the blue book value on a box full of glass paperweights 
and a watchdog without a bark?

That's how this feels. This body/life,
it's becoming lousy at taking up space.
One summer, my body dissolved like

communion wafers in the rain. Every day, 
a flood I was ill prepared for. One day, 
the rain ends, I think. I've been sad longer than I've been alive. 

I write an email to the boy I met in Thailand
and reread it dozens of times. I don't want to open 
the curtains because I'll feel obligated to participate. 
The fan turns and I'm aware of the rip in my sheets, 
how it grows bigger daily, how the heater 
is making my mouth dry. The icecaps are melting 
releasing small bubbles trapped for thousands of years
and you've only been dead two weeks. The fact that I'm
bored is a small suicide, like being evicted from my own life. 
Tomorrow when my friend asks me how I am, 
I will refer to people as plants. Snakeweed, Spider Plant, 
Peace Lily. I wonder why dead people have facebook pages. 
I wonder about the time in the shed and under the hedge.
Insomnia is a terrible thing to waste as is fruit and beauty. 
I wake up with indigestion. I understand you not wanting
to be in this world. 

I.

Ba, I'm praying 
that a hummingbird hands me its ability 

to hover and fly backwards, 
back into a timepiece where I am 

myself in a bath water 
you prepared. Startled 
that a flower doesn't bloom, 

I brood over the idea 

of bereavement; a nest 
egg of sorrow. 
Because there is an ounce of life unfurling inside my tears, 

there is no right way 
to swallow a sullen pill. 
There is a spark 

of lifelessness in the bulb 

that fails to bloom. 
I miss you cleaning 
the dirt in my ears,

miss you wiping filth 

off my kneecaps, 
scrubbing my face 
often, so tenderly. Remember the day you put me to sleep 

on grandmother's mat? 
Everything I need 
now is inside the threadbare 

blankets you wrapped me in, 

because here, my body is a fleabag 
where loneliness governs 
like a dictator.


II.

from the past, Ba, 
dying is like moving into a future, 
past the street bursting with voices 
of the people you know 


I am a girl who looks 
like her father . . .


III.

What do I know of a prayer, other than it's a place 
where my knees root the ground and palms 
curve towards God like a child 
waiting to drink from his body? 

Because prayers often beget silence,
I am in communion with the half-cleaved side 
of my melancholy.

My mouth wads the puzzle in the air,
where I imagine your body pillowing mine 
on the heels of your hands. 


IV.

Ba, when I close my eyes, 
we are looking the moon in the eye, 
the perfect place to dream into. Our bones 
gleaming in its dim lights. 

Mother once dropped in my ears 
these words; a fantasy comes true 
if imagined thoroughly. 


V.

I hear stars cracking. 

Perhaps, 
you are the most tragic victim
of my fantasy. 

From where I stand, 
it's easier to pull the earth 
closer to my forehead,

than to wait for my prayers 
to be answered. 


VI.

I am lacing your hair into a rope of desire; 

a collection of things 
beyond one's reach. 






Ba, what if this rupturing of emotions is just a compass? 


Sun's scooping up Lake Michigan in her arms like an armful of overripe fruit. I'm sitting, a rusty old swing, iron frame with damp wood slats. One of those where you need to lay a towel down first to keep the mold off your ass. Grandma, Papa, and I are together, but they keep slipping between languages & I can't quite keep up. Yule! She yells at him, slapping his wrist as if he were a child committing gluttony or sharing a family secret. I've forgotten most my Latvian and can't be sure what upset her so much. Muddy, he grabs her arm, confessing whatever sin he might've committed. I don't think he knows what he did either. She's Marija, but he calls her the name of wet dirt. He's Uldis, but she calls him the name of a December incantation. Jazeps, I think she's calling my name now. Do you know what we call this time of night? I want to tell her it's called the gloam, where the sun's newly baptized, but still lights the roads of the sea. But she feels better answering her own questions. The edge of night, boy. When I was your age, we would count the months by how long it took to pass. As she began the countdown, the sky finally bruised, and the lighthouse became incredibly relevant.

Five, for Riga.
Four, for Leokadjia. 
Three, for Modests. 
Two, for Kreslins. 
One, for us.

Grandma is crying, Yule is saying a prayer he forgot the words to, and the moonlight, diluted like melted ice in coffee, made sure I missed it all. 


]       The arrival of the traveler at the base of the silo.
]       The thick-edged scene in woodcut
]       What's the distance between the doorframe and the frame
]       Excepting the crack therein, drawn by hand
]       Where the asymptote does not touch is the same as the ragged edge.
]       The exceptional brink-maker.
]       The exceptional brink-maker's daughter.
]       In the center, one grain falls through at a time.
]       Except in the moment of overlap, her hand.
]       However, his army of crows.
]       The city of unsprouted endings, away, away
]       Where it takes place behind the frame
]       Where it takes place behind the thick frame-lines around them
]       Where the thin-lipped illustrator lives
]       Not touching, episodic
]       It gets stuck when you try to open it.
]       By hand, one pieces together the limits
]       Important to collect all the small grains of data
]       At the keyhole, the traveler 

I, one flower petal eruption 
Instantly suspended, 
Fleshed,
In single sliver—

Remember, they said, 
This is your weakness. 
Remember, I said,
This is my only reason.

Push past them. 
Indentation permitting 
Bone plates, follicles, 
Nerve-endings,
To be enmeshed in—

Me, shield in 
Me, the fields 
My own. 
Own this.

When erupts this
One visible ink
Of all my inner geysers,
The elemental stream begins. 
Moon-drops me home, 
Side-curves me forward.

Remember this.

Root deep Into each 
Tendril 
Bloom. 

Up & down the trunk
she grips the cub
by its neck

dropping it from
growing heights
letting its small body

catch itself
with claws on bark.
I watch this all

from our bed
without you
during those

darkening hours
when every animal
desires an other.

On a limb—a hawk
with a field mouse
limp in its beak

& above it all
an airplane
shooting south.

I shift in the bed
but you are not there—
only the raccoons outside.

All evening
they continue
to climb & fall. 

In the cab we fill with too many friends, he holds my knee without anyone noticing. 
It's the only gesture of his I like that night.
In my purse I keep a beer cap, a black seashell, and a candy heart.
I think of the objects only when they spill out, then I put them back.
Yet again an April snowstorm. On the drive I look
for the bald spots on hilltops where there is one tree too few.
Plants have no memory, they say, because forgetting allows them to store energy.
I remember everything, but my moods surprise me. 

Somewhere in the white choke of snow               by the harbor in Baltimore, I lost
small blooms of me: silver hairs, eyelashes,       so many parts of my body,
fossils locked in crusts of ice. Fingers           to the taunting of your pulse, I imagined
kindling a bonfire, burning                        the slow wood, red ghost-glow through the 
hemlocks. Caught in the blinding                   hailstorm, crowned in rain, I felt the cold
throttle of your shaking hands                     purpling my throat. Eyes shut,
there was no place                                 darker. In April, the corn grew high enough      
for hiding. I pulled the thorns from your palms    for you. I dug out the splinters
and kept them. So much fury                        in your softness, in the flowing, blue veins
within such quiet skin. There are dragonflies here like spools of that ocean: cerulean, mortal,
wings turning a kinetic wheel. The white water,    always falling deeper into dark earth,
rising as if to tempt you under, as if to whisper  into you.

I.

If I could, I would mark each page
with a bloody thumbprint. Every cell of me
a reminder that I am both living and dead.
I am made to make and inside me,
there is something dedicated to my unmaking.

In the classic story, the Hero, ignorant of his potential,
is charged with a divine quest. He descends to death,
reemerges victorious, is crowned and praised.
To cross the river Styx, he must pay in coins.
To cross the river, I pay in 12 vials of blood.

I am no hero. I am a fool making something out of blood.
Each day, I descend into the depths, guided
by unpronounceable angels like Cobicistat, Tenofovir,
Emtricitabine, Elvitegravir. I offer my liver and kidney
to feed them. The story goes that after his ordeal,
the Hero rises to new life. But, I told you, I am not the Hero.

My ordeal will last beyond my life,
just as it existed before I was born.
I have inherited the trial, will bequeath it in due time.
For now, I will make of it what I can.

The cells inside us which create all blood are haematopoietic,
from the Greek "blood-making," or, you could translate,
"blood-poetry." One thing borne in blood to be born in blood.
I will mark each page with an indelible print.


II.

Who will I be untrue to today?
My body has been at war with itself
since I learned how to cry. I will betray myself
if only to feed myself a myth.

The one man I came close to loving
sent me panicked messages
about his discolored tongue (I lied,
I am sure I loved him).

But he is 2300 miles away,
safe from the trap of my skin. In the end,
the Hero's journey is singular,
tempted by the ghost of love.

This man confides his secrets in me.
I remember plush lips, no lips
a man should have and the comfort
of our own beds, a loving separation,
a matched desire for peace, then, apart.


III.

On the interaction of HIV-1 and haematopoiesis:
the vicious thing will find the root.
The Hero, too, seeks the root
of his ordeal. At this point in the story,
he is at a moral crossroads. How lucky
that he can solve his riddles. I have told you
that I am no Hero. I mire while he rides on.
What is inside me destroys the blood, but still
my blood continues its poetry.


IV.

The Hero heads back home. I cannot.
The Hero is a fictional construct, held back
by nothing more than my pen. His power
moves forward along the page. But my body
cannot move back across the river. No savior
has come to sing for my bones.

I have taken a seat in Hades' court. I
have eaten the pomegranate seeds. All 12.
If I am to be trapped, I may as well be noble.
I may as well accept the cold touch
as the one I will know the closest.

Resurrection has never been our forte.
Even when the anger wilts, even when
my numbers look uninfected, some part of me
is filled with death. I am jealous of Achilles—
I was plunged into the slow waters by my heart.


V.

Isn't that the trick of things?
That there is nothing as lonely as a disease?
The underworld is filled with all of us.
Each name is a dark dead end:

One book, dead; one play,
dead; two canvasses, dead.
We have only relics of them.
None of these heroes ever made it to three.

This could be my one, my only blood magic.
I might be comforted knowing
the Hero has only one story too.
But remember, at the end,

he climbs out of the claw-etched pit. 

Moments between me
and me, I dissected
the pains, split them

neck to belly. Found

the boy, a blue
plastic bucket full
of sky. Barnacles climb
his skin, cover his eyes. The bay

                      (how lucky you are
                      to have this as your
                      backyard, a voice says
                      over and over)

sheds years like
exoskeletons; a field
of grails rusts
in a drop of rain.

His best friend
having spoken the words
I love you—muddy,
his childhood, stranger
that shore.

I traced the picnic back to the fridge,
the credit card, the father;
the gay to the
normal, the fruit
to the root
veiled in earth, growing
holier by the minute. 

Explain the road held hostage by 
the three-legged waltz of a dog, 
twisting milk in his grin—say
it wasn't really a dog, but a man 
back for revenge & unable to lure 
his adversary out of his home—say
it wasn't really a road, but a dream 
our imaginations paved. That's why 
slingshots veered left & we missed 
him every time. Explain the day

we ducked supper for the .22 rifle, 
became hosts to the noiseless rabbits, 
how they arrived like thoughts into 
the grass we guarded, & came away 
with the bells of three bodies gripped
in our hands, headed to the pines
for a stew on branch-fire, the peppers
Abuelita grew in a wheelbarrow
the secret ingredient. A few spoons

made us mummies trying to talk 
our bodies out of going blind, 
back & forth wiping our brows
in an ecstatic hell of found time.
Explain, but it won't be enough 
for the dice roll that told us which
rooster to dub with a razor blade, 
how it took only a day to train it 
to blaze its feathers at turkeys, 
even the ones that attacked
Tía when she wore skirts.

So many days are tunnels. At the end 
of one, nets of sunlit water for bathing 
outside. Another leads to a flea market 
where all our money pitched in affords 
only one pair of boxing gloves, so we 
flip a bottle cap to decide who gets
to fight with his right hand. 

Etymology of Improvised Explosives

IMPROVISED, meaning "done or made using whatever is available,"
	ablative of the Latin improvisus, meaning "not foreseen; unexpected,"
	ablation in English meaning "removal of body tissue, a glacier,"
	from the Latin ablatio, ablatio
	being perfect passive participle      of aufero ("I take away, steal, snatch; 
					      I cease from, desist from, leave off")
passive from the Old French passif, meaning "suffering,"
passif from the Latin passivus, meaning "capable of suffering,"
suffering being something done unto body tissue or a glacier,
or whatever is available, suffer or the suffering having no tie to pain
in the Latin & pain, & pain, being from the Latin for "punishment,"
results from & is the result of punishment, & in the face of punishment,
with whatever is available, one improvises.

EXPLOSIVES, meaning "a substance that can be made to burst violently,"
	from the Latin explodo—blown apart into its separate parts,
	ex-, meaning "out"; -plodo,           meaning "I clap; 
						       I applaud,"
	applause being something that marks an ending, an ending
	often being indicated by presence of an echo, & Echo,
	being both a name & a punishment, was punished
	with magic, a word derived from the Old Iranian
	meaning "to be able; to have power," power
	itself also meaning "to be able" in the Old French infinitive,
	& since to be punished means to be unable,
	power's improvisation is a thing to be applauded,
	& when power is made using whatever is available,
		how can one blame the suffering, once named, for bursting violently? 

  then forget the exit.

Here:

What's real. What's not real. Unforgiving blue.
(Heartbreak is like that ocean.)

Yes, I knew it once before.

I was tired from a war that never reached me but
               could recognize it like a sentence going on & on & . . .

How in drowning, limbs-lungs learn to swim,
bodies all together learn to float
                      nailed against each other.

Sensing such brutality, we face our sun.

Point this out:
                                            taste of honey,
                                                 mouths to cup an exit. 

My hair grows thick and wild like the night.

When I turn 17, I shave it off and try to throw
                      my body from a rooftop in Saigon.

Fact: there are so many ways to translate "stop,
don't jump" in Vietnamese, my mother's language,
though I've never learned to say it.

Fact: depression kills more girls who look like me
than napalm ever did. Fact: my face is not a moon.
My hair is black. My eyes are black.

Fact: the face eclipsed by night becomes a practice
in surviving all the colors of my body. 

Uncle Thuong is kneeling in the bayou,
               in his hands, puppets from the north.

My mother asks to try it, and he lets her.

We were only children in the swamp. Let us cross.


º


Uncle Thuong is dead. We are sleeping.

Lilies bloom beside him. Let us cross a valley.

Uncle Thuong is sinking. May we trip
               wire between us?


º


Midnight blue to silver, then a water bison
dried up by the road, shows its teeth. 

grandmother    i refuse love i sin
weeping with earth's knife i drop
this body    and empty
myself 
horror    here! i! am! 
our blood unrecognizes 
each other    the other
skinloud 
boneloud eyeloud
this moon    your body
what's left of it    griefdream—to know
i survived first: loyalty
you've grown
uglier
your hands covered with cuts—
                                 each a long and short vowel 
                                 it's time     ta'a
                      ta'a     —fe'ai     —fe'ai 
                            a        e        i        o        u

                      fa
    ga    la mo nu 
                      pi sa    ti

   vi 

                      o no     wildness thieved     i'll speak/ in english
to every awe 

                                                                                                   & embarrassment— 


      *


i seal my heart

in the belly 

of a great reptile

everyday     i feed it 

everyday     throw it meat

pour water on its great green head

wipe smut from its early morning eyes

ou te alofa ia te oe     i tell it

i promise     alofa ia te oe


      *


i am your most fierce

warrior     mother do what

you will with me 

i will do what you will

myself     an animal

no spot or stain

no truer body     giving thanks

to the sacred fish     at last

i arrange my kills

to control the soliloquy

that solitary distrust

my impatience     all skulls

neatly forward

my real self     all tender

tender red 

I wanted to murder him,
but his body kept getting
in the way. We learn to
live with that sawtoothed
loudness, caught halfway
between the wonder &
the wanting. & how I
wanted. I wanted his eyes
blue & razed shut. Wanted
apology like unbent knee.
Pulse cold, childish. How
much can a thing whistle
before all that's left is air?
Such a strange syntax we
live inside. Waltz through
aurora. Gulp down bullets
instead of the pills that
could make this all better.
God, I am tired of writing
poems about sickness.
When he spoke, I heard
my father: you know I only
ever wanted the best for you.
As if I were afraid of
leaning into wounded.
As if I couldn't gut him
& run, easy as birthplace.
Easy as the voices finally
shocked into silence. A
kind of hook here, say it:
careful, darling, you're
showing your hand. So
many times my body
has been more ache
than human. In which
direction must I search to
find a name for the curdle
in my throat? Slipping
on melting beasts, forcing
open memory's jaws. &
how I wanted. I wanted
to snap that lovely neck
the way a gun cocks into
song. I wanted not to hurt
anymore, my kneecaps
halfway shattered, the
dark consuming itself
over & over again. Just
once, I wanted reciprocity.
I wanted not to be the
crazy one. Just once, I
wanted the sky to wake
up on time & remind us
of the little mouths with
no names except erasure.
I could have lived on that:
every angle a limb could
break. Every way his body
yawned into my grasp,
treading the bloodstream,
light going limp, his eyes
that swum & stunk of
remembering. 

My mother wore makeup two times. Once, in a photograph on our piano & one other time I think. She is brilliant. She wears all black & all black socks.

I tell Nell, I don't know how to trust my own leaving anymore, its big neck, back. I tell her, loneliness is like someone small wearing a very large jacket. A frying pan. An animal howl. That heavy gray stone. 

Once, we went skating. The roots of us shooting up through the ice. The perpendicular condensation of similar commercial planes. 

She said, what we are right now is the definition of happiness.
I say, all this is is a parade.

The summer before last I spent ten days in Salt Cedar Flower & mud, sleeping with thunder above treeline. I thought of my parents speaking to their parents like children, knitting socks out of the long strings of whatever happens to us when we go. Death—lightning striking rock—Nell, sleeping soundly, an Isabella Tiger Moth, like LET THE LIGHT IN & LET THE LIGHT IN & LET THE LIGHT IN & LET THE LIGHT IN—like a felt flower taped to an orange tent flap, like the hope in that, like the incongruity of that. 

to the girl in the black crop top
moving through               the blue smoke city
i wanted to write myself into your body

and you               woman with the wild hair
that lovers clung to            got lost in
and you with the white-scorched flame

light pouring      from your mouth—
it hurt               seeing your bones            grind beneath skin
how i needed            to be stopped too

and i wanted to sing      this song to my mother
(fix the parts inside)        under eroded landscape
because to have love and loved her

is to have hated myself so deep—
yellow bird         she said         you bleed
under your alchemy of feathers

and now my desire is to be         nothing i can name
nothing and nothing        but the bottom of a well
struck by light from the sky 

To prepare, elements around the heart constrict, a pulling in; how a body knows before the brain & this cage, too, for impulses, synapses, this sending & receiving of; how we trick ourselves, say belief & mean it; throat in feel of its own hollowness, crowds in, just so; to imbibe, we host, we aggregate; let us rend tissues, collect our molecular weight to mold a new; think what leaving looks like, think your hands in gentle no longer to; oh, the to the to; how erasure beings in untraceable acts; this hip redacted, this spine redacted, our foreheads in delicate press redacted, kitchen sonatas while making enchiladas redacted, close breath in hold of your name redacted; to strike from, to block out, this undoing of what made you, once; think whole, think what now pocks away; say this loose clench in teeter. 

Crumpled in over & over; how this lacquer & metal: a wad violently prepared for discard; what collision resembles; & her cheeks tuck tight into your collarbone; her staccato breath heaves; the smell of her hair; her body in slow between your arms & thankful evolves, beyond a word, beyond a word you take for granted until this moment, now, when her face in your neck; & sister a cellular construct in swell inside your aortic sack; pupils gather the scene where debris litters; pieces of engine where a body is not; knot of you, in gradual unwind, folds so. 

Ghost Girl lies on the floor hoping
the parrot owner will spill
some of his Heaven Hill right into her. 
Instead he sloshes a few drops 
on the parrot who screeches fuck you, 
fuck you, 
               & though the man knows
these are the bird's only words,
he takes it personally, yells fuck you back 
& smacks the bird in its little breast 
               (reader, this is not a gentle story 
because the world isn't a gentle place—
being a bird of high intelligence 
               it'll remember this moment 
& its feathers will fall out). 
The parrot flies, not with wings, 
but with its whole body.
It lands by Ghost Girl. 
               Eye-to-eye
they look at each other. 
               For the first time in a long time, 
she is seen. The parrot 
blinks its dinosaur eyes,
& tries to bite, but its beak 
clashes right through
& it realizes that even this gesture 
is pointless.
Says fuck off,
she does not fuck off. 
               Ghost Girl kisses the raw rose 
blooming on the bird. 
The parrot sees Ghost Girl's empty
body, and she sees all the parrot wants
is a mirror to tap, a little bell to chime, 
and an occasional almond.
The bells in her stomach ring for the bird.
The drunk drifts off & the two on the floor
trade insults, grateful to be seen,
until shared anger becomes a dry well 
they can look into & demand
who will pay, who will pay? 

