Give us an hour or give us a day
to bloom. We have so little time.

We grow out of the landscape’s open mouth,
rising out of its ankles, its great granite wrists
—from the scars on its chest, we burst.

And when we do, we come from everything we can:
broken skull of the calf bleached out white in the light,

dark deer droppings the color and texture of grapes,
plastic bottles and burger wrappers left by the side of the road.
We feel such thirst, desiring. In a short time, we spread:

our song the chorus of a few making millions of us
in one wet April week. New profusion of us

filling ditches and fields for a thousand square miles.
Give us a little more time to live, and we will.
Leave a patch of dead grass near the highway for us,

and we promise to thrive without any complaints—
in this Texas humidity we crave—until summertime comes.

Like a pot of water cooling on the stove,
we eventually reach room temperature. Who knows
what for. The liver grows heavy with holes

grown heavy with pebbles, malignant. Pinhole
camera, little black looking-box. The skin
slips against the weight of the body like a tent

in hard rainfall. None of this is remarkable,
not really, not when you consider the rate
at which steam rises, its molecules seeking out

the cold. Everything wants to be condensed. Focus
a memory, and it shrinks for the aperture. The body
shrivels, laughable. Sad, but not remarkable.

Imagine life as a silent film, true black and white, black
being utter blackness, white like fog in headlights.
Sickly white—a white sink under fluorescent

bulbs. Noisy, buzzing white. The viewer is blind;
he sits too close to the screen. Click-click 
goes the film reel, elliptical. Sad, but not remarkable.

Imagine the water outside has risen, a constant rain
is falling, the leak has sprung. The big one. The floor
of the theater looks solid enough, then rises to meet

the skirts of female viewers, its surface forgiving
as a river. The floor is a river floating popcorn. Here
is your boat; it is reddish-brown, red like a liver.

I have spent three days in bed
watching shooting stars
through an open window.
The things my body is supposed to be,
it is not.
I let out a little blood into a cup
to see what it does.
            It just sits there.
I watch it rest and darken.
A star-quiet moth comes in toward the light,
its orbit smaller with each revolution
until finally, it falls.
I want my blood to become a book,
or a rope, or a chair. I want it
to grow a mouth and teeth.
I want it to crawl, amoeba-like,
out of the cup, to reveal its quiet turmoil:
the moth’s is very small.
It has given up crawling,
as does my wound, which heals.
The blood stops coming
and the flesh closes
            without my saying so.

The laceration runs trim as a dirt road
over the length of her brow, skimming her eyes
right to left before swerving back across her
scalp, skidding softly into her sylvan hair ringed
just this morning with rollers. They rest now
clasped in a box like tackle, her house unlit,
her newborn son and husband asleep in tenuous
silence.

                 Out on Old Hickory, in the moon’s black
absence, she sprawls across the dash, smashed
into the windshield, arms angled all wrong. Her
shattered hip rests slung in her slacks like marbles
in a drawstring bag. Inky smoke halos from
the crumpled hood and her brother, piled
somewhere behind the wheel, begins to moan
and lift his head.

                                  Later, when they’ve pried Patsy
from the glass, buckled her splintered frame
to a gurney, she requests the other driver be
tended to before herself, as though an encore.
And still, despite humility, from beneath the layers
of gauze around the crown of her head, muddied
already with blood, Patsy watches the woman
softly die, the flat note of her monitor’s peal a wet
piano warped out of tune.

                                                     That night Dottie West
is there to pick glass from her hair careful as threading
a line through a hook and later, Loretta, knowing
her friend’s got the radio on, sings “Pieces”
from a club outside Nashville, every word a salve.
And Patsy’s sister visits, velvets her thumb
across the broken singer’s palm. Patsy tells her
how Jesus knows her now. Like a friend, she says. Like
maybe I watched her die for a reason, the bandages—fresh
this morning—already scabbing to her.

                                                                                  Nights
in the hospital she prays for her brother, the dead
woman driver—everyone but herself, wincing as she
rotates in her gown. And until the day two years later
when she’ll test death again and wind up gone,
defeated, she masks her head’s upside-down seven
of a scar with makeup the dogwood pink of
her skin, and when she stands to sing, especially then.

The sky is a likely place and yet,
deceptive. That is how puzzles evolve.
Look carefully at faces, especially the eyes,
noting flicker and shift.
Assess details: slant of October light,
a single shoe at the side of a rutted road.
Prints are overrated but not everything
can be wiped away.
Check the moon and the junk drawer,
the wind-up bear, the bowl of plums.
Listen for the baby’s cry, the crow’s bray,
the struggling motor, the bell.
Put piece with piece, interlocking,
and perhaps the world will be revealed.
Perhaps we’ll have a brand new story
with opaque characters and restless plots
and remain confused, happily delirious.

the third person in my head squints
i am looking at a highway
i am looking at an apple orchard

i am a reservoir
i am a Styrofoam cup

my memories go
and can’t go back

i don’t feel the same
i feel alright
i don’t feel it anymore

There will never be a fifty-first state.
It would be too much
to have another state bird,

another state flower, another state
motto for schoolchildren
and game show contestants

to memorize. It would ruin the symmetry
of our national constellation.
We like that a hundred pennies

and a hundred senators go
into every misspent dollar. Besides
with a sky like this

forty-nine stars seem more likely
than fifty-one. So cancel
your hopes for Puerto Rico,

the District of Columbia,
Samoa and Guam, Guantanamo Bay.
The unbalancing light

of that tiny star
would turn the flags of our childhood
into stovepipe hats

and rumble seats, Indian pennies
and muskets
and scratchy old LPs —

something to be sent
to the attic or the trash, something
to burn less brightly.

In the final hours,
my grandfather’s emaciated belly
rises and falls beneath quilt and coverlet.

Beside him, the heart monitor’s erratic chirps
are drowned by the sound of the wallpaper
separating from its old stubborn glue.
Atop a stepstool, my aunt fumbles
with the curled, yellowed edges,
tearing it along the seam.
She pauses halfway through to unplug the morphine,
shimmies her father’s headboard away from the wall,
and continues to rip apart patterns.
His wheeze turns rattle, as she spreads new glue
and strokes the pink into place.

Her kids raid the closet,
laying claim to the Craftsman tools,
John Deere collectables, and Christmas gifts
some still donned with ribbons,
others encased in plastic.

In the morning
a hospice nurse enters to count the pills
he had not swallowed in weeks,
only to find bottles, missing and empty,
my aunt’s heavy eyelids nodding in the corner,
cigarette burns on her fingers,
drool pooling on her blouse,
the morphine plug on the floor,
a full days relief
in the bag on the pole,
and, on the bed,
a good man longing
to feel it empty.

Sometimes things seem better than they are,
aura of city upwelling like a nice guitar vamp
on NPR, just before we get the news
then settling down to its jealousies and traffic.

Our ear does not perceive anything with certainty.
All we have is a swelling of appetites
and the imperatives of family—like my dead
mother, crypted four feet above ground.
My father looks at the narrow space
and wonders if “she’s cold in there.”

In Shakespeare’s couplet, “Like as waves
make towards the pebbled shore/So do our
minutes hasten toward their end,” the intensity
rises, tightening in the first syllables of the final line
and then letting go. Death is like that, returning
to the iambic foot, reaching a crescendo in its own
sweet time, bringing its odd irony to the living,
quickened in the resonance of grief.

I want to be quickened by grief.
I want the sun to rise so that it might shine on me,
offer its merciful light on my plausible shoulders.

I’ve got another one

moving in
when I brace before the morning mirror
she is disturbed
when I am forced
to prepare for public viewing
the self with staying power
escorts me out the door

I long for ancient simple days
sitting on the bathtub edge
in a pre-pubescent cloud
basking in daughterlove
not looking at myself
at all
(she’s) prettier than you

but won’t assimilate
when lining eyes and drawing brows
she can be violent
(oh, Narcissus!)
it’s dueling headshots
the survivor of survival
becomes my consort (live with it!)

I warmly recall
the smell of Burma Shave
watching my father
with a love that fogs a mirror
and not considering myself
sadly then   at all

‘Wait a while!’ Mother would shout, ‘they say
There might be more showers this afternoon.’
            So I recalled, from time to time
How he would turn a deaf ear to her
And continue, dragging out quilts
Sheets, pillows, blankets, padded coats
One pile after another
Like moving forests
Hanging them on thick ropes
Tied to deformed poplars or lamp posts
‘Not again! This old man of mine just wouldn’t
Want to waste a single ray of sunlight.’
            And remembered, for nearly half a century
My dad had tried each time to empty the whole house
And sun-wash everything, more like a grandma
Than like a father, even during the Cultural Revolution
            Now realizing how I have been haunted
By his stark image, smiling, in blue, ever since
He nodded his head to Mother for the last time
About 5 pm on January 2 last year
            I find myself choked again with gratitude:

It was my father who gave me so many a chance
To smell fresh sunlight in my boyish nightmares1.
Paloma—dove, pigeon, messenger,
mensajero,
the world
reduced to the width of a piece of fruit,
ten feet of hollow PVC, Paloma’s metal cylinder
lowered into a shaft narrower than a sunbeam.

2.
Three doves: for supplies—water, oxygen—,
for fiber optic communication,
for eventual escape.

3.
When food is lowered, the first request
comes up the tube: thirty-three toothbrushes.

4.
Forty palomas per day rush chicken, yoghurt,
cereal, tea, medicines,
projectors, speakers,
soap-embedded towels,
bacteria-killing copper-fiber socks.
Soiled laundry is carried to the surface,
rolled like sausage.

5.
Palomas take forty minutes to fly down,
be unloaded, get back up again.
Six palomeros wait, collect supplies.
Toward the end,
the doves deliver dynamite,
blasting caps for the rock
that blocks the rescue.

6.
Palomas rush love letters.
Thirty-three men cut off
from wives and lovers
by seven hundred thousand tons
of fallen rock,
one hundred feet thick,
three hundred feet long,
four hundred feet high.

The drugs mean nothing. I’m awake.
Someone takes my blood and leaves
amid vague, distant beeping. An icy angle

of light filters in onto the blankets, the dark
of a sterile room at night. Hours ago
I relinquished my pants,

stripped in the cold for a nurse to catalog
my inventory of ink and scars.
She’d asked unanswerable

questions: How long since your last
period? When was the last time
you had a full meal? A paper body,

generically-shaped, filled with marks:

limbs ballpoint-broken. No use for bed,
I pace the empty halls without

At first the dog seemed insignificant,
unlikely to amount to anything

with its appetite and small attention span.
While we worked it chewed through the bindings

of the Pulitzer winners on the bottom shelves.
But then we noticed it had ears like rose petals

and the dire eyes of a philosopher.
It had a certain something something.

It was warm like a muffin.
It seemed denser than other matter.

We came home and scraped up the poop
and moved the plays one shelf up.

Angle-less landscape and still
I can’t see what’s coming –

something about the curve
of the planet, emptiness of the air,

not the heat but the humiliation
ahead of me. Windows down,

almost nine p.m., feels like noon,
soup-warm, small breeze, I’m rehearsing

though I fear that it’s a bad idea,
that polished is a synonym for insincere,

so many other cars on this road,
I assume all of them aimless,

we are silhouettes in passing,
nothing more to each other,

avoiding eye contact, and I am tempted
to stop at Café Risque,

whose billboards promise hot coffee
and the stripping away

of the everyday obstacles that keep
one person from another,

as if flesh ever solved anything,
as if a bad pun will get me laid –

soon there’s a toll to be paid
and I’m listening to music

from high school: rhymes
without consequences, one guitar solo

after another, all crescendo and crash,
every line, why, almost believable.

I am gentle
as if this stone 
is a woman—I caress 
the cold air that hovers 
just in front of 
this couch. I imagine 
my wife, who sleeps 
in the next room, whose
flower is hidden. I am afraid 
that she has forgotten 
me, eight months since 
the birth of our first 
two children. I was 
a husband; now, I am 
a father forming 
stone in my hands, yet 
it could be a woman’s 
body. My wife’s body
feels like air, stones
laden with memory,
a cool breath of what 
used to be skin. I form
the shape of stone
in my hands, hoping
this air will
return to woman.

And then you stayed, requiring
a new metaphor to detail the danger:

Glorious as a halo, how you make
men prey in a noose of light.

I Know You Sleep In A Bomb Shelter

every night. Your curtain opaques the precious-
metal light that shrieks up the mountainside. In January,

your legs still twitch above the sheets. Do you get that dream anymore
of Jerusalem on fire? I can’t know now, a sea & ocean away: my winter flight

home was the lost mosquito of August: an unwanted
orchestra in my ear. Here, Mediterranean means solid valley arching

the earth’s meniscus: I sit my mug in the snow & pretend
condensation is my call back, particle-talk:

somehow it will wind itself
to you through endless white—my Alaska.

Remember when rainy season fell early—like the yahrtzeit candles
you bagged at the market without knowing their griefen purpose—

& made Fall all garlic, Jane Eyre, thunderheads: the sounds
we finally heard: how much the people were holding

their breaths until war broke, & they jerked
into the bends. Newspapers are a trigger

warning: the slanted word-paste, ink that won’t wash
from my fingertips: I need to start forgetting you.

The summer was figs. We can’t go back
now—the world cracked open with a touch.

she went out
deeper into
the river

            If the shore trees sweep across my hair

until the warm water
rose unto her lips

            If their purple blossoms fall

she first saw
the tree
on the far bank

            If they are becoming

talismanic
against the setting sun

            If it lead me farther
                                                into light

I saw
a freightcar
unmoving
 

on the tracks
crossing main.
 

Highsummer:
a backyard,
an above
ground pool
against the night

like a fish's
blue eye
at the bottom of a boat.


I'll kill you


Darin told me
years ago

after I kissed
his girlfriend

with my
mouth open

underwater.

Sing to holly, jeers of crickets, smog-partitioned moon;
dragonflies on wheat-stalks, billowed ash in black fields.

Sing to mud-slicked cattle, chickens, grain, bluebottles,
flickering light. Sing anything to comets shorn by trees,

ponds, wire, rusted pickups. Sing odes to eyes gazing
on shoots, horsehair rope, ballast collapsed on the Victorian porch,

sumac roots. Sing to grandmother in her late grave,
grandfather’s sputtering heart. Sing to blood on butchers’ aprons,

uncles in dust-beaten shops, Mexican cake, stained
Formica tables, pickled feet in jars, thumb-smeared portraits.

Sing to chasms and echoes, fingered, salty rain, persimmons,
gray-mottled clouds, chirp of children chasing frogs. Sing to bog,

sunlight, shallot, thorns and brush. Sing to farmhouse, silo, rick.
Sing to violets in bottles of white wine, windows impossible to close.

Sing to darkness, lanterns, silhouettes. Sing to unknown lands,
depths unexplored. Sing to war’s defeat, lovers, hanging

willow. Sing to kisses and flesh, waves, harp wafted
from ancient inns. Sing to maps unpinned. Blissful rest.

In the evening,
a buck’s antlers
cradle light
at the edge of a field.

Snow has cleared
to show hard-packed
mud, grass kept

green, phlox and
dog-tooth violets pushing
tentative stalks
from dirt.

Silently, the buck
pauses to drink snowmelt
beside a half-
tree split by wind.

As he lifts
his heavy head,
evening’s shifting light
casts a labyrinth of twisted
root and horn.

In this life, you are
being lived by the moon
There is a flashing light inside, nothing
to salute / The tide rises, doesn’t stop
Soon you are something made of
something that was blue
You have everyone’s attention
You feel the tug of the cat’s paw
on your pajamas / There is no fate
you’d rather submit to
What you do know is that sun
If nothing else there is
the way a goose flies
low over the lake in winter / a thing
to shimmer against
You become everyone’s
reflection / And when
the sun does
come out
there is nothing
to see

Answers to questions you never imagined someone would ask: this casket, those lilies. Days filled with steps you never thought of: draft obituary, choose suit, pore through books of headstones, order cold cuts. Your only thought: this is happening. Back at the house, waiting on the kitchen counter to be unpacked, a plastic bag of personal effects: neatly folded khakis, beat up shoes stuffed with socks, watch you gave him only months ago, belt wrapped around itself, favorite shirt ripped open by urgent scissors tearing through. Stories you cannot tell, what you haven’t seen but see has happened: your mother home from the hospital with a half-filled bag, things she watched leave the house in the morning, everything emptied of life in less than a day and waiting for us to do we-don’t-know-what with. What you learn: you do whatever comes next. There’s no going back.

We underestimate the need
to understand through touch.

Far away from his mother and father
Moshe Silman is ninety-four percent burns

to the body, a tower of flames reaching
toward what we can only name.

He sacrificed himself, said Moshe’s sister
after giving the doctors permission

to remove the tubes feeding life
into what was left of her brother.

He arrived in Tel Aviv Saturday night
with gasoline and a suicide note:

The state of Israel stole from me and left me
with nothing. I will not be homeless.

The flame is always dominant.
The vigilance always the same.

One syllable of blood
and she sank into an almost-
faint, drained to the lips.
Her hair, this season
blue at the tips, swung
a wing across her cheek.
The silky owls on her pajamas
stared, all those pairs
of shocked eyes. “Open
the window,” she cried.
It squeaked with cold. The light
was full of snow. A wren
swooped past to the feeder below.

When she found her cool
again, we cracked wedges
packed with pomegranate seeds.
Sweet as woe and dry
as delight. Both of us
dizzied by her new height.
Open and closed, around
the moon’s clock, croon
the birds, egging her on
to dare the words.

kids keep talking about what a monster reagan is, but no one really knows politics, just what they
hear on records, at shows, in the alley-light on fridays.

You sit, transfixed by the accounts in the paper:
slaves bound in chains, the living manacled

to the dead in pairs.  Their hair and skin filled
with the stench of blood and the mark of decay.

A ship of broken bones captured by strangers.
In every heart a scar the length of longing.

And the captain, clockwork cold, casting his cargo
into the sea like barrels of salt, kegs of rum,

unwilling to part with anything that might be set free.
How they descend, falling namelessly into the dark,

the open ocean, that giant grave, a merciful mother
with arms as wide as memory.  How she takes them,

two by two, into her arms, and records it all.
You say, even after the last man is gone, erased

from this earth, the waves will carry the sins
of the murderers to the desolate shores,

ten thousand times over, every particle
of the air, of the earth, the bodies of the dead,

every atom of sorrow descending into the seas
will ring outward, till the towering judgments

of God come crashing down, till the sky breaks
and the fierce fires of hell rage in the place

where they once stood silently and did nothing.

In the dim streets below, something dark eats away at the light,
consuming the gas lamps on every corner one by one

like a cancer till nothing is left, but absence and your lone beacon
set in this upper window, a clockwork curiosity you built last year

to signal the masses thronging their ways home from the Crystal Palace
and the Great Exhibition.  The world gathered under a glass sky

and a mechanical earth—some strange new Eden full of wonder
and unknown futures.  And your staccato flare, a repeated message,

a pulse of numbers, depths, wind changes.  A code for passersby
to struggle through like a recurring cough from a worn body,

or the stubborn throb of pain below the belly that her doctors could not
decipher, except in long and short periods of blood and oblivion.

This year, you shine the light again, point it above the invisible barrier
that divides the living from the dead, and let your grief burn

in all its stuttering failure.  You close your eyes and the world is gone,
forgotten, but her voice lingers in the turning of gears, a loose horse

whinnying in the darkened streets, the oil-black clouds shuttling
across the sky in some wild and unknown pattern.

Come back, we say, to the bit of code we've let loose in the dark,
and it returns like a half-feral cat laying down its prey on our front step.

In its mouth, a still-quivering squirrel.  A sparrow its throat-crushed.
Or perhaps a few token feathers and some blood.  Here, it seems to say.

Here, is what you really wanted.  This small mass of tangled ends, frayed,
fragile like a blown egg, dyed crimson and pale, hollow inside.

Not everything that it returns is a name or a path home.  Sometimes
all that remains is an old man who has spent his life building a machine

to calculate the probability that the dead will rise again, that the empty bed
will fill once more with the breathing form of love.  Come back, he whispers,

but the world he returns to remains flush with the unwished for:
the fading back of the lover turned to dust and shadow, her face as still

and cold in memory as the morning he laid her in the iron earth,
or the geared machine itself, a giant ghost, a phantom of ink and words.

The hour is late, the years winding on.  The graveyard is already full
with the names of his friends.  He lights a candle for one and then another,

and another.  The house brims with tiny fires.  There are moths in every room.
No one waits at the door, but at the window, a constant beating of wings.

Of those machines
by which we produce power

it may be observed
that although they are to us
immense acquisitions

yet in regard to two
of the sources of this power—
the force of wind and water,
—we merely make use of bodies
in a state of motion

by nature we change
the directions of their movement
in order to render them

subservient to our purposes
but we neither add to nor diminish

the quantity of motion in existence

—Charles Babbage, On the Economy of
Machines and Manufactures (1832). p.17


//  the mind of gears, the heart, a spring
//  ever winding, a chorus of marionettes

//  upon a stage, before the red curtain,
//  a field of irises widening in the dark,
//  whatever we can take in, whatever we process

//  in the silent fist of memory, each
//  flows through the invisible lines
//  jangling our chains, lifting our wooden limbs
//  animated by living fire, an ocean of regret
//  we cannot return from, cannot cross

//  in small steps, how we long to tear
//  free from the needle bent toward home
//  one tiny shred of night at a time

//  the way we open our mouths to silence
//  the stars and their brilliant ghosts,

//  to fill the still numb void with words

brother of smoke, brother of canopies,
            brother of porch dusk,
brother of wasps in the head
            of a porcelain rabbit,
brother lost in grime and chemical fire,
            brother of failing liver,
addiction and two kinds of cancer,
            brother leaving my brother two-hundred miles of space
that cements the lesson he already learned: that he is down a brother

            for life—I feel you in the whiteness of teeth,
I feel you in grinning to ward tragedy,
            I feel you every time I speak,
my heart racing: the broken rabbit
            bounding through low-cut grass.

Brother whose family is darkness and nicotine,
            the wheezing of the space heater, the radio’s tinny static,
I know the spider that silks us together, keeps us
            standing just inside the shadow of the eaves,
but I want to see you when you step out of those bus doors.
            I want you to burn open
And hear all the locks inside you click.

When I die, I’ll come back
            an oakleaf hydrangea—
Something bigger
            than I was when we began.
When you die
            I want you to be a boy
so I can take you in
            on some decrepit path
pretending the wind running through
            somehow belongs to you.
When you bury me
            watch out: I’ll spread.
And you’ll recognize my autumnal red
            psychic flames burning
near your split rail fence.
            I was what you chose to plant
to absorb the emptiness
            left from other things.

If you lie back on the rocks just right, you can see bones in the
stars.

But if you stare too long, the moon becomes an enormous bone
and the truck you drove becomes bone and your skin becomes
bone and then your bones become bone.

Once everything in the world is bone, there won’t be a need for
conversations or love or money or friends. All we need to do, then,
is observe our new journey of becoming dust.

When we are dust and mixing with one another, we will only have
the brittle memory of what it was like to be bone.

no, I said, she loved you very much.
take, for example, the painting by paul klee
in which two men meet, each supposing
the other to be of higher rank—
the first, ashamed of his youth,
the second of his culminated age.

Be Still When the Stars Are at Your Door

            and run if winter starts with a brick
through your windshield; when twin midnights

            stitch their fingers into your knees—
were it not for your teeth folding over to dust,

            even the straw would look startled. You walk
down the hall with eyes like moths on fire. You beg of the lake

            until your ankles shake. In your hands,
wet leaves. In the wet leaves, the bones of an owl.

            This is an unfledged nest; this, a tether
to water; hung is the black bouquet around your neck. It wasn’t the sea

            but your skin that was seeped in brine. You were ripped
from the river by your wrist; dragged through autumn

            by the nails. When the arteries of the sky are slit, it rains
on your father’s grave. You would look for the wind

            when the trees start undressing, but you only trust
the company of dead starlings, their feathers frozen

            to the ground. In the ground, they still hear you shudder—
listen: answer the door wearing nothing but night.

I have forgotten the names of the faces
            of those who are passing through me,

who are lanterns and trees.
            I am farther than a seam,

Father, and I am that shameless color
            of wintered blood, a wet animal

walking from the hillside to the street,
            and I am a tunnel, a way

out, the cold that drowns
            in your teeth and listens, an ill-born.

Tonight, the fledging of birds
            is a widow. I am a window—how

do I look? Like a couple of cliffs, we turned
            our backs on each other. I left as a natant

gingko-leaf with the moon bundled in my hands,
            and I’ll wait it out. Like an old woman

in a busy house, I’ll move like batteries
            are dying inside of me. Try me

and I’ll get these walls to snap
            or the buried to clap—with one hand

I’ll pinch out a lantern
            as the other reaches through trees.

In the bright blue of this town pool, they dive
and howl, their sharp shoulder blades are clipped
angel wings, their drenched neon trunks, their rail-thin
bones. Here at summer’s height, they seek the deeper
end where nothing matters but the gasps their dives
attract, one’s graceful arc, the other’s clumsy flop.

For now they are content to clown and tumble,
these days of sunlight, brown parched grass.
Who knows if someday, one of them is shunned,
strange music sung in his dark room; who knows
if one of them will take the long bright gun or blade,
hold it close to his once-summer skin, and hunt that
boy who dove with him, surprise his skinny soul.

I ask a blind woman three questions. 

Without hesitation, she paraphrases Stein – I say this
            only to God and strangers.

Where does your language exist?
                        In the spirit realm – a gift of discernment.                                                      

What is the unknown history of your words?           
                        The charismata of wisdom in asterisks.

Who else dwells in the space of your voice?
                        Tantum Christum – no one else.

 Your azaleas flower in winter.
Santa Ana winds raise a fire alert –
                                                 red martyrs on stakes,              
           slain winter blossoms, our floating chapel. 

Blood-roe western light in the hills
                                    could signal new fires.
Four o’clock, a January magnolia awaits 
                                               a jeremiad of woe.
Ranunculus post-twilight,
April iceberg roses.  Northling envy:
            bone-colored Rosa chinensis in winter.

                                    No pruning until August,
no dead-heading blossoms.  Sphagnum 
dry moss – your light-haired face: 

                                                Eucharistic prayer
aflame.          In a drought, I wish to say, sepal. 
Calyx sheathed in November                        
                                         mouthed as saint
in three languages –

            el santo, thánh, and xianren
fireball, cotillion veil:  December moonlight 
            in green ardor – verde, xanh, lu.

i. the commuter

Nature must not win the game, but she cannot lose.
Footsteps vamp to the platform floor “she cannot lose.”

I conceptualize continuity, viscosity and age,
I think the train’s rumble, and thinking will not lose.

Inside the crowd the face that faces back.
Inside the crowd I reach out to the face I lose.

Nature, root, basalt, dripping water, words as ties—
Old Manahatta strains beneath Manhattan, but must not lose.

I wipe my brow with a deli napkin—forever the walls
like a mosaic burial chamber. I’m beginning to lose

the artifice : how do we say nature?
How do children when the trains rock never lose

their footing? Unlike me. The girls are pickpockets.
The crowd is whispering my nature is loose : I face myself : I lose.


ii. the hallway

Hollow, then caulk a mosaic
of roots above and basalt below and through it
nominate words to speak of what
dissipates—a stone

of roots. And basalt. Below and through it
the words dripping water hollows out—
dissipates—a stone.
Cosmic drool from the cleft hobo chin,

the words dripping, water, hollows, out,
heel to hallway’s echo, echo in a head,
cosmic. Drool from the cleft, Hoboken,
compose the commuter’s passing,

heel to hallway’s echo echoing ahead
a train of words reverberated so,
composite. Commuters passing :
generations gone into the century’s gait,

a train of word’s re-verb. Berated so,
we hate the hallway’s Jack & Jill.
Generate slogans into the sentry-gate,
the tunnel who’s teeth tells the cautionary tale.


iii. the busker

Playing a song, anything that rhymes :
stand against the wall or the trick won’t work.
Out fall nickels and dimes.

Rest in the lull, play for the fast times,
it’s not about the music. They pay me for
playing a song, anything that rhymes.

Sometimes curt and crude, sometimes kind,
a leviathan squirms its jaw open :
out fall nickels and dimes.

In the echo of foot-claps the melody refines
the silent bustle with something human.
Playing a song : anything that rhymes.

We are family—the ties that bind
our happiness, our mean days together,
Out fall nickels and dimes.

I accept the workday’s livelier signs,
the creature smiles, says “happy Friday,” snaps shut.
Playing a song, anything that rhymes,
out fall nickels and dimes.

What a scrupulous
                                ugliness—
surpassing
tires in slack water, antifreeze bottles, torn
T-shirt, 6-pack of Coors, all the things
of river-veined earth—
                                      a creek chub
lounging in a sump of stillness
below a waterfall
parched to a trickle.

Lumpish and still
in the shadows of a pool—
                                            I almost mistook it for
an anchor rusting
below a guise of sky
among the mud-gray rocks
                                             that time let fall.


We stumble up cracks and crags, catch our heels in the spaces of these stones
just for a glimpse. A flicker of history in the shape of these stones.

Entrenched on Inishmore, steeped in salt and overrun with weeds,
nature reclaims what man has wrought. Seawater slaps the base of these stones.

Broken walls rise in undulating waves, perfect mimicry of the ocean below.
Was it always so? Did wind and rain see the break of these stones?

Call it watchtower. Oracle. Garrison. The names we offer say more of us
than those who came before. No one’s sure what to make of these stones.

A thousand years more and this place might be just an imprint: a shallow grave
where the grass bends and breaks under remembered weight of these stones.

No elegant beginnings for me. It’s February
and down the street a Christmas wreath
clings to brick siding. I’m riding out

beginnings—bruised chest & belly. A February
countdown to chemo cocktails. Steri-strips
cling to my skin’s incisions like dirty siding—I’m riding out
this need to be chipper, the way I must

count days since diagnosis, repeat my birth date, strip
my body for surgeons who shake hands, make jokes,
snip away muscle and submucosa. I must
please, be a good sport, when in Versed haze I think

my body should be circled by surgeons who hold their hands
at my perimeter and chant light as a feather until
I levitate like a good sport at a slumber party. I think
if some animal, huge and mute, appeared

at the perimeter of the post-op hallway and lifted me, light as a feather,
I might be cured. I’d sleep in one of its arms while the other
batted away mute scalpels and earnest third-year residents. Claws would appear
to shred IV bags, frighten phlebotomists. Sound asleep, I’d know nothing.

I might be cured, curled in the matted fur of its arms.
My scarred skin falls away like dirty snow, a dropped wreath
as the beast lurches to the woods. Sound asleep, I know nothing
but the elegant measure of its breath.

You’re calling from a cave
the ways you’re hoping to be found—
      soon      unmarked    wrapped in a handful of air.
Blooming, fairly lustrous from your polishing
by stones, you’re wondering     
                        how dead must I be for my bones to show,
            for my fingers   tingling to tempt
                 beetles to my knuckles     a bridge through common dirt?
You know you’re not alive, in that remembered
sense of the word but still, you could emerge,
learning dance steps as you go, lingering
in the heat, singing to the trees, wandering
the battered streets until a winding sheet appears—
you spin into it, a raffish partner
anticipating your hesitant steps.

Your flesh was loose, thin—
clementine skin on a skeleton,
willing to stretch
the distance of one fingerprint’s press,
willing to adjust
against a palm, subdued lust
sticking like pith to your thigh bone, elbow.
You weren’t dying (what a way to go, though,
really—every touch a whole,
dried clove piercing the peel, those
fingers covered with spice and juice) but preserved.
Hovering above your shambling skin,
a carapace of others’ hands and limbs—
eye squint in the afternoon, a languid, stuttered word.

We awoke to rescued
hound howls—
the neighbors’ dogs
tracking the tabby
slinking through
the backyard’s contested
territory. Tipping
downstairs, we saw
our doors wide
open in the night.
A cricket card party
circled the welcome mat.
Bats issued invitations
for a tealess tea dance,
flung themselves
to unsung ceiling corners.
Chimney swifts
checked in, weak-winged
on their way to Peru.
Of the flue,
they chippered, five stars!
Five stars!

We all need
fame and misfortune—
a walk on that narrowed
view of the  moon
or a dose of memory
like the forecast of rain.
Even at arrival,
our guests mapped
how they’d leave.
A raccoon asked directions
to the Wilderness Road.
Turn at the shagbark hickory?
Why are you wearing clothes?

The animals ushered
us outside, told us,
Dance naked for a while—
you’re being watched.
Are you farmers,
laborers, or riflemen?
In the light of planets
we felt something strong—
neon, billboards,
blaring music, rocks
aflame toward dawn.

Our feet tangled
in tree roots.
We skinned
elbows and shins.
Our hearts fell
from our chests,
flowered
like bulbs.
I leaned you
against a tree
and we kissed,
we kissed—until
we embarrassed
the squirrels.
Back at the house
the bats hushed,
It’s nearly time.
I know it’s famous,
but I told them all:
Take the new highway.
Leave that old road to the goats.

Exploded silver scales 
halo two sleek fish
dead on cement, beyond
rock-throwing distance 
of Roanoke’s corroded river.
How did these lost bodies—
eyes intact, bellies absent,
not gutted, but cut 
in a clear circle, hole-punched—
end up under Wasena Bridge
near a bent, spent jack of spades
near skateboard wheels, near
grass blades and beer glass? 
After all the ruckus, how do any of us
end up the places our bodies take us?

Like links in a chain letter the dead lie
carefully arranged. In one, a head of straight dark
hair bolts down, threatening to burst the frame.

A 10-cent square with our state flower leaves
too little needed space.

The edge grows tawdry. The perforation frays
as if there were nothing here
to honor, nothing to commemorate.

The sky hung over the blue spruce. Flags
folded in rows at the top of the next page.

As an oft-sought pair of open arms, also
the Pacific takes its rightful place.
The green-grey one where fumes curl

in the upper corners, and turn and curl,
and turn. Because the roof was never
reachable. Ever aloft, so to say.

Nothing can be done
to prevent the world,
a needle thinner than

the narrow breadth
of a newborn’s vein,
from pricking your finger.

And though you might
try hiding from it,
sequestering yourself

behind your home’s
quiet walls like an insect
ensconced within the

crinkled-shell swathe
of its chrysalis, the world
will make its puncture—

Crowned beauties smile with their teeth
            strong enough to bite through the necks

of prey or even the predators they sometimes grasp
            behind their heads, nonchalant about the venom.

Who has time for poison when shotguns gleam
            twice as bright, sometimes fire of their own volition?

“People first,” Carmen trills while keeping tabs
            on neighbors, their penchants for novelty mailboxes.

She’s a girl raised on raw beets and paperback horror,
            so nobody trusts her alone with their pets.

Yesterday, her motto stumbled, stuck
            in the news cycle of pop star chemical weapons,

and she hummed theme songs, anything to keep
            her knees and feet facing the same direction.

It’s not that far to Los Angeles. This town wants
            a hoodwink, a hint of what little concrete keeps out.

Instead it gets hootenannies and fair booths in praise
            of turnips, of grits, of local creek water moonshine.

In praise of livestock, of machine operators,
            their clavicles protruding like rusted-out gutters.

In praise of the makeshift parking lots,
            of grease, of Carmen saying “Buenos días, ya’ll”

to the hooting of glamour-starved whistlers
            whose lust makes the pigs nervous in their pens.

The lady can’t pronounce the place name,
            remarks on air bubbles instead, how some

journalists scuba in the name of news or such.
            The guide is all grim, doesn’t like that sort of talk.

When they approach the hatching site, they’re quiet
            as kin, ancient as any beast eyeballing their calves.

“The ducks set up shop amongst the ferrets of our climate,”
            the guide says. We’ve set a precedent for them, stowed

our baby dolls in plastic buggies to better accommodate
            their bawling, begotten names to tell them apart,

each piece of porcelain. Here’s where the eggs go,
            in that sliver where sunlight strikes at the mud

until it’s gelatinous enough to cradle something.
            “Come along, the pontoon’s waiting,” the guide says.

Divers keep dynamite dry
            underneath their second skins

and solder with tools useless
            in the bright above.

They nod with a language
            that can never convey fear,

only who dropped the wrench.
            Here, two hundred feet down

in the filthy black, the river mud
            eats metal and boots if they stay

too long in one place.
            When the bridge emerges

from her cradle, no longer rocking
            but adult, the finned ones

will have blistered and fed
            and let loose growls,

self-satisfied by how dry
            the sound and how loud.

Dig fast lest they come for you, bind
            your hands before you lick your fingers clean.

One letter says, If you move your plastic tanks
            into Russia, I’ll move mine into Poland.

They don’t say to tape her to your torso,
            fold a coat around, and let the winds blow

as if knocking kings off cliffs, as if mad
            with jealousy over losing girls to scouts.

They don’t say if you hit iron, keep going;
            you’re not deep enough to bury the evidence.

She chases the others out of hammocks
and valluco pickups, singing
even ruins are fertile
I was raised off to the side
I was never given a single key
Her pride always my leaving
el otro lado is a one-way tunnel

I visit on the off-season
in a seasonless climate
I can never catch her
by surprise
In the patio
under wrought iron suns
and papier-mâché birds
in golden wire cages
she’s singing of the days
I’d cry as she’d grind
avocados into the molcajete

how weda to shed tears
for a pig
my uncles take over the stories
slumping over the large pit
knocking back bowls of menudo
to cure their hangovers
Lonestar cans floating
in the watery cooler

Is it getting late I ask
when time’s only told by rust
and firesales of bankrupt fields
a rash of children born without brains
or eyes, xylene lacing the soil
on both sides of the river

I lose face in the smoke
I’m a mirage of wing
and caged heel
The only one coughing
I’m shaking ash from the wind:
I did not get out
You gave me up

But who can hear anything
over her quaking swing
my mother a sluice
pulling apart patina
from grief
My mother twisting
the necks of hens
and bloodied up
to short sleeve

am I not still in your hands
that never ending dream
an egg forever hatching

There are dogs shivering uncontrollably
beneath beds made of more complicated

love. They’ve mastered the art of begging,
live in the shadows of this late summer,

the humid air wearing away instinct after
instinct. It gets ugly in the grass after a dry

spell, nitrogen’s of no use, cicada sounds
rip through the trees as roots get edgy and thin.

Horizons are thick and gray with warnings,
the sky hurling thunder as far as it can until

it becomes no more than some barrier
broken—an apple against the earth,

a book finding its way back to a shelf—
too much, too close, too long.

thirteen boy born
noose-necked, just
pocket change, a
cedar closet bar.
says last, like a nine-whip:
this is my philosophy.
says bully: two to a seat,
says p-u- s- s- say, says
knuckle and bone to back
of neck, says no one say
a goddamn thing, says he’s
just body just look at him.

26 weeks early, born
like a penned-in bruise with
24 hours and shotgun lungs,
so pull, kid, pull straight through
to 13, lip-big, dixie-drift-eyed,
a little off, a little tripping cage,
a little too big and bent-in all
the backward ways of being.

and his father now, no
busted cheeks or sheets of
what-ifs or might’ves, just
the unmistakable hollow
of lost last name and the boy’s
swung-open closet door.
says he traded deer fence
and trigger-finger for big-
city mic, says, blood-eyed
with both shoulders reaching
at each other, says, like a man
trained with his hands,
my son is now thirteen, forever.

In many ways we were lucky.
We had our strength, the heft of our bodies
rising each morning.  A cellar of vegetables
strangely magnified in their cap-locked vinegar.
Our house on the most imposing hill.

And when that dark clutch of birds rested at the lake
to feed on what grounded creatures remained,
we had an ornithologist tell us
“no, not crows” and “maybe terns,
black terns due elsewhere,” his binoculars peekish
between the boarded windows.
We winced at the blue crash of sky on grass,
the peppering of specks by the water,
and tallied our luck again from the beginning.

The lock on my gate holds things
together in order to hold people apart,
especially certain people who don’t know
how much I don’t want to know about them.

This helps keep me safe
from the unknown and from
certain conversations the wind
is now having with my gate,

but that doesn’t save me from
conversations with my neighbors
about the conversations I don’t want
to have with the persistent clouds

in which I have to pretend that
it’s a great flood that scares me.
How easy it is to lose your way
and need too much from others.

The lock freezes open sometimes and
I have to give it a drink of warm water,
which loosens its sharp voice to
a deceptively solid click, and that’s

the sound that keeps me sure
the outside wants to stay outside
and the inside wants to satisfy me,
but the key around my neck

bends me to the lock to listen.
I hear myself breathing loudly,
which scares me and makes me think
I could be breaking all the rules.

What if there’s another gate inside
my gate that belongs to possibility, and
I’ve nearly opened it many times, and inside
is the one lovely fear that’s been missing only me?

June’s blue sky
and grass soft on bare feet,
you and your mother take hands.
You race around her, your center,
your small body picking up speed
until likethat, you are skipping,
flat stone against lake’s mirror.

She leans back,
her arms stiffen.
You are airborne.

With each revolution
your laugh rises and falls,
your stomach tightens,
turns in on itself.

You are slipping
from each other,
as if your body wants
nothing but to be carried
along the breeze,
dandelion seed bending
to wind’s will,
for her to feel the same pull
and take her with you forever,

but only you experience
this desire, this loss dizzying
all you see when you thud
back to earth,

wind taken from you
again.

I cannot name trees. I cannot say: that’s a tall maple.
Though, I can name thrashing when I hear it
or call the sallow of their boughs sallow. Or the fading,
bulbous stories of their shadows, shadows.
The mausoleum across the way is dotted in black-gray
grapes, black-gray hydrangeas, black-gray beehives.
Tiny black-gray bees pass across the stone most afternoons
and go about the work of being a projection.

We provide privacy, darkness,
and light set at certain slants
across the room

where you happily pursue one
another—all soft and sweet
and laughing—

’til Younger returns to hours
no sooner gone than impossible
to escape.

Older, kind and listening, persists
as any good lover might,
but Younger

resists, hyperventilates.
Older whispers, You’re okay.
You are okay.

Okay, says Younger. I’m okay.
She rises to finger
us, the blinds.

She pulls our strings, works us
as though we are simple
marionettes dancing

up then down, spinning out
at all our angles, while Older
waits, hand warm

against the empty pillow, swallowing
the impulse to want and to say,
Come back, Younger, to me.

We stripe you in shadows and
do not tell you that this burdened
happiness is all blessing.

Okay moon

Okay cocoon
Okay blackbird

Okay room

Okay bad word, okay whisper

Okay pilgrims, okay loser

Okay loon

Okay fruitwood, okay loom

Okay Homer, or homing
Okay flora, singing fauna
Okay forged hand
Okay disarmer

Okay follower

Okay moon

Okay only house, okay parade float
Okay opening made in the throat

Okay trouble, red light green
Okay double pink promise by the swings
Okay sucker, big meanie, big stink
Okay bag thick with thirty silver pieces

Okay spoon

Okay monologue, analog-to-digital
Okay power chord, okay dactyl
Okay sound cannon, broadcast, typecast
Okay acronym, subliminal messages

Okay falling anvil and/or kaboom

Okay idols and real survivors
Okay twenty new great flavors
Okay June, Big Brother reality
Okay it wasn’t me, okay he loves u not

Okay moon

Okay milkface, okay missing
      or will be missed
Okay pubic hairs, okay scare
Okay pilot light, lite-brite memorandum
Okay this is the body
Okay blood
Okay this is your brain on drugs

Okay costume
Okay lampoon, okay greatest nation

Okay Harmful by inhalation
Okay Danger of cumulative effects
Okay Authority to intercept wire, oral, and electronic communications

Okay doom, okay gloom

Okay moon

Okay moon

Okay breathing room, sneak and peek
Okay heat wave, life and limb
Okay watch list, new writ, no fly

Okay mother

Okay ocean my bonny lies over
Okay phaseout, get out, smokem out

Okay sister, O sister

Okay high noon, send it to Zoom

Okay back room
Okay maybe

Okay to whom

Okay moon

Okay moon

No one came here
for your body.
You should know
that by now.

On the outskirts
of town we swung
together a skirt
of a structure;

we spliced wind
and wood, climbed our
eager scaffolding
suspended: whole days

will stop—how?
Not a minute
goes by all these
years I cannot fathom

the sorrow of anyone
on their birthday.
The boys and girls
who sang, the boys

and girls who never
arrived, the boys
and girls forgotten
on invitation

day: the most
verifiable thing
is vanishing point.
The other days

too, each day of
the week a different
day to leave. Separated
by years you might go

on a Wednesday and I on a
Monday. Or perhaps
a Saturday and a
Thursday. Every

day contains this. Like
the letters of your
name which
rearranged spell

prehistoric failure. I will not
stop inventing you
a new name—you must
wear more and more

fragile socks. Some sleep
some sleep we will
never retrieve
or release. We expect

to nudge you at the bottom
of the sea or beneath
the boards of the train tracks,
haul you

up in the national crane.

The craft demands nimble fingers
to form the glass as it cools
and droops, fingers unfazed
by the shaping paddle on fire,
by the furnace. Gloves
just make fingers stumble,
no longer singed or scarred
but slow, and quickly then,
the glass gets away.

To work, it needs the heat, needs
to glow as if itself on fire,
as if a piece of the winter sun
has come to Earth. Then,
the glass will bend and bulge,
indulge imagination
but will mark the artist, too,
his skin or eyes, or mind.

And it must move,
an even, unceasing spin
to check the molten flow
of glass, to balance all of it
as it grows, a marathon of inches
run by fingers at their limit,
pressing on despite the long ache.

1921

reared by the state and sent out at fifteen to work in some hard-pressed house in the suburbs—some doctor’s family


She’s blued Flossie’s sheets, soaked diapers
in borax, wrung the doctor’s socks, bleached
the family’s stains, and now she hopes
to cool herself in the meadow stream.

For her grandmother with Lenape eyes
and a furrowed face, she mailed a penny
postcard of Candlewood Lake.

Stopping for silver-queen corn,
the doctor met a shy black farmer.
You have mingled blood, the doctor told Elsie.
Ask him for a tour. The farmer showed them
goats, speckled roosters, a trough of rain.

The freshet swirls her shift as she stoops,
burnishes her arms with golden soap.

I am not yet dead but have been dying
at an unknown speed for some time
and so I have already made peace
with the end of anything. I am not sad
or surprised, but am growing indifferent
toward those who are indifferent toward
me, loving them passively and maybe
stupidly from a distance keeping us both
safe in our own minds, though one of us
is lying the way they are dying unknowingly.

Were it not for the anthem before the game
and my muscles refusing to forget, I may not
have found a heartbeat at all, which I took as
a sign I should live, abstain attention to the
red stain on my shirt that will, at some point,
dry, though maybe not before these beautiful
bones that have framed my entire existence.

Isn’t it funny how, in your head,
it’s always you getting threaded
by the bullet? Filleted with
the pocket blade? Jumped?
Beat with the two-by-four and
Louisville Slugger? Set on fire?
Pulled over and parked inside
a fresh grave? Isn’t it funny
how that ain’t happen to you,
not once, how it was just some-
body that looked like you,
that never occupied the same
place at the same time as you?
Because if they had, or you,
that would mean something
different entirely. Entirely
different: you, a dead body
that looks like somebody else
elsewhere writing about how
it hasn’t happened to them
but could, scared that it will,
paranoia about blood running
in ovals around their brain
as one year becomes another,
the planet completing its spin
around a god-thought, a star
bleeding light instead of blood.

As though my blood and body were made of midnight champagne,
the thought bubbles to the surface as clear as a tiny crystal ball of
carbon dioxide: this year, I’ve decided, I will not see color, because
by now it is undeniable color has darkened the whole damn world.

The light’s elocutions are nothing but lies my eyes have gathered
as gunshot after gunshot after gunshot goes off in the ghettoes
and I swallow God like a sweet pill so that I may sleep relatively
easy. Wake up without an ache. Poach eggs, pet my dog, pack my bag
and get to work on time. Make my money―
                                                                                MY money, that I earned,
that I take home to all I have on the brink of collapse in the tremors.

I say earthquake, you say backlash: whatever, really. These TV
talking heads talk so much these days you’d really think the sky is
falling, and if it is, or if it does, then it falls straight into the partisan
blue sea and it’s all the same to me―
                                                                   looks all the same to me,
this year. If you ask me if that’s smoke or cloud, I’ll say cloud;
if you ask me to watch the video and decide guilty or innocent,
I couldn’t choose confidently, but I feel I’d bend toward justice.

Come on, we used to talk about it
all the time. You wanted death and
I wanted you. Last night I found you
standing open-handed in my bedroom
again, like you still had something

to give. Orchids wilting in your mouth,
your eyes staring wild and bloodshot
at the snarl of fir trees cresting the swollen hill.
You used to talk about souls and pretend
you didn’t have one. You used to talk

about your dad but made no attempt
to love him. All I’m saying is I sometimes
picture you swimming in a boundless river
of sky, the color changing all the time. Water
like amniotic fluid, the childhood you never

had. All I’m saying is we need to wake up,
shake the metal out of our mouths. All
I’m saying is maybe we could startle ourselves
from the ground, fan out wings and lift off
into the distant sunset like mottled loons.

I broke off from the side of a mountain,
broke off like my country did,
broke off with a rope ladder,
an empty musket and a bag half-filled with silver coins,
broke off into flakes of bush and loam and skin.

I broke off into a baptism,
head first broke into the waters,
not sure to come up again,
somehow always coming up again.
I breathed in and felt it like fire,
breathed in and coughed and cried and
came out not dead.

I fought my way into a body,
clawed past Bataan, past Siquijor,
dug my fingernails into a shipwreck,
asked a forest which way was north,
coughed up blood in the shape of islands.

I unfurled my body into a flag,
like my country did,
unfurled myself into a ship’s mast,
into the curve of letters on a cave,
into pebbles spelling out a name.

I broke off from the right side of a storm cloud,
broke and crested onto shore,
pulled up and breathed from a river tide,
breathed out to be born.

Only yours, Love,
could I pick out
of a line-up,
like in Porky’s,
a movie I would pause
at the scene of the boys
running naked
through the woods—
my first time seeing
penis in a film.
But your two-freckled shaft
would be easy
to spot among
the other tallywhackers
and ding-dongs.
I could recognize it anywhere:
compared with other foreskins,
yours would look dainty,
welcoming, not at all 
like a Shar-Pei or turtle
wallowing in its shell.
Blindfolded even,
I could tell your penis
by its weight,
resting in my hand
or by its girth between my thighs.
I could tell it was you
even when cornflower soft,
by the gentle curve to the left.
Tie my hands behind my back, too,
I still would know you
by smell—
clean, like a swimming-supply store,
but also musky,
the woods on the first dry
day of the rainy season.
Even by sound—
the gentle slapping,
like water against a boat,
as you run, still wet and cold,
from the shower to bed.

When exhausted,
but still pumping blood,
I’d recognize the pink
of your corona.
By its turgid color,
I could pick yours out, habibi,
the same purple as when
I was a kid, wrapping rubber-bands
around my thumb until it hurt.

Once I pretended my body was a farm auction. My chest
the hay baler taking the pastor’s arm just for the climax.
This is a field where I swore I’d down any robin for making
notoriously good mothers. A garage where I learned
baseball from my father carving bats out of wings.
Not like other boys, I end a sky by humming murder
or mean my most diligent flock of wings. Do I worry
if hummingbirds sleep? I do. I don’t know.
It’s possible my heart can best be described as local.
Handcrafted. Invites over 17 different species to roost.
I try one method in coping: to heat coins over rails.
To scar thunder across my skin. Some days,
when my throat is the bottle of milk souring on the porch,
I contain the single note the radio is afraid to sing.

Four of us in Fair Isle sweaters,

faces pointed at 45 degree angles

away from each other, room strewn

with wrapping paper shrapnel. If I

was seven then, do I really remember

our arguments? I wanted a puppy

so I got one, until it peed and was

sent away. I was skinny, blond, blue-

eyed, so everyone raved I would

be beautiful, but I didn’t know how!

That I needed some external, warm,

tenuous mound of cells to sink my pug

nose into? That hugging Mother was

not an option? That when I watched

my brother eat I never wanted food

again? That when Father asked me

why I hated him I said, “Life is

a long drive in a borrowed car.”

What you say matters,
each word tagged
and monitored
like an eaglet.
Make your voice
a small bird,
the kind he can hold
in the palm of his hand:
chickadee, sparrow, canary.
Use words that behave
in the corridors of memory.
Don’t say Fuck.
Don’t be a blue jay.
Don’t crack your head
on the window
or rifle through his duffel.
Don’t ask where he parked.
When he hands you
the ticket, its charges
printed in dark red script,
let the checkbook
fly from your purse
like a finch.
Post payment immediately
and sing, sing, sing.
Don’t hoard bits of paper,
don’t shred his orders.
Don’t bark, don’t pick.
You are not a magpie,
you are not a crow.
Your voice is a long, sweet song.
Build a nest on his shoulder
and rest your head there.
Fill his ears with feathers
so downy and slight
they can fill a canal
and never weigh more
than an ounce.

Dents in a window pause
at thunder and cross this
quiet horse. Draw him afraid
of an audience or that
best stable overrun with
hay and bridles and carrots
and tails swaying to what.
Then let him graze.

***

I don’t have to tell you
that uncooked yolks
in the sunlight cancel
each other out always.
Practice scale. Now
suffering. Finally, heal.

***

You must drive a machine
to freedom. Its purpose
dissolves under foot.
Take back the factories
I say. Rush into them
and rescue the worker.

***

Conduct a wetless
seashore, no one
suffering. No
tight water. We aren’t
up to our necks in the
charge.

***

You are a coat on water,
your own exhibit.

Your rabbit-heart is a prayer.
Blank nature is something
to steal, how you know fear.

***

Electric, you are the sure
voice, the important hands,
what will invite the talking.

***

Your daughter is
your daughter because
she calls you
mother deer.

***

A blank picture
of a fire burning
is just bones broke.

***

A blank sound
when your daughter sees
a chick hatch from an egg
for the first time, her open
mouth cried
nothing.

***

A blank body
when somebody
grabs at your coat again.
You reach for the wool hem,
this belongs to me.

Some days I feel more like a ghost


than a human being:  soft, untethered.  Words
I do not say curdle beneath my tongue.  Silence:

a comfortable home; body, less so.  Hair collects
in the bathtub drain, a piece of me that won’t stop

growing.  America is a land without ghosts so everything
stings of wet paint, alcohol.  I wander convenience

stores past midnight.  Scrub dishes as soon as I
dirty them.  Save my wisdom teeth, mined from fleshy

gums, wake unfluid and sticky-eyed.  Each day round
and crisp as a cold apple.  Beside my limbs, late nights,

I lie and look at the moon.  An eyelash.  Its light
slats in between the blinds, silver, wet, identical.

I hate travel, but at least my skin
is yellow & blistered. Meaning everything atomizes
to my wildfire touch & nothing
is ever cold—just lacks motion. But
I do like train cars reminiscent
of an observation deck from which Mother
made rapid small talk with a lanky college boy.
Their dialect, a sixth flavor. I was in China & lonely
& we were moving towards a bigger
city because in Hunan, we were in
the middle of nowhere. Which is to say
we were in the middle of everywhere
else. On that train, everything seared.
How we devoured sour fish like water
in that summer fervor because we knew Hunan
passengers wouldn’t scorn the latent fragrance of their own
land. My brother thinks of Chinese American
as hyphenated, but I understand the cavity
between the words, how our throbbing
torsos can split open at any second. A whole is still
everything without its parts, just without / everything.

1

The first map my dad hangs in the hallway
is an aerial view of Guam.
The island nearly fills the entire space. “Where
is our village?” I ask him. “In the center,”
he says. “Here: Mongmong.” I whisper
the names of other villages:
“Hagatna, Barrigada, Tumon, Dededo, Agat...”
I once imagined these places as completely separate,
but now I see how they’re only different parts
of the same tropical body. 

2

The second map my dad hangs in the hallway
is an aerial view of the Marianas archipelago.
I count 15 islands extending in a vertical
crescent. I recognize the shape of Guam,
the largest and southernmost in the linked
chain. My dad pronounces the names
of the northern islands: “Rota, Aguijan,
Tinian, Saipan, Farallon de Medinilla,
Anatahan, Sarigan, Guguan, Alamagan,
Pagan, Agrihan, Asuncion, Maug,
and Farallon de Pajaros.” I tell him:
“They look like the beads of a rosary.”

3

The third map my dad hangs in the hallway
is an aerial view of Micronesia.
“‘Micro- means ʻtiny,’” he says. “And ‘nesia’
means ‘islands.’” Two thousand dots scattered
across the Western Pacific.
My dad points: “Here’s the Marianas,
and here’s Palau, Yap, Chuuk, Pohnpei, Kosrae,
the Marshalls, Nauru, and Kiribati.”
The archipelagoes resemble constellations.
“Are the people there Chamorro too?”
I ask him. “No,” he answers.
“But they’re our cousins.”

4

The fourth map my dad hangs in the hallway
is an aerial view of the Pacific Ocean,
rimmed by the Americas and Asia.
Countless archipelagoes divided into three regions:
Micronesia, Melanesia, and Polynesia.
My dad traces a triangle between Hawaiʻi,
Easter Island (Rapa Nui), and New Zealand.
“This is Polynesia,” he says. “Poly- means many.”
Then he draws an imaginary circle around
Papua New Guinea, the Solomon Islands,
Fiji, Vanuatu, and New Caledonia.
“This is Melanesia,” he says. “Mela- means black.”
The ocean, connecting these vast distances
looks like a blue continent. “Remember,”
he says. “We are all relatives.”

5

My dad never hung a fifth map in the hallway.
I first see it when I travel, as an adult, to Taiwan.
The tour guide shows me an aerial view
of Austronesia. “ʻAustro- means ‘south,’” she says.
A highlighted area, the shape of a full sail, stretches
from Madagascar to the Malay peninsula
and Indonesia, north to the Philippines and Taiwan,
then traversing Micronesia and Polynesia.
“Austronesians migrated to escape war,
famine, disease, and rising seas,” she says.
It’s difficult to imagine that 400 million people
alive today, who speak over 1000 different languages,
all descend from the same mother tongue,
the same genetic family. I examine the map closely,
navigating beyond the violent divisions
of national and maritime borders, beyond
the scarred latitudes and longitudes
of empire, to navigate the cartography
of our most expansive legends
and deepest routes.

For what do you not have words, yet? But isn’t that a bit on the
nose? Like, isn’t language supposed to be inadequate?

And if so, what do I do with that? What can I do with that?
And, hey, shouldn’t I be over this by now? But then I think no,

probably not, I mean, it’s not like I hallucinate bedside murder every night
or something neuroatypical like that. That’s the term for it, you know.

Neuroatypical. So I guess I have words for that. Sometimes
it’s my mother with a rifle, which makes sense. She’s the after-

math of a distant war, you know? No, you don’t. No one ever does.
Then sometimes it’s a wraith, there then gone. I wake up screaming—

one large battering ram, pummeling the air. So that’s what it is.
That’s what I don’t have words for. What do you need to say? List as

many things as necessary. But are you sure you want me to? Because
there’s the death sentence, you know, and the scar along my spine–

but, I mean, the rods make me a cyborg, so that part’s cool. But
the fear of death isn’t. Hey, when was the last time you died? Can I

ask that? Is death a ritualistic thing for you? Are you dying right now?
And I know what you’re thinking. Sure, but isn’t everyone scared of death? And,

I mean, probably, it seems like one of those quintessentially human things
to fear. But wait, back up a second. Remember the hallucinations?

Sometimes there’s a wolf. Not as often as my mother with a rifle, or the
distant sound of something cracking. But the wolf is always there, even

when I can’t see it. Would you believe me if I said that predators are quiet?
You never die when you think you’re going to. One day you’ll hit your head

& something will leak out & you’ll think—oh, so this is what death is like.
Because it’s never what you think it is. Slow, deafening. One blow after

another. Your teeth will never be straight again. And then, on tiptoe, the
wolf–

What my father knew
he could calculate

with small pad
and pencil nub,
                            factor
length of pipe
and drilling angle

through soft soil
or through rock.
                           No matter
if he lost a finger to metal coupling
or burned in an explosion,

nothing would change
how numbers fit
together on his page—

neatly in lines
like children on a dock’s edge,

              waving.

First I had to ask the hill
to take a walk within me
this tall hill

went on singing
I had to ask it

to hear me
I had to find a place to lay down

in the dirt’s soft darkness
the trees have been building

between hills
where roots will nook me to their water

the leaves high up will ask

ask will answer
only myself

white mushrooms glowed by the trail
waiting for sunset

does the earth sigh

at your neck, acorn caps fallen off and beetles
all the grasses

who is asking
the dirt and its animals
if you wait and nothing happens

can I stay or has it ended
there was no promise

but a final sound
from a final voice
I was drawn along

made me the urge

made rust rain
purple, certain
in its song

made me breathe deep
the coldest air I’d held

the bright gut at the bottom
trying sound

there was no promise

The Season of No Mirrors.
The Season of Hide and Seek.

Of Haunting. Of Clocks
Unwound. Of Straightening

the Spine. The favorite
of the young: Season of No

Silence. The favorite of no one:
Season of Cramped Hands

and Carpal Tunnel. Seasons
can be very short. And fickle.

If we’re lucky, No Sleep lasts
one day, one night. And then

there is the blessed Season
of Quiet Thoughts, ironically

usually succeeded by Gratuitous
Vigilance. Underneath the seasons

lie the times, it all gets very
complicated, and there are many

calendars. Time of Dogs Chewing
through Leads. Headstrong Time.

Unknotting Time. Time for
Discarding Objects and Forswearing

Vices. Accident Time. Starving
Time. Gravedigging Time.

Autobiographical Time.
Otherwise known as Unnecessary

Confessions. Lately things
have been changing as Hatred

parades down the avenues,
and no one is sure who is in

charge or how to stop it, or
whether it should be stopped.

Perhaps this confusion is itself
a season. In the meantime,

also the Season of Waiting
to Return Even If You Have Not

Left. Of Mute Songbirds. Of Bitter
Foods. Of Tinnitus. Of Melting

Ice. Of Refusing Rescue. Of
Wantonness at War with Shame.

In the Time to Prepare
the Heart to Receive News

of Deliverance, I lie awake
anticipating Lost Words

Restored to the Tongue.
I’ve heard it’s on its way,

though maybe that’s only
a rumor founded in False Hopes—

the season we always discern
too late.

You still sleep with
your bedroom door locked

your front door bolted
and chained as you are

to those memories.
Tonight, you lie awake with

streams of silver from
your lit eyes. He is still

circling just above your head.
Though now, your belly

is thick and full, your lips
moist, your head un-cracked.

You still remember.
The night he raided your

room, sifted the jewel
of your body out of

your blankets.
Stripped you.

by now you have forgotten the person you were, learning
to draw the needle through flesh—to cut rebind and fashion the body
into a mausoleum and cleave the delicate from the firm

to seal the foolish hope within. now there is only the familiar work
at erasure and the animal sense—hairs stiffening at your neck,

a ringing in your third ear—feral screams of the freshly tombed girl, 
the pain remembered as a body reimagines the limb lost and the loosing too—
its phantom fist clenching and releasing like a prayer

to will the mind from itself prayer to refuse being
broken. only on your most precarious days when you can be swayed

by what the body will never unremember, when you are choosing
to remain and can recall the wound without living it,
only then will you press gently against the seam, loosen the stitches

to hear hope—oh foolish girl—stroking your boundaries—ageless and singing still.

I’m in
                            a clear space
let’s say
                            an interim
ante-room
                            and some
insect-
                            restiveness
personified
                            won’t unfocus
this after-grief—

Skittering
                            then stopped
I don’t much mind
                            finding corners out
on its way
                            cornicewise
towards
                            wherever falls
this hour’s
                            supply of dust—

I find myself
                            much less annoyed
then of old
                            of earlier
before, ante
                            post-partum.
Yes, this
                            harvestman
is my after-
                            grief child
something
                            resigned
by its nature
                            to resignation—

And a spy
                            o long-legged fly
spinning nothing
                            besides
its own
                            attention.

We build an asteroid from Legos, imagining ourselves
safe. In a bedtime Bible story, I was told that the dinosaurs

were not allowed onto the ark, sealed out with the heathens,
the waters rising around their necks. Never mind. Let’s just
play. Hold your hands in claws up to your skinny ribs, like this.

Feel what it means to be a species going extinct, two stupid
stubs of arms—but we don’t say stupid, you scold me—ok,
then ludicrous. Useless. Unable to reach the light

switch, to even make the decision: to douse us
in darkness, or hasten the flame of the asteroid’s tail
that I snap together with you, brick by brick. Look:

the ground beneath our feet is hardening to space rock. Roar
with me, son, our jaws already fossils, lined with dull teeth.

Didn’t they catch you like soft nets—
like history, like ancient poems—
keeping your figure from shattering?
And didn’t you know it? Told from
your birth—smelling like incense
straight from the womb, or like
firecrackers spitting up the dark.
Overturned earth. Amitabha. Laughter.
You repeated the same four words.
You said, You will preserve me.
A mark lives on your wrist from your
second year of life. In a sense, it was
a reworking of your body: flames
like fingers baking and hardening
you—fire up, then glaze—china
fissures, bubbling skin, one arm still
tender, the other clinking like your
baby teeth against a spoon.
In the beginning, there was rain.
Lingering above the mud-flooded
paddies, a woman saw the fields
and wanted to play—And hadn’t
you wanted to know the care she took?
Her painstaking thumbs, these souls
lit like candlesticks, massive armies
springing from the ground? Didn’t you
pray for a vision of the moment,
knees pressed into a gold-trimmed
pillow? And when, later, another
woman submerged her one thousand
arms underground and raised eight
thousand soldiers from the dead,
didn’t you look for the words to ask
for more? There was Nu wa, Creator
of Mankind, Repairer of the Pillar
of Heaven—and then also
the bodhisattva, Avalokitesvara,
Goddess of Mercy, The One Who
Perceives the Sounds of the World—
Did you think once, as you asked,
Guan Yin, my thousand-handed one,
keep this boy safe—that you were
raised by two women and their
stories, who gave you your skin,
yellow as the dirt from which it came?

This is my fear : I will find you hollowed out and dry : filled with
honeybees : and buzzing like a machine :: once in a children’s book
a tractor flaked to rust : alone in a copse : of ash :: I would rest myself
like a stone in your shoe :: we each contain : too much to carry :
of the divine : despite the quotidian dreams of our teeth : despite our
carnivorous need :: if we are any piece of God we are maybe toenails :
unnecessary and plain as milk :: I swear : the part of me that wants
to do good is larger than the part that is able :: for instance my hands :
the bone-china teacup that is life : oiled beneath my hands :: my hands
that want so much to be shaped like peace :: can a beach be both :
the beauty the world needs : and the glass beneath which : your softness
blooms :: my friend : in my life I have done things the wrong way enough
days : to need the death of a sinless man :: a perfectly executed full stop ::
my friend : if you : will keep climbing : I will hold the ladder : will exhale
you like a prayer : above my tongue

Other women don’t tell you

there is shrinking too, once milk and need
are gone, once flood is history
and you remember what it’s like
to sleep again, naked, your hands heavy
against a frame that is more you
now that so little of yourself is left, but wait,
the body isn’t first—that grows or stays
or shifts weight awkwardly
like the aging man you’ve never met
whose loneliness you wear as yours—
first is space, inside your mouth, that list
of things you never thought you’d do
like let your child cry
himself to sleep or fall
when you’re not looking or choose
to look away or mention
breasts so many times
in casual conversation
you’d think that they
were never yours, that space
you never thought to count,
39 plastic balls (the kind you’d seen
in McDonald’s commercials that taught you
English so long ago), 23 dirty dishes, 17 bibs
(5 plastic, 12 cloth, and yes, the distinction
matters), 4 piles of laundry (one more
than the people living in your house, so how
is there so much cover for so few bodies?)
2 strollers and 2 car seats and 2 others
whose purpose you are still unsure of,
and 1 you, because there is still you, shrinking
underneath or next to or maybe outside,
looking at your house like a neighbor passing by
who thinks, it sure seems warm inside. 

Other women don’t tell you

some days, cleaning the bathroom will feel
like enough. Some days, washing out every bottle
and scrubbing the milk residue rings until their white
is in your skin and under your nails, some days, letting
the plastic dry until it shines like expensive China, some days,
that too will feel like enough. And when you’re squatting
on the bathroom floor across from your son, making noises
that are animal and beast and mother in one, watching him
scrunch his face into a prune to make those same sounds
back at you without out result, some days, when he picks up
a magazine about wood building and stay seated and looks
so much like his father and grandfather and likely theirs
and you are there to see this, those days feel like so much more
than enough. But others, most days even, after you’ve hidden 
every roll of toilet paper and every spillable and breakable
and chokeable, after you’ve folded and tucked and verbed
through those things other women told you
make you woman or warm or worn out man or maybe
just womb, after you’ve done more with your body
than your body has ever done, nothing feels like enough
                                                                                                      or like anything at all.

I’ll die if you don’t return, mother tells me,
like the beast to the girl in that old story,

with the wilting flower and dying father
whose daughter leaves him for an animal

that became something it could never be.
I’ll die, she reminds me, almost daily

now that I’m already gone. But children
never believe such things—that one day, sooner

even than we realize, we won’t have someone
we can leave. I know slowly, it’s already happening,

her heart expanding into a fishing pot, an octopus trap,
clay and rope submerged in seawater, sinking.

They call it broken, but the muscle is far too strong,
it grows—balloons and stretches—until the chest

cannot contain it, until the skin is calm horizon
and the animal beneath breaks through the water,

open mouthed and not an animal anymore.

For decades my dreams were pike,
winched up from the barnacle dark,
febrile in the ugly dawn
and shameful of scrutiny.

At the spinning glint of a pen
or the lure of a bedside light
a pike would flex in my neck
as ruthless as a fired shell

and rise at the tense skin of sleep
and break it like glass. To trap it,
I’d force tired fingers down my throat
and catch the dense greengold gills

as they thrashed to be swallowed back
into a crypt of gut, then haul
it from my head in waking gloom
and wrap its snarl in puddled paper.

In the morning, on the yawning dresser,
I would weigh its mean physiognomy,
unbutton my flesh from its teeth
and find fluency in its jewelled flanks.

Later, I would relent my grip on its tail
and watch the denuded pike
descend in the printed page
until its candle eyes went dark.

I dream of carp now: basking
just below the milky surface,
anodyne and abbey pool bland,
floating shadows, too fat to land.

When it is dark / I imagine the world is erasing my body / one bone at a time / like ashes /
spreading in the river / When it is light / I pretend I can swallow sharks / twisters inside
an open cage / My mother says / there is no use being alive / without a body / I say being
alive / makes me want to burn / down a city / skeletons collapsed by light / clouds rushing
ahead like / runaway trains / When I tried to die / the windows bared their teeth / because
that night / our ancestors / escaped their lanterns / to remind us of the sky / how we see it
as an ending / a mouth that never opens / so we left our incense sticks / in the cracks of
the road / smoke rising / like a slow dance / between our steps / spines / hollowed into
rain sticks / That is how we know / we are alone / everything burning / inside of us / like
an old bookstore / trying to hold on / to everyone else’s story / before its own / my father
/ sweeping the fruit basket / off the counter / to make room / for my mother’s heaving
body / slickened in moonlight / & in the old days / when we used to be alive / I sold my
loose tooth / for a nickel / they say never hold on / to the things that try and escape you /
It’s how we learn / to fend for ourselves / a bird’s body stiffened by wire / abandoned by
its own flock / So, god / please tell me there are more / than five stages / of grief / tell me
/ there are people / who raise their fists / for something other / than war / like my mother /
in the garden / scraping dew / with her knees / fists / knifed open / to touch the light /
because I am tired / of cutting my hair / after every heartbreak / cutting my thighs / for
every / opened vessel / because when the hurricane hit / my body swallowed everything /
the fluency of water / the vacancy of glass / Here / I am tired / of being powerless

How orange rinds float in warm water. I say, please and it tastes

like signature lipstick, a handful of rings. How to churn butter

and stroke her soul. How to wake at six A.M and not think of

zaffre nails.  How to build a trestle table. How to disrobe a mannequin.

I’ve asked for less. How to mix haldi and milk. How to skewer a wish

and gouge out the eyes of a fish. How to trace in cursive. There’s a missed call

and my voice is husky. I leaf through journal entries labeled porn.

How to vivify code, how to wean her off collecting favors,

how to diagram brutality. I am vultured and clawing. How to unfetter

a rattlesnake. How to gut her teeth with my tongue. The tub is clogged

and the bathroom is flooding. She’s five minutes before the

darkness creeps in. How to say goodbye. How to stay mute.

I want to trade wife
for whiskey, to know my way around
a steak knife. To be the exit,
not the wound. But I was raised
without men, to remember
and remain.

Once, I walked in on my uncle
walking out on his marriage.
Once, a girl loved me
into leaving.

Uncle, make a brother
from my borrowing.

My heaven is a metric one, like my mother’s.
Upon arrival, we pray some angel shows us
spreadsheets—charts and maps, graphs
and infographics. How many naps did I take,
over how many hours? How many hearts
did I break, and how long did it take them—
on average—to recover? My mother wants
a count of steps, the volume of bodily
fluids. She wonders what was her top-
speed, her total mileage. Incarnate,
she keeps a tally of every mile she’s run
since my birth, a tiny tabulation
in the corner of her calendar’s squares.
When she hit ten-thousand, her then-husband
bought her a customized trophy. How many
hours, total, will it take us to heal from his
indiscretion? How many children, total,
did he masturbate to, and how vast a network
of hurt was he a dot on? I wonder about the dye-droplet
of my words into the internet’s water—if it bled
into how many stranger’s homes. How
many people will read my poems? If I
find kind words and diffuse them far,
will I dampen these knots and help them to loosen?
Did his images of little girls come to him
in .zip files, and from where? How many times
does a map of lost-innocence wrap around
the planet. My mother wonders, if every shed skin cell
from her entire lifetime was pressed
into a giant ball, would it fit
into her bedroom. Would the volume of her
exhalations fit into a stadium, a cave? The odds
are astronomical that every human breath
holds in it a molecule that once passed
through Christ’s lungs. Centuries out
of my tenure on this planet, I want to watch
a geographic time-lapse of my presence here:
the pinprick of the first improbable
cells meeting, my first cry sending traces
of DNA into a hospital room, my steps dragging
my residue all over the planet until I also
become pervasive, maybe constituent enough
to be a moot point, overall.

My nephew doesn’t know the strokes of his Chinese name.
He doesn’t know the beginning characters
like person, the first part falling from left to right
forming the torso and leg, the second finishing
the body. He doesn’t imagine the tiny marks
on either side as hands holding flames to make fire,
the hooks on moon as points of a slender crescent.

It is not his mother tongue, only the tongue
of his grandparents. To him, a box
doesn’t create the contours of country,
eight lucky strokes and a mouth neatly packed inside.
It is not my first tongue either.

I forget, sometimes, that mouth is in our surname,
that my brother and I share a mountain peak.
I am woman, and he is man. Together
we make the word for good.
My father is a poet in his first language.

I give my nephew the Boggle Junior from my childhood,
the cards with simple illustrations,
words spelled out three or four letters across.
Box! B-O-X! When my father asks him
what a box is, he says,
It’s something you use
to carry something else inside it. 1.

The old woman I’ll become someday
is already aging in my ear.

She says the future is where
              I’ll move through every room,

answering as if I know
who I’m talking to.

     2.

Motion is the way a place changes:
a split between

                            the body that contains,

and whatever lives
inside it.

     3.

The body is a place.
Yet the it that I am
             knows only what is felt,
marked in.

Smile from within, she says.

Within —
wherever that is.

     4.

She says I must believe
in a place that holds her.

Voracious carnivores, flathead catfish feed primarily on other fish, insects, annelid worms, and crustaceans. Submerged logs, other debris form their nests. The male builds the nest and fans the clutch. The size of the clutch varies proportionally to the size of the female. An average of 2,640 eggs per kilogram of fish are laid. Young flatheads are cannibalistic, and therefore cannot be used in fish farming.

*

To eliminate any fishy taste, simply soak the catfish in milk for an hour before frying. Bread with seasoned cornmeal, and fry filets in batches. The catfish are done when most of the bubbling stops and they begin to float.

*

Stepdad drops the filet into cornmeal. The air is a flat sand. In the cornmeal-mist I can just make out the sharpness of his nose, a contrast to the rest of his pudgy body. How can he think about eating? Mom insisted he not let me watch, but I watched. I saw him drag our German Shepherd into the treeline and put the magnum to her ear. When he came back to our sobs, he said it’s a bullet or a vet bill, and I’ve got a bullet. I bury her rock by rock as the fall comes.

*

Although the concept of catching fish with only the use of an arm in the water is simple enough, the process of noodling is more complicated. The choice of catfish as prey is not arbitrary. Most noodlers have spotters who help them bring catfish in, either to shore or to their boat; noodling in pairs is considered important for safety. Noodling partners often form long-term partnerships.

*

I cannot eat the fried fish. Stepdad says I will eat it or I will go sit at the bottom of the pond. There, I spot a carp munching pond grass. He spits a pile into my lap, and I dine.

*

I think I am drowning but I can hear him laughing and mom is also laughing so I must not be drowning but resisting the fun of it. Stop kicking, I can hear him say through seventeen miles of water. The bitch hit me in the nuts. Mom pulls me out of the water by my foot. Watch what you do with those things. You could really hurt him.

*

The average punishment for rape is. The average punishment for molestation is. The average punishment for imprisonment is. The average punishment for. I’m probably making all of this up.

*

To avenge is "to get revenge" or "to take vengeance;” it suggests the administration of just punishment for an immoral act. Revenge seems to stress the idea of retaliation a bit more strongly and implies real hatred as its motivation.

*

You would think that all catfish live in the deepest part of the water, but flatheads make their bed in the shallows of a riverbend, wait under a layer of mud for the moving thing. The moving thing may be a crawdad. The moving thing may be a woodlouse. The moving thing may be a sunfish. The moving thing may be a finger finding the mouth of a flathead who consumes the hand. The whole hand pulled in, hooking on gills. She pulls the flathead out of the water by its mouth, barbels flinching.

*

Bullets in your soup, cracking teeth. Bullets littered
along interstates, swimming pools, shoulders. Bullets eating

all your air. Glossy and slim-coppered, bullets
skirting your legs in the office park. Stacking us

one by one, shelled, spent. Sparkling in playgrounds,
magpies making new games: catch as catch can.

Crimson-ended. Bullets teaching geography,
rattling like pins in the map. Here is this one

and then the next one and then another before
we can bury the last one. Here is a church choir

with notes punctuated by bullets. Here a parking lot,
a snowy afternoon, where there is space

between flakes for bullets. Here is your hand
in the popcorn finding bullets. Here is your last bouquet,

your knock-knock. Bullets finding homes nestled
in our chambered hearts, clinging to tissue

that will not forgive. At the gas station, bullets wait
to end where your life should be

 At the Flamingo Road Publix,
                                                                                I bump
into my grandfather
               whom I haven’t talked to in years
                                           rolling his cart down
                the frozen food aisle.

I watch
                             as he wriggles his small hand
                                           in his pocket,

               and I’m overwhelmed
                             by the baton of memory:

                             those gristle-gray afternoons
in the room on the side of his house
                                          decorated with egg cartons,

me with my trombone slide
              scything through the air.
                                         How he wouldn’t talk

for hours as he hummed the melody
                           I missed. His arms sexless and bent
               like parentheses;

                             my legs stinging
from red smacks of baton for each note
                                        fumbled.

               But now, he looks so frail as he puts a bag
of frozen peas into his cart,
                                        then struggles
to remember my name:
                            Is it Charlie?
                                                   Maybe Jonathan?
                No, not Charlie, not Jonathan, I reply.
                              The names
heavy and slippery in his mouth like river stones.

                           Not that. Not that.
When I return home, I tell my wife
            I saw my grandfather at the store.
           
           How is he?, she asks.

I tell her he seemed happy,
                          that he looked good for his age.

That night, I rummage
                                         through my closet,
              find my fusty-smelling trombone,
                            then throw it out
one part at a time.

Why run from your skin?
Yes, as a girl, you wanted

a last name long enough to not be
swallowed by the world. But you

have learned why the sound of daughter
ghosts through corridors,

a wilting echo
attempting to label fading bodies–

the silence in the word’s cavity
is how long it took for you

to love yourself. You are peach.
You are gold. You are all the names

white people have made up for the shade
of your skin. Their eyes are not your tongue.

Tomorrow you will put your yellow hands together
& you will recite this again.

The Mariana Trench Isn’t Dark Enough,

& I’m growing older               growing older
           dissociative &               holding onto memories of sleeping in an ocean
swelling with the bias            of a mind no longer,
            pried open by              earthquakes, tidal waves, the gorges left in the floor by
every rift in a mind &            synapses that erode what’s left
           of rock & sand              & sediment crushing itself
into solidity & a mind            underwater
            is nothing but              deprived of oxygen, an aggregation of
memories & foulness,            bad matter & every breath I take
             I swallow salt              water that fills my lungs,
cutting air from rifts              scoring flesh, rock & I’m growing older
            growing older              with the dissent of the tides
with every blue moon            pulling water from shoreline,
             eroding away              sand, every cracked shell
that carves away into             the ocean floor as I’m
             growing older             & I’m growing older.

Known by the rainbows
I fan across grandmother’s shelf,

I shine against the wooden members
of our menagerie. Split from white pine,
carved and sanded—

if you look closely, you can still see
where hands worked them over.

I began as silica, burned and molded
in Flint. I don’t mind

she bought me cheap.
I get to sit by the windowsill
and watch the woodpecker brave winter.

When the sun sets, her cat chases
my moving refractions,
confusing light for substance.

Someday I will be thrown out to the Atlantic,
shattered for a sea-glass fetish.

I will break against rock
and the sand will scrub me smooth.
No one will recognize my face.

It’s like that when you’re nineteen    you can sleep on a bare mattress in the closet and it’s magical

how the coats on their wire hangers flutter above you like black cloth birds    winged things

unfolding    it’s dark in your mind too    all the books have yet to be read except Hemingway

they make everyone read Hemingway    and it’s not certain yet that you won’t be famous    or

dead at twenty-seven    or both    after all your friends are strumming melodious guitars in the

other room    and someone is thrashing a tambourine    the wild hoof of it stampedes over you

like horses    and not just because it’s the first time you’ve taken your shirt off for him    because

he’s only looking at      your green eyes

The tree will have its limbs
torn off, and you can do nothing

about it. Rain is more delicate
than sun. Every summer vacation

we had together will become
a scar you love. Taking the plastic

canister back to the bank’s drive-
through lane is good practice

for humility. You will not need
nor want humility, but you will have

it forced on you, and for more years
than you ever believed you would

live. Memory is like honeysuckle:
sweet-smelling and invasive.

You will love so much, your
nightmares will be about loss and

drowning. When you have to
mow the lawn, don’t sit down

to write a poem. Just go outside
and hope the blades are sharp enough.

I put on liquid eyeliner, but my dog
has cysts between her toes.

I drive to a bar and sit out front
with the engine running, then drive back home.

It’s true, I call my mother, drunk, to ask about
                                     
                                        her god, but the next day

I don’t remember my questions, or her answers;
I can’t recall the shape of the moon.

A student says he thinks I assign homework
so I’ll have something to do when I go home.

It’s true, I don’t have anyone to listen

                        to all

                                    the nothing I have to say.One day, the moon will love me back
but until then, I will weep & maim oranges
in my attempts to produce a single peel.

My life, at these moments, is a sustained étude
in distraction: How to get around/under/over
a great wall/a readied apple tree/somebody else.

My comforters became cold air drum liners—pillows
firming into sacks of clinker & I many times question
in which area of my bed would be ideal to build a fire.

I am done with people who learn only through
catastrophe. I don’t need a gale to inform me
where lies our system’s weakest point.

It has been tempting to want to switch realities
with a happy stranger. The beaming florist
seems a better fit, though I’m sure I’d soon tire

the flowers. This is Nature’s cruel paradox: you
can wither a tulip’s silken panels if you care too much
for it—begin a root rot from which it will never recover.

So frequent have been my desires lately, that even a wish
feels greedy. What I want is a lake as still as an empty sky
beneath an alabaster sky as bloodless as the wizened bark

of an aspen, so that when I skip the flattest stones available,
it will look like I am splitting clouds & I will become so good
at it, perhaps one day, you will come back & join me

when animal I forge
the iron and gnaw
the skin-casing blue I

forget when animal I hurricane
myself crave the escape 

from my own deadly
mouth I feed 

and am fed by routine
                        when animal I have 

no name other
than animal but you 

still call me girl

Ask me


why     my father         held out           his hands         when I threw up          in the

hospital hallway          at age   five      and I will tell               you      there are

many               unplanned ways          to say               I am     the color         of trees

and even          in error the body          speaks rain      Ask      why     my 

father   was       in such a hurry           to hangup        today              and I will tell   

you      it’s better to     fasten               yourself           to this              tiny      leaf      of

a          world               than     to         wander avenues           of stars 

Remember       the high           oaks     the       sycamores       and      white   birch   

they     are       your loves       given  back     to you             as if     you could        pass 

through                        days of            sickness           and      walk   once                again                

into      the church       of those                       hands

Installation Art
Glass, painted steel, silicone, monofilament, shark and formaldehyde solution
85.5 x 213.4 x 70.9 in 

Whether the shark is flying
            through the air 

or swimming in
            water, it’s hard to tell. 

In death
            anything’s possible. 

The shark’s mouth
            is wide open as if

in protest. If it had a voice,
            it would be screaming.

Although, maybe death is as
            silent as this glass box,

which circumscribes
            the unknown with a deceptive,

transparent ease. How finite
            the world seems. I look into 

the shark’s tank and try to see
            what tomorrow contains.

I can’t picture it.
            Both wanting and not

to contemplate it,
            I crouch down

to get a better look, to gaze
            deep into the shark’s jaws.

Is it better, I wonder,
            to see my reflection

or nothing at all?

Whiteness is a mind. A kind of eye.
It severs and scans, breeding ghosts, re-
moving what it can’t be. It hates not being
everything. At night, it lies there (I lie
there), glitching, running scripts, trying to see
all things inside itself. As if the eye might see
the eye seeing and know its pure rightness—
as if being right means I don’t have to die.

Certainty as a drug. A need. A theory
describes the last ice age whitening
my ancestors’ skin. Stuck too far north,
they sat listening into the endless night
reading threats in everything. Suspicion
sentenced the mind. The genome. Maybe.
Maybe policing from a cave’s mouth
fits as a beginning. As a myth.

But whiteness invents itself in history.
It builds a ship. A badge and a map.
It is a cop metastasized into a holiday.
Into a credit line. Into a child. White,
I lie awake for hours, letting the TV’s light
write its stories into me. And I know
it’s too easy to think one isn’t a person—
to turn all things to nothing, dreaming

a crack in the ceiling’s corner, there,
where a little white god crawls in, selling
death in fiction. In abstraction. In three
white time release capsules. Or
a past. A policy. A polite, well-fenced
residential area, somewhere in Ohio,
in a room with a suicide by overdose.
For whiteness, death is another face

of certainty. A secret face. The one
its law drapes across the stilled bodies
it targets in the dark. Whiteness thinks,
“If I’m not right, I’m not alive.”  And so—
one haunts the threads. One plots and trolls.
And somewhere, one crawls from bed,
turns up the machine, and just lies there,
listening, as the room goes white.

I want to kill the bluebirds nestled
beneath the underbrush, their breathy bleats
giving away their home.
                                            Mama has been
rubbing lotions on Papa’s fevered forehead
for days now      —       his hand blown off
in a hunting accident,    infection spreading
up his arm, his neck a network of wreckage.
I imagine it
                  green as tourmaline, sour as milk
turned. Mama hasn’t eaten in days,
and I sneak all the sweets I want.             We are
buying time with ice bathes and bartered prayers.

I cry in his closet as he sleeps, the itch
of his wool coat on my cheek, tobacco
scent stitched into the pockets where he keeps
silver coins to fidget with.
                                     “Marie,” he calls out,
                         and I stumble over his shoes.
                   The bluebird of his darting voice.
“You disappoint me.
I would have thought you able to handle this.”



Drunken birds

whistle in my belly
beneath the thin sheet, and
the square of tropical sky shifts
like an eye, opening—the flicker

             of gloved fingers inside me.

It’s cold on the exam table, arms curled,
the strange familiarity of stirrups.

Doctor asks nicely
if I can explain my history:
             Well, nothing fits–tampons only recently.
A quiet smile back. It is, actually, funny.

Involuntary, my clench down,
my push out. Black window of me
narrowing.

              Bear down.

              The white ceiling of your bedroom
as your mouth twists me into other shapes.

Doctor says good:
              the blood flow can help.
She presents a set of stiff pink
plastic cones to take on dates.

The birds in my belly love me.
I picture myself as a vase
filled with soft petals
shed from houseplants.

In the waiting room
I play Snake, game
after game. I won,
I whisper I’m done.

In place of physical
affection I am

sent memes and gifs.

I do it too. The bear
eating cake at the table.

This is not perfect.

Something done
toward feeling full.

A hand with a baby
chameleon on each finger.

i ran across the field    after class
            laid down            a banana peel           on the grass
            said      i bet     it isn’t even that           slippery
            to my friend    who laughed when
i slipped

                         the bed            of grass           cut against
                                    my upper thighs          unpeeled
                         a soft layer       of skin

i laughed
           when he first touched              the site             of the bruise
           gone by then                didn’t hurt but
i still felt it
                        the back seat cut          into the back                
            somehow         i slipped into his         wet dream
implication of a body              slipping inside
                                                                        the car door     

i liked
           i think              
           i liked              when he left     
                        the car
                        reeking 
                        of rotted orange           
i drove home               with the windows       
down               by the high school

i walked barefoot        on the turf       
            black beads of plastic              to my heels
when i came                home i still felt            pieces              
            slip                  inside
            my white
            socks

i wore              again               when he fucked           against
           his bedroom wall        
i slipped                       the side door               when his mom

           into the driveway        

i pulled                        
           every time he tried      to grip the sides of
                       my throat         in public          he laughed       
           as if     we were children                     playing            
                       his favorite                  tag

             it is slippery, i thought                       he slid             my body
            against the grass         one night         it is so, so slippery      so
i laughed
i laughed

I mother the sad thought

of what became, wrap its body
in a light-green blanket, Plath’s
oven its bed. I watch her wedge
her towels between door and floor,
my windows and ledge. My mother
in the haze of a 1950s childbirth,
my waiting-room father’s pink-ribbon
cigars passed around like pamphlets.
It quelled my voice, body fisted,
cartoon stars circled my head.
It cannot sing for anyone.

I only happen to be wearing
a silk, floral blouse, it is a coincidence

The shopping list says:                1. I, pray and pray
                                                     2. for my heart to crack

The shopping list lists:                 3. I, this tradition
                                                     4. I, like my ancestors 
                                                     5. not having a verb or action

Let us sharpie expressions onto pine nuts and pretend they are mercenaries..?

And so, I am happy! OK, I am childish
in behavior, not in age      The shopping list: 6. flirted with me

The shopping list says: 7. I, almost sarcastic, modern
in occasion        The sonnet jumps around whenever I look away! Sonnet, behave, I am trying to make a shopping

List: 8. If you keep this up, I will keep messing up                           
my work and they will think I am losing my mind!       The shopping list: 9. I cannot figure out

this prose of meek intent                                                 The shopping list says: 10. Say something

I, too am
sorry          warm cookies !          cinnamon !


Part of it is missing, the shopping list, Midwestern gothic

I, watch water
swirl down a drain                 chocolate !                  cold cider!

The shopping list: 11. I need fish but
I do not have a license                            Boys and men are so mature

The shopping list says: 12. Let us pretend these beans are poison and we will 
                          grow into the ground 

Who is she? Who is she?

The shopping list: 13. Coming,
sexually                                
I can lift a three-gallon ice cream tub above
                                         my head I am so strong                                   The shopping list: 14. I can swell
up and up and up

I have no need for a daughter because I have always been
a mother I am worried about my stage                                                  

Really, I,
am just embarrassed

Because at the funeral mama glowed,
exalted in blue eyeshadow, lipstick
dabbed on for blush, and because galeros
strung from cathedral domes are connected
to ghosts, the Cardinals’ languorous rise to heaven,

My grandfather lay in a wood coffin
like that stuffed cockatoo hung from the ceiling
mama suspected was filled with asbestos, 
and beauty’d begun with the smell of wax burning.

Because that morning a flock of cardinals
winged at my head, rustling
like choir silks, and because I couldn’t stalk
pheasants, foraging instead the sweet lawn
teeming with clover as a talisman against destruction,

I hated mowing, bees fleeing ahead
of lopped off flower heads, the tart
sap of grasses, bells ringing
in gladness or devastation.

Was it love to toss a cut tulip
into the dug plot, leave before the bulldozer
finished covering him up,
or the performance of love to say
like a child, he’s tucked in for the night?

Because in the dark garden blowflies
searched for a feast, I pushed peas on my plate,
gorging instead on sweets, and—don’t think of it, no—
the dirge bell struck; I was pulling the rope—

When I want a thing, I put a little
music in my voice. It comes by instinct,
the hunger in the song before it is sung,
and so, I imagine, it never goes away.
A new language comes out of no one
person or place and a little of the all.
When I think of my father I think
of words turning into water.  I think
therefore I stream his music in my head.
My measure of him phrased, desired, mourned.
Hard to resurrect the world without
a world left out, to make our losses sing.
Where there is one, there must be two.
I too am scared. Paradise is lonely.

yo mama’s dead — my nigga             she don’t come around no more    you should            get this
catch that          fade                         eat this tough love.      How are you?             you haven’t returned
my          calls                the group chat stay on mute    &   the poor dog pookie          — oh    God
pookie       dressed in winters fur coat.       God spit you out        let me fill up that water bowl
—  oh god pookie       I said              oh, God,   pookie             my boots     are           filled
with lead       // the concrete is lava     &i’mmelting   i’m melting        don’t pull me out.
You see, what had happened was — i just / you know                     it’s ok. i ain’t sad no more
pull that frown   into happiness             into some outside               into a spring /  a more sky
hue                       the color of clouds on leave               summer hot on their backs       whip them
niggas into shape               i say to myself                             mama, you should feel this too
in that  graveyard        that God-chosen resting place             the velvet casket sticks      to bone
choosing you as dress    now, i ain’t gonna lie              somedays                    just some
days                        I want to rip you out                  &         let you dance                           with  me
the way                     you always said          we were going to.       please, just one last time.

I want to name all the birds. to identify kingdom and phylum and order and family

and genus—I forget, sometimes, that we name everything that bleeds.
I want to categorize their clumsy syllables. know them by their candy-

colored wings. the soft nakedness of their feet. I want to call out to them—

each one, by its name, as though I had known it all along. in the museum diorama,
their bodies are mid-flight. perched. diving into glass. oh, those four-chambered hearts.

the hollow bones of flightless deaths. funny how we strive to name groups of anything.

a prowl of jaguars. a streak of tigers. how we name companionship as though
it is something surprising to want. to need. a brash of deer lingers in the dew-wet

lawn of my childhood home. chewing clover. blinking into the dense fog. I wonder:

what would we name a group of me? twenty versions of my body shift in a field.
my skin collects wetness at dawn. I’m skittish, maybe. I look for shelter. a dissimulation

of birds watches from the tree line. an exaltation of larks bursts from an oak in a splash

of darkness. somehow, everyone looks beautiful in white. like doves—feathered
romantic things. on my side of the glass, the creatures I see are always more frightening.

let’s name us a murder. a musket. a loneliness.

I’ve told this story so many times
            it’s just words to me: a boy shatters

the glass panes of my chest,
            pale fingers roaming, his breath

a fetid bloom on my neck.
            I’m tired of writing this poem,

of explaining how a boy
            teaches me to be a forest fire

when I did not ask to burn.
            Forgive me: maybe this

is what I get
            for being spineless, a body

hushed into silence
            a body petaling into flame.

Sometimes a palmful of water is enough
to keep an island from statehood, power. 

Sometimes it takes shovels & machetes
to carve one’s name in the same earth 

that yields so willingly to others. Human
currency devalues quicker than paper. 

A raft rolling wildly—sometimes spilling
its children into the surf, sometimes even

reaching us intact—can always be turned
away. & home can be made as strenuous

as passage. That we are not them helps
restore our faith in ourselves. We watch

poles hoist skyward in prayer—lines sparking,
alive in communication—& know some good

can come of suffering. That’s the Jesus we hold
up for worship. That’s the West we praise

our great-grandparents for taming for us.
Sometimes another’s grit gives a people

back its power, sometimes even their vote. Still,
unbordered doesn’t always imply incorporated.

Or empathy, aide. It’s a wonder we can even see them through
all the seabirds lining up to roost on their unbroken backs.


Firewood
(chái) 

A tree spent her whole life
growing. 

A tree gave me all her
rings 

that I might know warmth. 

Did you know
when you rub two limbs
together,
they burst into brilliance? 

This is how I imagine
love to be. 

My agong was cremated—
all his life ending with flame
that I might know warmth
in the thickest of fog.


Rice
(mĭ) 

And what is life
without a bowl of good food? 

Rice has taught me
that even the smallest grain
in abundance
makes you whole again.


Oil
(yóu) 

How much oil does
a body produce? 

Enough to illuminate
a lantern. 

How much oil did
your ancestors produce? 

Enough for an entire
festival of light. 


Salt
(yán) 

My ancestors
are teaching me
how to cook. 

“If nothing else,
tears make
excellent
seasoning.” 

Sauce
(jiàng)

“Is sauce
A necessity?”
I ask. 

“Sometimes
you will not want
to nourish
your body. 

You will
regard your body
with bitterness and
stop caring for it.

Flavor helps
you eat
what you need to
so that you may
become strong.” 

Vinegar
(cù) 

If you leave
rice to ferment
it will turn to vinegar. 

How lovely that
even in death
the growth of
this earth
Flavors our food. 

Tea
(chá) 

At the end
of the day
I sit on
the couch
with a shining body
and a meal
in my lap. 

Agong
and all his mothers
before him
cremate themselves
to warm me
a cup of tea

that I might
know warmth
in the thickest
of fog.

I wake: snow in the garden, spouse asleep beside me like a
pinprick of light in the distance, a stopped train—I’ve been
dreaming of Tomas Tranströmer. The dream dangles over
a cliff—I cling to its meaning, but it slips from my fingers,
I fall back to sleep. Again, his green ocean pushes up
through palazzo floors—Good evening, beautiful deep!—
and just as I feel joy rising, the plot changes, faces of
dictators peeling away one after the other until it’s
snowing, snowflakes piling up while the moon watches.
Now it’s clear I am the night’s experiment, another set of
variables to test, and thus subject to slow cruelties—like
those infant monkeys whisked away at birth and assigned
inanimate mothers: either a cloth mannequin or a naked
metal skeleton, both providing basic sustenance but
nothing else. Those dreams in which you can’t move; those
dreams in which you understand everything, and have
everything to say, but can’t speak. As when the ocean ices
over, freezes six-feet thick all around your ship, yet still
you feel it rising and falling, rising and falling. Wanting to
wake from the dream. Wanting to stay asleep.

I have to return to the clinic for more imaging—
they found some “asymmetries.”

Nothing is symmetrical in nature,
no two things alike,

but these asymmetries might be fatal—
in nature but unnatural,

like the huge white pines at the end of my driveway
planted at the same time:

one grew stocky and healthy; the other got tall,
started to die, broke in half.

Have you ever been driving on a highway and forgotten
where you were going,

as if there were a branch in your brain that split off,
a gap that opened up?

Or seen the way one bird lifts its head
higher in the nest,

grows faster, tips into flight sooner—
if the others even live.

Is this the day when everything inside me tilts,
breaks into before and after?

There are so many days I can’t remember        moments locked in a drawer
that I can’t find or open.       My own stories are alien.        I have swallowed
a pill and whispered to myself              This is not happening.        Often.

But it usually is.    Happening.       Still I can’t trust what I’m told.     Where you
see the glowing red of hysterical madness       I see      the planet Venus bright
in the sky.     Ms. Scully, you know enough about the human psyche to know that

perception is reality.      A social worker told me this once and I could not
hold inside me        the truth that we all experience the same event differently
and that makes everything true.       If perception is reality       where I see

the planet Venus          there are millions of perceived UFOs.     And there are
a thousand wild stories falling from my mouth.          They are true.
Do you believe me?         I try to tell myself I’m fine.       This is not happening.

Another year has passed since my body would not die—       somehow it knows
to panic tonight, hot.          Dana, I need a Xanax.       I need to be a hoax for you
to carve up on a sheet of aluminum.      I want to breathe in November quiet like

I used to.       This is not happening.      Perhaps you can document it        my
little catatonia as much perceived as it is real.       I assure you that I exist,
Doctor Scully.       But memories stolen by villain or medicine         may as well

have never happened           and there is no closure.       The well-dressed men come
for all of us in the end.     They tell us what to believe.      I write myself onto paper
to discern what might have been       in missing moments.      Agent Scully,       I want

to know—       how can any of us close the door on ourselves         without swallowing
a perfect paranoia           some sort of uncertainty with which to warm ourselves
when we hang up our coats             taste the disquiet       heavy with ghosts.

How about a space-a a
            vac       vv
                        Vacuum?

a
            vacancy f
for me to
t
                        Try something?
Talk. To as
to ask you wh
to ask a question about
why yo
why you, during those school years,
browbe
           browbeat me in the schoolyard,
your knuckles churning
my cheekbones into a purple-blue egg.

Le
let me answ
let me tell you
                       words now spear
                       into my tongue. Una
unable to shoot strai
shoot straight out.

Let me ans,
gi
                                    give me time

li
           looking at m
looking at me you wouldn’t kn
know this about me. Th
That I sti
still clutch those days
in my fist.                                 Ju
                                                 Just like you dinn
                                                 didn’t always sh          sh
                                                 show
how you sin
                         Sing?
how you would single me out,
silence me in dirt and chain link.

I           I
            I know I soak up
a lot of patience—I
                                    I’m not what you thou
what you thought of whe
thought of when you said
you wanted a friend who ma
made you hang onto every word.
If you g
If yo
I
           if you g
                        Go?
if you give me a few more
seconds than others, I co
                        What?
Please I
Please I know what I wan
what I want to say. I kno
I know you don’t fe
don’t feel the sa
feel the s

In the Mask Shop— 

the jackal intrigues: glossy ears
the color of onyx, snout carved

like a tomb. Rabbits next, their eyes
slit—starless on the porcelain. My sister

pulls a skull from the wall, its teeth
bold like boyhood. Dark branches

fork from the eyes, boughs spooked,
golden leaves spread across the crown.

In the mirror, she wears the underworld,
face flooded with trees, one great bone.

Resurrected, she beckons & I reach
for a mask, the skull a fate I’ve always

known. Behind it I am cloaked,
forever dark in my girl-head, a womb

made of stones. What can I say—
our bodies are tragic houses,

the cults of ghosts. & girls are taught
our death tastes like pomegranate,

never how it sours in the throat.

You can give a tumor a cute name, 

            but like a hurricane     it still 

might kill you. A small body inside 

a bigger body, an un-gardening

of limb and trunk.

All day sharks ram 

the ocean to keep from drowning, 

a constant moving panic. No,

not even sorrow knows           her fate. 

I love how the fields foam

                        with wheat. 

I love how earth inhabits 

many appetites.           The baby 

gazelle lapping

from the same stream as the hungry

lion,                 all sun and flame, 

each rib a gone-soft gold 

in the mouth.               All it takes 

is two sharp barbs of a hook 

to pull a small city up from the sea,

all eyes            and flushed gills, 

a pearl-grey brokenness

Fear, like a wave ,

looking for something solid to break 

against. This hunger that is ours, 

for now,                      for less.

you name every rifle in your father’s
hunting cabinet another synonym
for escape. This crevasse, a rite
of passage: your hands trembling
in unknowns, exquisitely foreign
& freezing in the dark. Somewhere
in a city drowning in dusk,
your mother tries to shape your sorrow
into something she can blame herself for.
By the side of a road, a dead man
promises his children that tomorrow
he will wake from hibernation.
The precise moment it comes,
you are infinity within creased knuckles,
wishbone from a body that is not yours
or one that was, once, until you traded it
for the memory of incandescence.
Listen: every deer in this forest
is learning the sound of anguish.
Listen: the moon rises so loud the sky
turns black in fear. In some other
version of this night, your body knows
all the places it has not yet been.
Perhaps one day you will relearn
the art of inhaling, but today is not
that day. Instead there is only your
father’s cabinet, somehow swinging
open. Mouth glinting, soulless, teeth
as so many rifles swimming helpless
& hungry in their trapped
jawbone.

The next village over
and another man
who is also afraid to sleep. 

His gray dog near the bed.
With each pause in its breathing he hears
the promise of chaos, all the stars of heaven
careening towards the house
so he walks through the doors, instead.

Outside he measures the honesty of hay
with bared feet. Through the window
a radio delivering some local midnight violin. 

It reminds him of sixty years
and then the suddenness.
It reminds him of this moment
the resistance of alfalfa underfoot 

the nearness of death each night
the hostility of living in spite of love
the acres of darkness ready for harvest.

The scientist fed me a salad of geranium leaves

A winter kind, tipped white. Two stones flung skyward

Crowned in more stone. Me wondering if a mountain is

Silent inside. Every campfire makes me lonely.

I bite down bread & cold weather. Slice my finger against

A glass bottle. The red so red & bright I could not help

But admire. I am but next door to happiness. Blood

Beating against a blue bandana. Remembering my uncle 

Across the lunchtime table in Las Vegas sharing labor stories;

A man falls forward from his own cement roller and is crushed,

Slowly crushed, in a cartoon it would be funny, you could almost

Picture the pancake body peeling up flat on the roller,

But this is not funny, it’s death. Feet first, my uncle says.

He’s already been crying. I want to say the story is a lie, something 

Terrible I made up to sadden my poem about a single drop of blood

Beading garnet on my index finger. A poem that headed too

Artfully in the direction of mountain & pine, a cement roller wheeled

In like a death derby. Nearly all my father’s friends are dead.

In Copenhagen I hid when I saw army trucks rolling through, who even

Fears the army when the army lives in Copenhagen? The trucks were

Topped with hand-bound Christmas trees. I saw the soldiers with their guns

Strolling beside the calmest, Copenhageniest, swan-scattered lake. It

Reminded me of sitting next to my uncle at the restaurant table, knowing

He was strapped with a gun, a gun in Las Vegas, the shining Mandalay Bay

Hotels like gilded macaroons. It felt wrongful, that gun, like a stiff dick,

Like the steel hand of a chiming slot. The cocktail girls dressed like Santa,

Like sexy Santa, their perfect legs wrapped in support hose, their eyeliner

Like the curved runner of a Norwegian sleigh. Copenhagen is just another

Stupid name for sleep.

A poet confirms / that birds don’t pay a bit of attention / to national borders. / One
source says we stand / at 25.9 million refugees, / but days have passed since
publication. / Every season, the river erodes the shore. / Snow is falling on the
mountains, and here / it is flooding. I stand at the doorway to watch / rain cover the
courtyard. / On the television, countries discuss / the building of walls / while
presidents meet and take photos, / remove nations from agreements established /
for climates like this one. / You and I speak / another language, forget the syntax
used / to write proper depositions. / Thousands of footfalls across the continents /
echo in our ears like the blood of a conch shell / found in a quiet place. / Eighteen-
year-old women don scarves, carry Kalashnikovs, / and march into the sun, singing
the meaning of names, and die, singing / the meaning of names. / It has been too
long since / our fingernails also were brown with earth.

oh Omertà I’ve long loved me
a quiet thief: steal me like brambles// a cotton thread// a drop of blood

you darling birdsong// so scared to soon be
no sing// deadquiet

the ivy writhes lonely in the dark
like a lover with nothing—here we are in a room that rarely gets light

who will weep for me// when from every socket// I’ve plucked out the eye?

the song of glass along flesh, I feel rather unraveling—
heartache & small worship! save me from this little prayer of mine:

to steal & plant the moon // in the cradle of my maw//
may it outward seep like gore from throttled plume

I read
differently…what she had “taken off…”
what “she didn’t
want to,” what “if she did…” 

If only he could change
position

with respect
to hills, like elephants—white in light
when white is presence

in pigments, absence

the color of the object
changing, like iridescence

like things (her favorite word)
she really wanted, despite the eyes
apologetic—things

like mother-
of-pearl. Fish, peacocks, as examples

when we did
not have sex
in my dream
we closed down
the grocery store
halogen dark
on the harbor
and were lying
on the blood orange
and the grapefruit
you spoke to
me and I
pushed your hair
off your brow
as in waking
black streaks
on the orange
peels your face
always too hot
near mine like
breath on glass
we looked out
the sliding doors
onto the sea
but I held
even when you
touched my hip
and the party
barge panned by

dry body bed light
the house women smell the curve
her body closing—

our mother’s body
like my sister’s body my
body so yes we

reenter ash blows
her in our faces we throw
it on the wind from

Ragged Mountain I
live there again do I have
that nostalgia yes

do I know I have
it yes does that exculpate
me no do I know

it—live there again
call it home that opposite
place we smell her body

ending itself the
house they build by full of want
smell salt unwanting

what is disorganized
as a feeling attending
like a death needs

that nostalgia do
I wish she is not dead yes
does it undo me

yes does undoing
do yes I know no more than
that I think but think

it—we own it ten
years almost exactly in
Cushing U.S.A.

nervous for taxes
but in other ways how dear
yes it everything

is no but I have
that nostalgia no still no
but how do I get

to yes yes there is
only the no I live there
again I am wrong-

ly equipped she says
before she dies honey there
is no justice in

this world easy chair
flooding white tissue tipped red
itself can I love

her for it—can I
forgive her for it maybe
is it the same thing—

is that just—but is
it how it is—downwind dust’s
carcinogenic

living here again
yes I can’t say it’s that our
friends’ parents die where

in our bodies things
are already amiss we
know it in our smells

before and after
I mean in losing easy
what fear wants to take

every woman for
four generations has had
a breast nostalgia

yes is there a right
answer no have I got it—

Write a poem about a character who goes for a walk at the beginning of autumn. Make it
a clear afternoon. Have this character walk twelve blocks. One line per block. Let his eyes
describe each object he passes. Show your readers what he has gained or lost along the
way. Let his mind wander as quickly as his feet. A forgotten train in which people are
still traveling. A sigh passing. A door that never closes. Remember– show your readers,
don’t tell. Hold still as you try your hand describing the prints of famous watercolors
plastered to the bus stop. The Ferris Wheel under construction. The face of the auguste
clown gesturing at the camera. Match it, color for color. Consider the little leaves.
Consider the wind so gentle. Consider its early autumn song. Consider adding a quote
from Cocteau as an epigraph. Let your pen slip. Let it sink in to where the sun is very
strong, & where the shadows, very pale– lengthen. Vanish them. Act as though your
character recognizes the gentleman sitting alone on a bench on the quais of the Seine,
tossing fresh bread to a swan. Have the man use the phrase, “After me, the flood.” Give
him a name. Take a deep breath. Start each line off with

Because
because

The things that she would call sacred: the yellowed morning
behind bottle glass windows; the hair swept back, away
from the mouth. The candle wax pooling in their hands.
She wants to hammer their thanksgiving into the sacristy wall.

The priest extends a small piece of bread, unleavened,
over the railing. There are no children. There are no survivals
below the waist, skirts dimming, draped and still. A verb
becomes a noun becomes a body becomes a smooth, curved stone.Dear Body,

Forgive me: before this message, I’ve tried
               to reach you though the customary channels.
                              I dropped a line to your business address,

                              then later, with some qualms over manners,
               your personal email, the one at which
I imagine, your close friends send chain mail.

I have a few requests; I wanted to bend
               our mutual ear, and thought it best to deal
                              with our joint interests directly, to cease

                              miscommunication through scraps of data,
               through lab reports generated by the hospital’s
automated systems. Let’s be honest: do either of us

know what to make of the milk-ghost images
               shot through with X-rays? Yet having heard
                              no reply after what I myself would characterize

                              as a civil interval, I confess that I tried
               calling you. Perhaps you were out—you let
the line ring for some minutes, no machine

catching the call. I wondered, briefly,
               whether you knew it was me on the wire,
                              whether you read our name on a pop-up screen

                              and decided to wait me out. But speculation
               is beside the point. I trust that you can appreciate
my position: after decades of working together

toward what I believe is our common good,
               I’ve been surprised by your recent failures
                              of good faith. I hope I do not go too far, but

                              I view your recalcitrance as willful disregard.
               When I desire to grasp, say, an apple—does it matter
why?—I feel I can expect your help, your closing

of fingers around the green rind. Or when I need
               the knee to hold, the joint to bend appropriately,
                              that I should not need to wonder if you’ll comply

                              or toss me to the ground. You’ve left me,
               I confess, in a spasm that looks for all the world
like a drunk’s bungling rage. I’ve tried

to appease or inspire you, shouting down
               the nerve-trip wires with pill after dissolving
                              pill, but you don’t seem cheered. I’ve considered

                              the possible dissolution of our partnership,
               but on further reflection, I do not see a viable
alternative to our continued work together.

I hope I do not seem too familiar, too cavalier
               if I say that I have grown to like you, over time.
                              At the outset of our working relationship, I may

                              have thought you a bit ungainly, and might have made
               some remarks uncomplimentary to your appearance.
For these, I am sorry: I see now that the texture

of your hair or the general curvature of your muscle
               and fat is in no way my concern, for you are
                              an independent entity. I hope that any dismissive

                              comments on my part are not to blame for our current
               state of affairs, and that we may repair the rapport
we once took as a given. Please, consider

replying to this letter. Whether by post or email
               is at your discretion. In case you choose to call,
                              I’ll be waiting with our hand on the phone.

To My Seatmate, on a Cross-Country Flight

The mask is not for you. I don’t wear it
to keep you safe from what rides with me
in Seat 17B where I’m wedged against you
through takeoff, flight, then landing.

It isn’t here, strapped behind my ears
and fogging my glasses, to shelter you
from what I emit into the plane’s
closed air-system. That’s not to say

I mind your thinking about tuberculosis
or a mutant influenza that’s rutted
in pig dung. Or that I resent the look
on your face as you contemplate

how you’d make your meeting if you caught
what you suspect I have, which clinics
flank your hotel. I’m not bothered
by your scanning for empty seats

in this too-full, body-stacked fuselage;
it’s nothing I don’t do myself, and daily,
a risk-benefit analysis as to whether to touch
the germ-riddled handrail on a staircase

or take a seat on the heaving train
next to the child with the glistening,
effluent nose. Then again, this mask
does little to help me, either. Leggy proteins

kick through paper, gravitate toward skin
in their will to replicate. See how the mask
gaps at the side? It’s a reminder that we breathe
the same air, you and I. That what you inhale

I have exhaled already, strip-mined
and sucked through lungs to feed my own
creeping blood. That though we are careful
not to bump knees or elbow the armrest

at once, we share the secret spaces of alveoli.
Our molecules comingle. That you, hale in your
wool suit and I, knuckling my cane,
we are caught up together as the plane banks hard.

The flu season comes in its usual tide
of cough syrup, cherry reds and arsenic
green. Kleenex bunts the couches
of waiting rooms, drapes the desktops

in offices. News headlines pump hysteria
across the wire, make a virus’s replication
into a particular insult to healthy adults
and children. Pictures show lines at clinics

men with shirtsleeves rolled up, injection sites
bared with high gravity. The hoards look
like a pitiful regiment, ready to march to war
against viruses that threaten the American Way.

Experts appear from clavicle up,
their televised jaws slack-flapping the same
blather as always, telling us that usually it’s only
those who have underlying conditions

who die of influenza. Only us, only the few
shadowy figures barely worth mentioning.
We few, the cancer-bald. Just us, the asthmatics.
Nobody in the death-ranks but we of genetic

mutations. But when film cuts to an image
of a sweat-glazed toddler hooked to electrodes,
it’s only we with the underlying conditions
who know how to say, Oh, baby, little one, I know.

Imagine yourself natural
in the day like grass—like ice.

Ontological Data and Problems

The Tools of Protection
below are in no special order
and none is stronger than any other:
opinion, ignorance, God,
applause, face East and draw
deep deep deep deep
thy breath, get out, insania,
hieromania, philosophies
of resignation.

Properties

Exquisitely happy
and sad.

Indicators

An anger you can really taste.
A face you can remember.

The Variegated Sameness in the I-Network

How splendid, this distress,
in its matter-of-factness.

The Fourfold Ontological Dimensions of Certainty

One:    The body.

Two:    What’s broken
              so far.

Three:  I feel my feet
              and start walking.

Four:    Always this making
              bullets of wounds.

Lambs were bled here.

A horse was buried on this land
so we could stack a chapel over him.

One man caught him, rope-bound him,
unfastened all his teeth.

Two winters came, one after the next,
then everything was snow.

We lost our habit of expecting
flowers in the spring.

One May, the chapel horse
rose swiftly through the floor,

took the Christ child from the altar,
and carried him to woods

where sometimes, far from view,
trees would marry each other.

The maples were the ones
we liked to wound—

piercing bark to get the sap to drip,
boiling that to make a candy.

This was when a blessing meant
a sacrifice.

We said a hanged man blessed
the hilltop with his feet.

You     rat in the walls of childhood
desire to milk tears from a homesick child
a real place      you can almost draw it                        superimposed on a map
you know it existed
because            you were there once

swimming in that sundress     
that too-long t-shirt     that lake
waterlogged shoes clinging
to your silk and your first self-inflicted hair cut

Behind the laundry cabin a pair of pants around a pair of ankles      a sigh  
no        more likely children laughing or children crying
the rats                        your pets         made flesh each summer

This   poem  was  originally  entitled  How  to

Survive   After    Obtaining   the   Four   Year

Degree but  then  I fell asleep  & upon waking

I entitled it something else. Sometimes I have

dreams  where  February  comes early & I am

left  standing  out  in  the  middle  of  a frozen

lake.   Sometimes  you  glance  at  me  with  a

funny look in your eyes.  Sometimes you  tell

me    to    carpe    diem.    Sometimes    I    do.

Sometimes nobody compliments my jeans so

I buy more pairs of jeans. Sometimes nobody

says anything so neither do I. Sometimes it’s

raining & sometimes it isn’t.  Sometimes  we

step outside & our footsteps are engrained in

the dirt. Sometimes we bathe ourselves in the

river. Sometimes you ask me why my poems

are arranged in columns like obituaries.

My grandfather died
the way that spring blooms

palms open, all cold
and full of nothing.

And always I can hear
his ghost calling to me,

crying from under snow-in,
from the bury of forget

and from the heavy hurting
of all over and again.

He says scientists should give in
the way wick weakens,

for all flames eat candle through.
He says, stop trying, surrender

to the inevitable, to facts. Frozen,
he says, means simply

stop. He reminds me
what remain really means:

Left behind. All of us,
we are dying. Eternity,

a porch gone bare
with the steps all but burned

in the blur of winter.
Eternity is a place only

for scientists and for scissors,
for screams.

Eternity gulps deep and breathes
I am no longer. Eternity exhales

I always will.

When I was a thin boy I dreamed
I had dangerous bones,
sharpened them over a prone
brother, crunched fist
into his heart.
When I talked
to the girl with the silver glasses,
my elbows melted
into my sides, I couldn’t name
even half the quiet knot
I had turned into.
Squeezed close to her in Pearl
Harbor’s dark, I found I could reach
from my own body and know
for the first time
my hands are tender.
Leaned into her, my ear to her ear,
my face pressed so flush
next to hers in the theater,
I saw bombs go to fog
through her glasses,
fire turn to milk in the sea.

i.

What happens in wreckage when teeth
have been so changed
from original dental record
via orthodontia or otherwise?

The unfamiliar vellum of an x-ray
held against illumination,
how red and green together will
give blackness.

ii.

A red vessel is red
because it reflects its own color. When we say
“this bowl is red” we mean
it is not itself.

What is it that you see when you wake
in the middle of sleep? The veil
over your eyes, so the next morning
you don’t remember saying Did they shoot me?
I don’t ask anymore, you won’t tell me.
You’re ashamed of the nights
I startle the feral survivor in you.

Last night as your ear shone membrane-
red in the lamplight, my sudden shift
on the mattress was like buck shot
into a tree. You flew up and out
towards the closet. Endlessly

on-call in Afghanistan, your hours
were only punctuated with sleep.
Muscle memory—learned in Kajaki,
Musa Qala, near Sangin, in Marjah,
at FOB Zeebrugge and White House,
even at Camp Leatherneck—told you
where your gun was kept.

The look in your eyes said you were
still asleep. I wanted to ask who
I was in your dream. The loud sky?
The Pashtun man who eyeballed you
before they rushed your post? Boots
running over themselves?
The Jerusalem mule limping along
riderless before it knelt in the road
and exploded? The only thing my hands

could do was touch your chest
and tell you It’s me. Cold with sweat,
you always come back down. Fall
like a pruned rose back to sleep. I can turn
into a birth-wet fawn, flattened
in the steppe grass. I can lay still
and wait for those shadows in your head
to retract their fangs.

You said Jesus would come into me,
into my heart. I remember your words,
“Come back if you don’t feel it; we
will try again.” I came back. I came back.
I remember the pith of those years:
yellow walls, ringed with paper chains.
Chains the color of flesh: “incarnation,”
you said. What use was flesh if not my own
to give away; what use was your gentleness?
Incarnation was the wooden quietness
of your pleasure, your tongue on the roof
of my mouth, the thrill of your coming
to fetch me. Jesus was a bulge beneath me
when you held me on your lap. I remember
the jealousy of those days, the come-thous,
the founts, your incarnation, the flesh-chain
reaching me through all these years.Like the rumble under a river
    the dead hear looking up
suddenly and like the beehive
    roar of sighs every word
just barely is able to contain

ten thousand years of life
    inside us quietly every day
remain. Like the sea-sway
    green of waves without end
and the vertical plunge of miles

darkening down, this limitless
    is comes on when you finally
listen in. I’m nearly halfway
    to death and still may turn
and go the other way.  Watch!

Child, we are not here to stay
    and you don’t seem to care.
That is what I admire about you.
    You say giddy-up to the day.
You laugh and laugh and you

have no idea about rivers, sorrow
    or the sea and you don’t
know me and that is for the best.
    I’m a downer. Ask your parents.
We are friends. Child, we are guests.

5.
The bird is singing just before
                                                 it gets eaten—
                                                                          flutes on the saw teeth of steak-                                                                                                           knives threaded from the gutter
                        to hear the way serration chimes.
                                                             Front stoop chatter rattles garbage cans:                                                                                                                                                            echoes geese left behind
             for the winter to keep frosted rooms
                                                                         company. In the front room, I sing
                                     the clear note of silver tapped against glass
                                                                                      for attention—you shave
wafer-thin almond cake, let the robins carry
                                on conversation for us, our manque trembling
                                                                                              on the edge of dessert spoons.

4.

The teakettle sirens us to the honey-onyxed kitchen: scooped-out grapefruit shells & black
coffee-grinds compost in the half-drained sink. From the satinwood hutch, the deserted
engagement gift remembers polkaing on hardwood to Unter Donner und Blitz—over the
mountainous curve of your shoulder, I marked how the model dancers whirled in music box
confines: to avoid a May wedding, donate trousseaux a week before—pawn the ring & flee.

3.

            Sidewalk pacing: diversion to keep the web between my fingers
                                                                                      from itching under hypoallergenic metal,
                        insomnia soothed by counting
                                                             streetlights, jaywalking at three a.m.
            On the fourth floor, I water geraniums naked, curtains open—
                        on ivory vellum, I draw exclamation points,
                                                                       then cross out save the date—made-up flight
                                     patterns doodled in the margins. You email me
a triptych of exotic places (Mallorca, the Amazon, Cambodia). I clip out
                                                                      pictures of the Alps, snow-capped
                                                                                   onion domes in St. Petersburg, celebrations
at Nalukataq & string them above my bed. Pinch pennies between my lips
                                                          to save on fountain wishes & learn to dry clean at home.


2.
Coup de foudre as geese fly south, honk homing songs to keep on course.
I dig for cash at the dry cleaner’s, jam my hip against the counter & cling

to an umbrella, two blazers, a winter coat:—your number
on the bottom of the receipt for five days with half-chewed gum.

Over sushi, you make a study of me: flushed cheek with teak walls,
reflection magnified in water glasses—

1.
           I pay for my own dinner, walk home alone,
                                  listen to brontide spill
                      over the cityscape, rustle through beer tabs, cigarette butts.
                                                                       Boil beans for the week
                                                                                                            & wait: how many rings
                                                            until my better self clicks on? Hello,
                                                                                                             you’ve reached—

         In his tiny corner, the hamster burrows deeper in woodchip dreams. I run
                           hot water in the cramped bathroom, draw myself bedtime
                                                              stories on the foggy shower door. When the power goes out,
                                       I paste glow-in-the dark stars on the south wall
                                                                                                  until they phosphor on.

I know how it is to see bones in the mirror
I know how it is to be rotting alive
I am seventeen tonight   the moon a shotgun barrel 
over my shoulder   when death slams the screen door   
the floorboards creak   we drive to the game   
fumble under bleachers   while padded bodies collide 
my teeth in the dirt   among half-eaten hot dogs
my skinny hands stroking death   through his trousers  
by the edge of the field   I make him a dandelion crown   
he slides his tongue   past my lips   I feel a meadow 
in my chest   when I slice it open   termites swarming
like what I consume    then I shovel it out   
then sew myself up               death hid in the thicket
while I undressed   shorts fell to my ankles   
death you were watching   I liked you watching   
you liked my stunted body   like a moving car   
I fall right out of   I’m sleeping even when I’m not
I’m sleeping when I stare at myself in the mirror

My troubles are legion. My troubles bide time on the tongues of clods. My
troubles swim the acid ocean, shellacked with superstition. Deathless. Sure to
walk again.

My troubles are salted with cruel bedtime stories. My troubles are the
aftertaste of everything must mean. I mean devil and dinosaur, and so begin
my troubles. I mean double face of heal and mortify. I mean a story about
hubris. I mean a story about transformation. I mean bounty of fish and ill
omen of upending. With my tale comes my trouble. Barnacle on the tongue,
that splintered oar.

My troubles dangle raucous legs and lack respect for systems. System:  World
unsighted. Magic trick that bleeds on impact. But my troubles  never balk at
drawing blood. My troubles have it in them. To crush life worlds. To eat
infants. Teeth of how does this work.  Glands of can we look inside.

Before I had myself—web of clear morning, so long coming—I had my
troubles and their tales like sirens. Kill the children, heal the children, row the
children to the other side. My troubles, how they wail from roof tops. How
they scribble over history with their fair weather demands.

Remember when you said

we’re not going to make it? I spent all night reminding you to wake up in the morning. You hadn’t slept that poorly since our hotel flooded. I have been meaning to apologize. The way a person can never relax because there may be someone just outside the window, tapping the moment you look away. This is what I have done to you. You have boarded all the windows. I meant for you to love me more than this. I meant to trim the weeping willow branches that reach toward our bedroom. The way a person can never be intimate because the other may become too violent, squeezing too tightly and biting down too hard. This is what I have done to you. I meant to touch you softly on the arm the first time we were nervous together. I meant to tell you I loved you earlier than you would have felt the same. I meant to not do this. I meant to let you sleep, only placing my lips on your face when I knew you were too deeply asleep to notice.

The Lavender and Thyme


on my neighbor’s patio
struggle to live
in the same pot.

in the kitchen, their cat
laps up little licks of water
from a clear bowl.

there, above him,
in the sill of the window,
is a spider and her whole existence.

Father as the miracle. Father as the present
disciple. Father who kneeled at the edge

of every pond before testing his step.
My vocation was of dare, to be inside

the pond I broke through that winter.
My hands, drenched and blue as Gulliver

trout. What I could feel, grasping at strands
of him as I found them. River furrows

sheathing what he’d never seen, the season
still too early. After that, we could never tell

which surfaces were safest to touch, which might
fill our boots with a thrill so numbing

we could never unlearn it.

this is a good place to begin from here
my imaginary old man appears
something beginning here in the event
beginning is such a thing for the old
man the doorway is a beginning the wood
porch and peeled paint the uneven rotted
steps the drive leading to the road rumbling
over the bridge following the river
past hills leaning into where the big sky
begins surely there is a beginning
something is perceived first as a shadow
then a bear then a small child then bear
the sky is perceived as the ocean then
a small redness
                           all that begins does so
in many ways which is to say that there
is no end to it which is to say that
when nothing happens he waits for it to
begin whatever it is that is beginning
we are getting closer some light falling
some hinge some door closing softly as if
for forever and again forever

Together they are diamonds: honed, bruting,
decadent as a bird’s beak, a fish’s eye,
grapes clotting the platter, sweet wine
slicing the rim.

Alone they are silent: the chipped tooth,
the dry root, the faux thorn.

Hang a tooth around your neck
and pretend a solitary point
can protect you.

I was language before I was a body, fit for a soul too long in the arms. I was sand forged by the sea’s signature, strung out on the narcotic moon. I lived a whole village inside my waiting. Every voice a muffled thunder. Every god claimed acquaintance with the weather. I burned my tongue on my own riddles. The night bloomed a great garden. There were no bones that weren’t the skeletons of birdsong, of bat-song. I unearthed a woman-song, its hum an allegory of bees. The words were a confusion trapping my escape. I plagiarized my sin. I refused the fugitive you.

Sparrows enter through doors and windows, lured
by unseen forces, exit in a flurry of chimney smoke.

Stain of flutter. Shimmering carcinogens. Not burning
but batting wings to ash. To ashes. Not burnt but

spurting from the funnel smudged and frenzied, some
dark thing possessing them. Passing through the stack,

they emerge changed and skittering. This is the reason
I shake in doorways, cringe at hinges, tremble when

I am drawn toward some sunrise, some small
kindness, anything tender. Pressure in my chest,

a column building—a plume of sparrows rises.

A country of origin in a grandmother’s jewelry box. Old and ornate, baubles heavy on the lobe.
The city is built in spires. My ears are not pierced.




Orientation: Promiňte, kde je metrem? Straight, then to the right. A kde jsou moji duchové?
Saving you a seat on the train.

Legacy: Blood is fractal as opposed to fractional. Bronzed branches on autumnal oaks are not ¼
alchemists.

Translation: If you are in Old Town, you are in Old Town. If you walk across a bridge, you are
in Malá Strana. What is the latitude of your language now?

Threshold: (See also: pain.) The point at which this vision begins to take on properties of the
nightmare. He broke his sandal on the doorframe. Look for the detached leather strap round his
foot as he toils in the field and call him king. Libuše loosened into myth. You do not yet know
you do not come from here.

Pronunciation: A háček is the difference between halve and have.

In which there exists no X or Y & Z
is for zoning & zeroing-in on the general
calculation of failure used to map our safety,

but let’s face it: little is more fragile than this
act of juggling glass & metal along a false
horizon. Takeoff is something we must do

blind. What can hearts know of houses or road
signs needed for dead reckoning when traveling
at speeds the dirty side can never handle. Tension

means to grip firmly the control column. Caging
prevents the susceptibility of damage. Caution.
Warning. Emergency. Distress is the same

in every brittle language. Love is the coffin
corner: the heart, reaching maximum altitude
& top speed:: the moon, raising its blade

in a part of the sky you hadn’t expected. Without
ballast, without static wicks, without calculating
true air speed, we barrel-roll forward, all hands

& knees, bracing. Up here, furthest upstream
of a moving object, what we cannot see of bow
& stern, we hear. Let it be less a snap or crack

than a boom when the waves mangle themselves
faster than normal toward us. We know the shock,
abrupt, its energy dissipating quickly. Takeoffs

equal landings, we hope, though we can never be
sure the earth wants us back. May we embrace no
failsafe, no reverting to home, no direct course.

Let our landings come through thunder & snow.
Let this rabbit roll us rough down a river of stone.

Down here—forever projecting—
signs for signs for a sign for a woman

who kisses against the knife, but no one
sees her anymore. My son’s the fist inside

the fist he’s shaking at the rest of the world.
So on. So forth. Pocked hearts, not even

bodies broken enough to be dragged. Dumb
rugs over bald floor. Between us the clouds

are being torn apart by hands bare & neither
more nor mine. Distance isn’t the word we

mean if objects are always already absent.
What have you? What have you done makes

more sense. What have you done for me
lately doesn’t make him laugh. What have I

done, he wants to know. Him. One of two
choices I made to hold change in the world.


II.


What have you now? I accuse the puppy
               & his boy responds—because desire
                              Mom, because hunger—as if

he, too, could chew a couch cushion.
               I live here, with a head not made
                              for hats, in blizzard country

where I accidentally slam the shovel
               against the asphalt & the dog
                              barks & starts searching

for the other him & the other me. As if
               another us could be somewhere else
                              where we sound better,

happier, full. My son says because desire,
               hunger, fifteen years already on Earth—
                              this great gift he’s certain we have

wasted & can never repair—words mean
               worse than nothing if we’re thoughts
                              unable to share pain

& wonder. What have you now to say,
               Mother, I ask myself, as I shove
                              snow from an end to an edge

of dirt, bracing myself to throw, a language
               so old—what have you?—taunting
                              me, the puppy arching, choking

on a chunk of anything, & I reach for a treat
               from my pocket to dislodge it, thinking good
                              boy sounds so much like goodbye.

Blue Sky Thinking

& who among us isn’t magicked
               into being, & what isn’t written
                              into the mind’s folds

like mushrooms to the touch. The king
               of clouds is interested in nothing
                              but clouds, which is uphill

work & surging like a wave. Why
               should anyone agree that this
                              endless succession of cloud-

less days would be boring? We reach
               & reach & do nothing but burn.
                              Tell me to pay attention

to what’s happening above, & I’ll show you
               a woman cut in half by a window.
                              No matter. Fog is only light

scattered, the way a silencer makes
               room behind a bullet. Food
                              prepared from fish

is just fish. This mind, this blue day, sky
               full of galoshes & rain, this curtain
                              I never stop pulling. I envy

the tree its last curve of snow, the cloud
               its slip of ice, simple
                                               receding.

Out the spring window a blue jay masquerading
as my dead aunt or maybe vice versa.
I tell the jay, just in case, my craving
for pie, though blackberries
on their thick treacherous vines
won’t arrive for another season.
I tell the jay, now grooming a blue black wing,
mapped and mysterious as a planetarium,
where I have been dancing and the book
David read by himself. I explain
my children, David and Rose. The jay cries.
The corn and the honeysuckle and my aunt
and my grandmother Rose all still in August
in Bucks County, Pennsylvania. Still 1976.
It is dusk. We have our brown paper bags
open and ready. The planets are rising.

We must break the animal between us
until it is of use. Eyes gauzed with flies

and marbling cataracts, ankles all
spavined and covered in lesions: we meant

to rear a colt whose very thew was want,
and bore instead a beast that never learned

to roister. Do you see what the desire
to desire has wrought? Do you also hear,

when you wake at night, the uncanny song
it makes of braying, makes so mendicant

and gentle—like this long touch which doesn’t
stop or proceed. Let your hand leave its sleep,

let it rise from my chest. Let the horse go
unfettered, string the mane into a bow:

that we might start to play the coda—
the freer measures, the silent rest.

When I close my eyes I see my father,
dying. I dab his head with a washcloth.
His open mouth jaws a gurgled amen.
His eyes emote hosannas of breakage.

I wish my eyes could blink a drone strike back
into tactical non-being; the dead
ghost down the road in a wedding convoy,
and I wonder how I might turn away

from a deep sorrow that is not my own.
When I fall asleep I don’t dream stairwells.
In me, a school of salmon swims upstream.
In me, a fish leaps against the headboard.

Dear Lord, I fear paradise diffuses,
in a sharp gust, like dandelion puff.
Set the tinder of old phrases burning.
I’m waiting to pull the bee from the rose.

I call the door ajar in me a grace.
I want to be as flagrant as the wind
that cuts December Wednesdays in half.
I hear notes that build a more merciful

God, some days, and other days I just let
the bear in my belly swing from my hips
and I paw out my animal blessings.
And my animal blessings paw out me.

When black boy whistle everyone come running to see what.
Everyone have something to say about
what to do about ________
and who should be doing it, too. When he whistle they wanna assume.
Whistle must be something to do with them. Whistle must be warning
he about to take. Everybody knows black boy always wanting _______.

Black boy whistle is never just “need a cab”, who ignores
black boy though he try catch it anyway. Black boy only needs ________.

Is never just an excerpt of a tune in his life. Black boy never needs ________.

Is never just black boy enjoying his own head. Ain’t nothing
a black boy could be thinking about to make him whistle or ________
either. Black boy whistle while he _______.

When black boy whistle
Black girls supposed
to strut. Harder. Black girls always want black boy desire.
When black boy whistle.
White girls supposed to run and
tell. White girls always reject black boy desire.
White boys supposed to
stop it. White boys always fear black boy desire. They supposed to.

Whistle must mean he staring too long at something don’t
belong to him. Everybody know black boy always looking at _________.
When black boy whistle
he be asking to bring the roof down around his head.

Asking for patrol car stop and frisk
And lynch mob too
He be asking for it
When black boy whistle
everyone come running to see what
ain’t nobody asked him to put his lips together and blow.

Narcissist, she sees omens everywhere.
                                                           It makes it possible for her to believe in God,
in her marriage, rippling beside her in the Mon.
                                          She counts each cardinal in the trees, each green light 
stacked one after the other on Fifth Avenue.
                                    The world wrapped around her like a thicket, like a cave.

But the gods built the cardinals, each tree, each
                                                            of these three rivers. And some nights, while
her husband sleeps, she hears
                                                the echo, pulsing through the East End like a siren
only her God-made ears can hear.
                                                                Lean over me, one bank at a time, and see
how you can make this last forever.
                                                                          Now lean farther.
                                                                                                                           Lean farther.

after    i    pry    my    body    from    his    beautiful
neighborhood.   after    he    apologizes    for    his
beautiful neighborhood.  after   he   finishes   the
bottle   of   wine   on   his   own.  after   he   shows
me    each    of    his    books    and    what    they’ve
meant  to  him.   after   photographs   fall  out  of
each  book  like  a  surprise  nail  into  my  palms.
after  the   photobooth   film   time-capsules  ten
years     of     him     and     his     wife    pawing    at
happiness.    after    her    sitting    on   the   couch
almost   embarrassed   of   him.   after  i’m  given
a   tour   of   their    daughter’s    artwork   turned
hallway   museum.    after   the   reasons   behind
his   curation.   after   some   hand-trace  turkeys
just   weren’t   good   enough.    after   i   worry   i
might  not   actually   survive   this   world  much
longer.    after    he    declares    himself   double-
aquarius   and    i    silently    beg    the   stars   for
forgiveness.      after      they      tell      completely
different    origin    stories.    after    they   bicker
over  how  the  dinner  is  done.  after  my  heart
loves  for   his   wife   in   the  most  disembodied
way.   how  each  of   his  words  sound  like   he’s
captured    a   creature    that   should   never   be
anyone’s.   how   my   mouth   fills   with  disgust
washed      down      with     refrigerator      water.
crushed   ice chewed  nervous.  after the  planet
tells   me  ‘no.’    after  his  travel  logs  show   all
the  truth-beauty   he   thought  the  planet  just
gave    to    him.     after    a    confused    tornado
decimated  this  one  orange  city  block.  after i
step  into  the house  and  know  the  cat  as  my
only  friend.  before   and   after  the nausea  of
the  night i  curl  up  into  fever sleep.   the new
hurts like blankets that refuse the soft.

a body of water full of water a bag of cherries
wet from trains

flat carved imitation of a cuban cigar on the ship
i meant to have for myself

*

my little sister her weight
on false wooden anchors my little sister
in perspective a lighthouse on her palm

*

would you sail to scandinavia
why not it’s so close
the gull waiting on a barrel
isn’t nearly so close

*

my older sister the one who asks
for a castle my older sister legs crossed
prying apart a moat

*

the lighthouse staircase a diagram on the wall below
a woman walks her dog down cobblestones

where wooden sailboats a pufferfish carcass nest
on spines all bloated to full

*

could you ever live here
why do you want to
do you think you’d get any sleep
all these depictions sunlit by the sea

*

my little sister a barnacle saved for our father
layered on a canvas of sand
my older sister grounded mast and dunes
a sigil a balanced cannon

sinking changing into long pants at sunset here

a swan holds its head down however long it needs
like names written and washed away the figures of a year

kelp is hair rocks are bodies kelp is wet green hair the sky
blue water blue the pier its shadows darkest

*

my little sister wet green hair

*

my older sister darkest blue

She drowses now drifting
Between scorn and harsh grace.
She remembers the miry head,
His stricken face, lips peeled back,
The broken hymns of praise,
The immodesty of her rage.

Here though her fingertips
Turn the crisp green stems,
Poignant with fragrance and hue.
A meshing intimacy she spins,
The petals blending lucent
As the sun warming her window seat.

For the first time she knows
The politeness of colors,
Their pattern of binding light.
Outside the last snow melts;
She sleeps and dreams trusting
The husband who comes to take her home.

Wilhem Roentgen aimed radiation at objects,
each holding photons like a dam holds flood.
What spilled over was cast on film, a portrait

of what was lost: a metal sheet, a set of weights,
his wife’s hand—silhouette of her wedding ring.
The history of innovation cycles, a stone wheel

that hones a knife’s edge. Biotech is built small
for warzones, to trace poison in water. Mustard gas
fathered chemo: autopsies of blistered victims

showed tumors lulled into slumber. Wildfires
clear stagnant fields clean—eventually you
hardly remember the earth’s scarred flesh. Still,

I remember cadavers and my reluctant scalpel
baring down onto bone. I remember someone
said, They wanted you to learn, as if permission

could supplant the image of skin peeled out
like an onion. Roentgen saw this muddled
future; he called them X-rays, x for unknown,

but he predicted deformed fingers, twisted bowels,
and hid behind lead. Even his wife, mother
of lobar pneumonia, of excised bullets and clots,

knew her role in this play. At her naked
knuckles, she cried, I have seen my death,
but not once did she pull her hand away.

I hang a photo
to the moon

Before   there was
the clack of flash   the plastic camera
processing

your skin
brown as dying pines filled
with nothing inside them
the cockleburs
and pitch
stuck to your bootlaces

a boy
sitting next to you

your temples lining your face

And uncle said once
we scrape brain onto the hide
to cure

wáaqo’ kuum wéye

But the white moon keeps
your polaroid
from developing

Just some holey ghost
his image   his son


*


Mom kisses my forehead
twice

blows out
both candles behind my eyes

I’m still awake
             moonlight dripping
from the ceiling

When I sleep
I’ll be
dead   but warm


*


Somewhere in this
blacked out light

my brother and I are
learning how

to cry all over again

My mother   a pile of ash
waiting to catch fire
again

we breathe
on her skin
             and we’re
reborn.It’s not your fault: the rust and how it eats
into your side the same way a colony
of termites—two thousand years ago—took

apart the remains of the dogwood planks
that held aloft a crucified thief.
Who is not abandoned, here? You,

the city, even the man who left you roadside,
months ago, frost on the branches of the world,
a thunderstorm, and his long walk North.

When you leave The Colony, you must leave
on foot. Carry only what you can wrangle
into a single suitcase. Bring a loaf of pumpernickel
and a thermos. Don’t forget the first-aid kit.
Don’t forget the flare gun. Bring a bowie knife to cut
little notches in the trees. I’m not sure what purpose
this serves, but it seems important, though the trees will
argue this point. Don't listen to them.
When was the last time they lent you
a ten-dollar bill, or told you one true thing?

In Narrow Road to the Interior, Bashō says,
“A lifetime adrift in a boat or in old age
leading a tired horse into the years, every day
is a journey, and the journey itself is home.”
That’s cool, I guess, though somewhat misleading.
Technically speaking, if you spend a lifetime
adrift in a boat, it seems the boat would be “home,”
and “the journey” would translate to mean
senselessly lost, forsaken by God, ravaged
by waves and/or loggerhead sea turtles, as you feed
on gulls you kill with a blow gun
or small fish that may or may not be poisonous.

Remember when that cruise ship, with its delicate freight,
hit a rock and keeled over off the coast of Italy?
Or one year later, when another cruise ship
had a engine fire that knocked out its electricity
and there was flooding in the guest rooms
and sewage in the hallways?
That only happens when you’re out to sea.

Sometimes, it’s best to stay exactly where you are.
In Durham, for example, you can order cheese fries
whenever you like. You can go to minor league
baseball games and drink Duck Rabbit Milk Stout.
You don’t have to be hated by the Gods if you don’t want to.
When I said, “You must leave on foot,”
you know that was a metaphor, right?  We have cars.
We have fuel. Our highways go everywhere.

What wise figure said, “Better to light one candle
than curse the darkness,” and then was forgotten?
Who said, “There’s no such thing as a free lunch,”
then closed his eyes and was forgotten?

Who told the masses that
“Liberty is always unfinished business”?
That was you.
And then you were forgotten.

In The Book of Infinite Quotations, your name appears
more often than Socrates or Plato,
though I used to think you were one of them, a distinguished
scholar of the forgotten world, one who spent

each day in a robe, drinking wine from a cylix
while inventing aphorisms.
All hail the great thinker, Anonymous!
And then you were forgotten.

Last fall, I put sixty job applications in the mail.
They came back like birds whose feathers had been ripped off,
their tongues cleaved. My wife went to see her therapist.
We crossed months off the calendar and waited.

My car, with its busted transmission and its heart
clogged by postlapsarian anxiety, sat out front all winter.
I called my parents,
tried to think of something to say.

If we could glance back into your time, we’d see
Aristotle in the Lyceum, and far
behind him, you—the enlightened Anonymous—
pondering the creeping horizon.

Look how the fog greets you like an old friend, drapes
its arms around your shoulders, ushers you out into the field.
You leave behind so few possessions. Poems without
names. A faceless statue. A clay bowl, filling with rain.

Tell him, you have not previously undressed
this notion. Your mother would say
“how cute,” perhaps “the older guy?”
or “now remember to call it regalia—
they yell at me when I say costume.”
You didn’t object to Indian Girl for the
fourth grade costume ball, a Hobby-Lobby
approximation, hair in braids, be-feathered.
Did you see the new carpet, black-veined
marble and baked haddock in the casino
buffet? Did you hear Barbara in HR
finally wrote up Gene? Wolf clan can’t eat
wolf meat, and if we ever got hold of turtle,
you must apologize, leave that portion
and take extra of bear. No beadwork
would mention this; no fancy shawl captures
what cannot be claimed. The tribe pays
for your birth control. The tribe offers a flu shot
every time you visit; you are mayor of Oneida,
hash-tag native. Namegiver she loved me, she took
my hand, smudged sage like oil drops straight
to the ceiling. You are trying to say your own name,
but can’t pronounce it; you are afraid your skin is turning
translucent. Wear bronzer. Go on and braid your hair.
You are not enrolled, and it is only a costume.

The physiology of you and me
sitting at the gate goes like this:

we are terminal.

                    *

A woman two seats over
speaks into her phone:
You’re someone else’s husband
and I’m someone else’s
wife if you want
to get technical.

                    *

Nov. 13. Hotel de la Gare du Nord.
48ºN, 2ºE. 3:34 AM:

          —We’re going to be fine.

         —Promise?

                   *

I find a book buried in my suitcase.
Vectors by James Richardson. I flip
through the ten-second essays,
pausing at the checkmarks
I don’t recall making.
34. Where I touch you
                   lightly enough,
there I am
         also touched.

                   *

We go to dinner after visiting
the Louvre. We barely talk. Full-
bodied Syrah swirls as I draw
circles on the tablecloth
with fine crystal. Light
reflects through, a purple
stain on stark cloth.

                   *

Remember when you told me You’re too easy—
shouldering the weight of your fingers—too easy to love.

                   *

Nina Simone plays
in the lobby. I think
she exiled herself here
and I don’t care if you don’t
want me because she could.
I’m yours right now. You, upstairs,
lie in bed watching the news
you hear me and I should’ve left.
I put a spell on you. The elevator
doors open.

                   *

50. Not beauty,
                   not even
         need.
We fall
                   in love
because we are
                            unused—

                   *

Your skin stretches over the muscles
that hustled their way into my bed—
bone and tissue, biology moving
through you. A single cell waits
for the axon to fill the gap, and I’ve
retrieved your message: You can’t get
blood from a stone. So I’m gone.

these days, I am


[inside the whirr of the engine]

following the money.
I am examining fever
pitches. It is all these

[Apollo says Athena says Nike says]

bowl games all these
conference matchups all

[heroes in the hull of our love]

these head-first hits all these over-
and-overs. This, this sport
that chews the brain.

[everything within this again-and-again]

I’m watching all these
hometown heroes
sign away their faces.

[big ol land]

If this country is a melting pot,
the pot evaporates itself into
real coin money. Race,

[these white men make millions]

too: I am blurring between
Get back out on the field &
Get back out in the field

[our landscape of broken bones]

keep your ears among the eaves
sometimes I whisper what

dizziness, what destiny

when I’m feeling done
with this solitude  my insides

wallpapered halls, flooded
with blood cells
and dust-mote
breaths

I am weight-
bearing, not up to code

here is the library:

finger the worm-
eaten plans, my wings
admired, but never
constructed

catalog each tarnished lip, each
bone strain rococo-
redefined

what light I let in shudders
mice and moths, falling
in frailty and fur

each arris rusty joint
in socket  here’s the sore

tooth  here’s the broken
turret  follow me to the root cellar, toes
against raw-packed earth

crates of ghost-green
potatoes, wheel spokes, a dried up

gasoline can    my own lungs,
own hips

tell the fat termites
to eat woodchips, while I

release concrete from its hold,
adjust to the crumble of a slated
roof    of shingled mistakes

these spirals out of my spine
the egress and regrets full-stop—

Always a whir & a click at the start of it. Always
at each new origin, a crime: mirror the roe deer’s

rolling eye, the berry-colored flesh that makes
the milk that feeds you. Always a bloody

cloud bearing down on a grass-braided hill;
always a wide red wail when the furrow meets

the plow. When I sleep, my forepaws run
without me, a shadow unstitched from its howl;

pre-dawn sidles up like a pack of something hungry.
            Child, what wild voice

are you waiting for? One: plow the furrow. Two: kill
your brother. Three: build the wall.

Dig Spring out of the tart March earth,
whether She lets you or not.

Light thirty-eight windows
with strangers’ faces. Suspend
breath. One’s eyes should have a feather
gaze: hovering over, not hitting,
concrete. There should be three children’s
hands splayed to panes: attempts to grab
a snow that hasn’t yet caught. One set
of fingernails mid-click on receiver, wrist
the toppled neck of a strangled swan.
Attempt to raise, half-mast, a paper to cover
one’s chin, but linger. Stifle a cough
in seven old Adam’s apples. While the red
face that blooms into weep should not
look, the back of the shoulders should be tight.
The man that loves to watch should be shot
in the dark while his fingers Jacob’s ladder
over and over in excited tangle. Add
a masturbator with an audible smile,
a grandmother slipping into cardiac
arrest under her cardigan. One just plays
a prayer on repeat I’m sorry I’m sorry I’m
sorry I’m sorry I’m sorry I’m skipping
tracks across the rosary. Almost beaded
together, two lovers should tango, rose
bit between molars. Two should be Siamese,
twisting against the other’s skin knots. Four
are already on fire, match touched
to the moth. Six truckers have seen so many
accidents, they no longer remember how
to pull over. A newborn stirs, a pink spoon
in its sleep. Two lock in lover’s quarrel, flinging
accusations no one can hear anything over.
SOMEONE IS SCREAMING! SOMEONE
IS SCREAMING! a face under pig-tails
tattles. Her mother arthritically kneads
and seethes. Her father checks his watch.

Likely mauve means tenderness
toughening gradually

An ache of ochre subsumed by
the blue-black of impact

I remember thinking
this will leave a mark
but I don’t remember why

In the flowerbed bordering our house
is a wound of violets
the size of a basketball

No one saw it land
No one can say
for sure what happened

All we can prove
is effect

That which stood and stretched
now takes the shape of
what destroyed it

Black glass, borrow me.

Nail, catch my sleeve.

Condominium, collapse.

Livestock, I am pasture.

Savior, move my cloud.

Pigeons, come closer.

Carnival, I am arriving.

Disorder, answer me.

Oh alphabet, numeral.

Boy, perform for me.

Psalms, in single file.

Belief, I misspell you.

Winter, choose ashes.

Oh liars, oh stagecraft.

Cliffside, say nothing.

Let me take your coat.

(Bed, a coat for you.)

Metal, be another bell.

Bell, ring. Bells, ring.

End, make room for me.

This is how it goes: when we cover
our eyes, it begins to rain. Sewers

flood with saplings. This idea of flow
is important to us, or to you. I want

to be more like a drain: something
that stays put. Something that lets

other things pour though it. In time,
when we open our mouths, entire

aviaries will spill out. Leakage. A type
of storm that matters in what you

would call the grand scheme of things.
In time, I will be able to tell you why

there are so many birds, so many options
for slaughter. A man who comes through

with a rifle, and then the birds, falling.
Their ghosts hitting the pavement.My ama buries her first son      according to the Qur’an—
in a white shroud, no preservative,     no makeup, no wake.

Died on Impact. His friend was driving.        She asks Allah to hide the image
of his body lunging through glass,     both breaking, whispers

his name in a thick tongue      as dirt darkens. Bayan

means clear, lucid, distinct in Arabic.            She recalls naming him
as he emerged, alive, definite      in wetness and warmth,

obvious compared      to the tiny bodies before him,
blood-born, unbreathing, preened      from my ama’s airtight hope.

As the last of the dirt      is smoothed over his grave,
son re-enters mother      on the same path he left—

pushes past her ribs, pulls sun      down into her womb, illumines
pray, pray, pray. He grows over      a trellis of the three before

which never arrived,      curls out of her throat in vines
with fruit-hung limbs to protect         a family that outlives him,

creates a shady space for them           to chew dates and recite:

In the evening, do not anticipate morning.     In the morning, do not anticipate evening.
Be in this world as if you were a stranger      or a traveler on the road.  

Out of the body of the paramour,
the spouse.  Out the body of the spouse,

the older spouse   Out of the star charts
of the zodiac, the skeletal attentions

of a science whose telescopes look up,
apprenticed to a sky clarified of idols.

Science cannot fall in love with science.
Dear alchemy, thank you for your book

in tatters, your skeletons, your fascinations.
Out of the dark ages: the godless sun

whose distance from the rapture spawns zero
after zero.  Out of the zero, the table

of elements, its step by step that grows
more heavy as we go.  Out of the known,

the isotopes we engineer to nature.
No sooner born than blazing to extinction. 

*

Out of the body of the beloved: the love
that bears one name as it sheds the older

younger body, the way a god sheds
the blood of characters in books we love.

Out of our mistakes over dinner,
listening poorly: a better, kinder mistake.

Could it be our idolatries have less
to do with the fallen world of objects.

More with the fall, a failure to listen
to the silence there, in the names

and images whose spirit is not theirs.
Not ours.  Where a mother was, the word

mother.  And the voice that was hers
laid into the silence she needs to speak. 

*

When my mother died, I had no words.
She was always interrupting that way.

(Out of the black car, the child in black.)
And it took letting go to hear her again.

(Out of the updraft: the leaves of birds.)
A give in the wind to absolve the branches.

Out of the younger face: a father’s chin,
a mother’s nervous tic, a newborn stranger.

Sometimes I need a kinder, funnier savior.
As if an idea might become an idol,

and forgiveness is always elsewhere.
Out of the idea of love, nothing perhaps.

You and I, we are always partly something
coming from nothing.  I love that.  I do.

Out of the marriage bed comes the marriage.
Out of the marriage, the older younger marriage.

Somewhere back there we agreed, I guess.
The first to rise feeds the cats.  Hello,

I say in my own tongue.  And they come running.
Hello, dear cats, I say.  Speaking cat.

I too dispatch bioluminescence
like a woodsy cologne.

Love me, we are kin
(But shy of incest!).

I swim toward the grail
of loam & water.

I swim toward your arms.

Love me, I will ruin my suits
while you watch.

I will grow a nictitating membrane
to shelter my eyes

when you push me in.

Love me, thresh my tie
with your pectoral fins.

Open my throat so I can truly breathe. 

I.

The first time is for love. She sews diamonds
into the linings of her furs. Her maiden
name, the death sentence, dried up like winter roses. No one
gives her—she keeps the picture of her father,
with his uniform burned out. 

First husband is whisked away like spun sugar,
a number stamped on his wrist, a tag sewn
through his ear, a sow. Disappearance
is death—the details get hazy,
how do you divorce a plume of steam?
First husband was a good man, she says,
and her lids crust with salt of the Baku coast,
she hides a jump in her eyes at the morning 
paper, a lapse of their overcast 

With her father at the ballet, she’d practice holding
her lungs until she floated like the
ballerinas. Now, she is blue
in the face for different reasons. 

II.

The second time, she marries
under a blanket of petals, foam on an upper lip,
clad in militant grey, Moscow skies.
Instead of a dowry, my grandfather pays a
ransom and that night, she tears the mattress
with her teeth and he cracks her like leather.
It makes sense, that it’s the start
of my father. 

III.

Grandfather is Ivan and father is Nikolai
and Babushka is Ludmila, but not really,
since she is busy being heartbreak. I am
Katya, from either the Russian pure
or the Russian torture, depending
who you ask, and she can’t look at me
because of the cowhide of my eyes. 

In Moscow, they give baby girls their father’s
name sandwiched between sweetheart and Daughter of,
an ownership, a reminder, a butterscotch wrapped
in foil, but my father left me a blank space.

downtown there is nothing
            but grey sky                & grey cement 

& women wearing grey
            scarves & pea coats                &

the smell of crow-shit
            everywhere      for we are in a dark month

in which there are many months
            huddled           like nesting dolls

& the crows & their shit
            are inescapable            dropping

through the night sky
            like stones                   & dropping through

the day sky
            like stones        too                  troubling

the slick branches & making
            the sidewalk smell                   like the sea

but at least
            i think              as i walk home

the crows & their shit
            will leave some day                at least

we know they will someday
            die                   & when a grey-haired man passes me

he nods his grey head
            & the days keep growing       

shorter             & there is no end
                                                            in sight 

            [::] Absence of stone [::] Door left open [::] Pasture that does not inspire the elegy [::]
De-evolution of the blood-brain barrier & all pathogen [::] Fissure [::] The earth’s crust & the
open wound we’ve named canyon [::] Open wound soothed by the incoming river [::] Physical
object that blocks leads the way (e.g. street signs, a bridge above the tributary, coast
saturated with lighthouses) [::] Port in the storm [::] Portal from a world with guns [::]
Heaven that does not hide behind gates or demand blood for entrance [::] Electrons that touch
despite the laws of physics or countries [::] Touch [::] Electricity passing through
synapses without being stopped & frisked [::] Brick against window the moment before
shatter [::] Fences melted [::] Open arms [::] History defined by something other than
empire [::] History that is not
                                                       a history of loss [::]

say the tongue / is a vessel / to give & receive. say the tongue / is inheritance / 
is title / is debt all / at once. say gia đình / say bố mẹ. know / an open mouth 
is / nothing / more than mirage. that the noise of crickets / trilling / in the moor 
/ is only me / trying to remember / my own tongue / a little longer / & failing. 
there’s a harbor / not far away. some nights / I am the widow / on the roofwalk 
waiting / for my own return / from sea. other nights / I am the sea / itself 
gutting / all / in its wake. come daybreak the sky / so thin / it is sharp. the air 
stacks like firewood / like hours, & only time separates / fire & flight. say may
mắn / say số phận. say you’ll never / leave / again. look: there is water / in 
the collection bin though / it hasn’t rained / for weeks / & the plastic ice cream 
cartons / I ate from as a kid / are now flower pots: easter lilies / nested in ditch 
weeds. so, let / nothing / go to waste. tell me: / can a tongue / be salvaged too?

When a nail pins to the capitol door
its grievances and capital demands,

it makes the sound of a carpenter,
one eye on the head, the other the hand.

What good is a nail that does not wound,
what good a wound that does not tell you

when to stop.  There is a better world,
a better bore at the rendezvous

that gets louder as his subject turns
to power.  When a nail’s vision squints,

it drags a nail-shaped shadow farther in,
until there is no shadow.  Only a coin

of steel laid against its good intentions.
The will to listen is not the listening.

To enter a stone you will need the force
of stone to visit you.  To find your strength.

You will need to hold the stone in place
as stone holds a number, a number a birth,

a dash the arrow that splits the living eye.
To enter a stone you will need a door

inside each iris.  You need the gravity
of things that do not move any more

and so the mind to move them.  And the art.
The sculptor’s lily, the lion, the broken sword;

you need to push them into the difficult
the way that flowers push into the blood.

To enter a stone you need a bloom to lay there
where you, in stillness, follow, not knowing where.

The oldest natural systems of wind
feel the earth beneath them, the dizzy spell

of everything we call our solid ground
curving the finer element into cells

like clocks.  Or the stare that mirrors them.
Spirit then is a bent and bending thing

that has more lung in it than we can fathom.
The air in the animal turns its wing

floating through the vein and out again,
and still this solitude, this need to return

to some world, to couple, to argue, to plead,
to grant our charities their flesh and blood.

The strongest eyes blow against and through.
And still the lovers turn.  Still they argue.

Even if true, if the mass assassins
hit some stripper bar the night before,

if they tucked a final dollar in the G-string
of a fallen culture, who am I here,

among the uninformed, to relish that.
Who is the man in me that lays shadow

over shadow, invisibly stripped,
in the small dark room of what I know.

If I alone am the voyeur now,
does my excitement see what it must,

as myths do when just as curious
as fear and retribution will allow.

If heaven’s virgins are a part of me,
do they peel the cloth that makes them holy.

You with the transparent eye are no one,
you say, and yet an eye I love, your sun

drawn to the horizon of all things now.
You my snowfall blowing into snow.

No bully neighbor pounding on the door
to remind you, yes, you, what walls are for.

You take us further in to meet the world.
Such is your gift.  Every heart a field

of common moths and blossoms the wind blows through.
But then what.  What of the avenues

of Boston, the many of the homeless district.
A man in need is one thing, but in this traffic,

does your heart select.  Does he.  He
who knows a thing about transparency.

Soon my fingers

will outgrow their rooms, their miniature plates and thumb-wide
shelves, but, for now, I still

pretend water fills the bath and soap suds
fill the sink. Father is

stoic and always seated with a newspaper by
the fireplace.

Three children perch at his feet, surrounded by
toys the size

of caraway seeds—a set of blocks, a miniature train,
a baby doll. Mother waits

in the door like a dove, a vase, a pool
of cream. She is

stiller, somehow, than the rest, a pearl-handled piece of sterling
from the dowry chest,

a precious butter knife.

It’s a beach scene: the sand scabbed with pinwheel
            umbrellas, people, littered towels. I’m parasailing

three hundred feet behind a neon yellow boat just
            offshore. From above, a shadow looks just like you

standing up. But I’m too far away to tell. Your
            could-be shadow isn’t moving because I’m moving,

which throws everything else off-kilter. I want
            it to be you, know that one of them has to be yours,—

the place on the shore I had tried earlier to mentally peg
            so I wouldn’t forget: here is where she is and will be,

when you pass don’t forget to wave. But that was then,
            and I am up here now. There’s a rope tethered to the harness

around my waist, yellow ratchet straps pulled tight,
            tied off. I’ve got thirty minutes up here, that’s all I paid

for, and I’ve already wasted ten of them trying to
            decide which shadow is your shadow. I should be

enjoying the view: the snow the boat cuts into the surf,
            the green water lapping up the shoreline, the movement

of the ocean so slow its surface could pass for
            wrinkled skin. I only have fifteen minutes left.

I have my hands around a bundle of ropes that lead
            like nerves up to the wings. I want to call out to the you

that isn’t you down below. I have your name
            in my mouth but don’t know what to do with it.

Tonight I made a Thanksgiving wreath at the senior center. We started with fresh balsam speckled with blue berries. Ferry bells. I didn’t know the name of anything. A woman whose face was stretched like cling wrap over a plate told me to use the lotus pods as my focal point. Once I saw lotus flowers floating in a pond in Shanghai. A man there drew a poem on the ground with water and a calligraphy brush. He wrote Can you coax your mind from its wandering. Then the words disappeared. All around us, people danced. They’d hung their purses and their groceries on the branches of trees. Someone brought a boom box. Women danced with women, women danced with men. At the senior center, women wearing twinsets and pearls manipulated their Thanksgiving wreaths. They poked wires through the lotus pods. The instructor cautioned against using fruit as it would rot. Everyone picked out dried flowers instead.

For all the children who held their mother’s milk
inside their cheeks and waited for it to turn into teeth

              or those who steamed it into a twilight fog
              and sat naked in the center of the kitchenette

thumb pressed against the roof of their mouths,
blinking so quickly      they wonder if they ever even woke.

And there you are,
back in your mother’s arms again:

              the yellow patchwork of the linen
              severed through with sunlight,

and the hinge of the bedroom door dressed
in a cochlea of broken shells.

              Your only rattle the sound a lozenge makes
              as it clangs against the teeth in your mother’s mouth,

singing skeletal lullaby, let me in.

There are inevitable ends we all must face.

Here are mine:
The sun is circling back.
It will reach this house by morning.
I will put my ear to my mother’s mouth and hear the ocean.
She will have had her thumb on my cheek for hours,
              absently tracing the tears I never thought
              I would cry.

The shape of the birds is strange today is
not right the shape of my wrong-shaped heart

one day doctors will hold it up and marvel
turning it around in their latex hands murmuring

what a misshapen beast how did it even beat blood round
such a body I had shaped like the strange-shaped

birds but could not fly I always ran fast
and awkwardly the way the ostrich runs

out of danger and into the shallow silly ground
just so I did not hear when the doctors told me the day

I would die instead I was singing back to the birds
that took flight and maybe passed my message on.

The ant trail of red lights stretches

south on the avenue—the longest line

is the line that moves away from you.

I dream waves sliding in the wrong

direction—a sea of aloof spins away

again. Cold hours rise from the foamy

twist. Something will happen;

something else will not happen.

Hours before: tea candle moons,

careless heads floating over glasses

& the evening in flux. Voices tumbled

from the black & red coils of night

& I saw a wish: to carry the last book

on the last train. I wake before 6—

a frigid moon pinned to the corner

of my window. Outside St. Patrick’s

Old Cathedral, black leaves jewel odd

branches, uncertain against a zero sky.

When I was young there was a small diamondback
rattling up at me from the casket

of my pool’s filter. I finagled him
into a Folgers tin, popped the unpocked lid on,

and let him heat in the sun. Every few hours
I’d shake the tin until its insides stopped

shaking back. A month later the snake
looked like a stiff black shoelace, a half-knotted

pretzel charred and forgotten amid paltry drifts
of coffee grounds. When I was young

I’d swim during lightning storms, tiptoe across ice
so thin I could see dead leaves trapped like pigment

in an iris; as soon as department-store intercoms
crackled alive, my mom wouldn’t be surprised

to learn that someone found her daughter
jumping puddles in the parking lot. I never felt

danger was greater than immortality, no matter
the men I’d flash at rest stops on the way to out-of-state

soccer games, breasts hardly budded,
or the man who groped my preteen ass

with the hand not gripping his toddler’s wrist—
God bless you, Blondie like hot Coca-Cola in my ear.

I always had a soft spot for sharp bursts of adrenaline.
Even now, I leave the bar after last call

and barrel past my house, slither down backroads,
into a speed-limitless country. Accepting the dark’s strength

to birth deer, oncoming cars, turns too coiled,
more darkness.

I.

Take the figures of Pompeii:
each death left a void
buried in pumice and ash
beneath the shadows
of Vesuvius. Archaeologists
filled them with plaster,
extracted a ghostly exodus.

Take Segal. His models held
pose until plaster casts hardened,
then they wriggled free. Each
left the husk of a moment

standing like a woman in a blue
doorway, or coupling in embrace
at the bottom of an endless
staircase. Figures huddled in lines
as if waiting for a train,
forever waiting to depart.

II.

Why does the hand
follow the eye? Why
does it build, sculpt,
cut color with a knife,
chisel a likeness, give
form to an entire room
on a single plane?

Open suitcase, rendered
with the texture of flesh.
The lonely figure of a sheer
dress floating on a hanger.
Woman, nude, painted
into a chair—I call it
Stay.

I request my glasses to be taken off first. Even now I am
tired of wearing them.

I request not to be put in a box. They are unwieldy,
smothery and cramped. A draw string pouch is more
appropriate. They come in assorted fabrics that breathe. It
would be a gift bag to earth.

Speaking of gifts, I request that people, in the similar way
of crows, gather shiny things from here and there, keys,
fake eyeballs, bits of metallic string and the like, and bring
them to me like belated presents.

I request someone to put my sweet little dog on a leash and
bring her to me from time to time.

I request that she put her nose to the ground there and
recognize whatever is left of me. I have no doubt she can
do this. She’s got skills.

I further request that dogs in general should live much
longer than they do now.

As the men I have loved have all been lovely and as these
men have all been carpenters, men who build things and
occasionally tear things down that must come down, I
request that with every carton of nails a secret prize is
discovered and that the prize takes the buyer into the grand
orange light of the future.

I request that people say of me, she lived in sorrow and was
pretty much fine with that. it could be tired. really, it could be
                          sleeping there between shifts
                          stomping through the streets.
                          it could be taking a noonday nap,
                          resting its glassine gaze.
i’m trying to be hopeful.
                          it could be playing dead. pretending
                          like circus horses.
                          i used a simile for several reasons
                          but mostly to draw attention
                          to the difference
                          between pretend dead horses
                          with white crowns
                          in a tent, and this
actually dead horse,
black against a quiet background
in a city street. sometimes you can’t believe what you see.
sometimes you don’t believe what you see.

                          there is a difference.

                          last night gregory peck did not die when he touched the ark of the covenant
                                                                                           two golden eagles embracing the space
                                                                                                                         graced between them.
              i’m not religious, but i understand religion
              because i understand metaphor, or
              i understand how
              we use metaphor to say
              what cannot be said.

how a dead horse is never
just a dead horse
is never just.

In cursive phases of the moon alphabets arose in your name
But liable now Arabic how much here to oppose in your name

The pulse of azan is what I miss and holy water drinking my knees
I lick English daily for a moistened lilt to transpose in your name

Her tongue desires immolation and throbs to kindle your hue
Bedouin bard stringing pearls of couplets to dispose in your name

Vines of arabesque bent to hold the broken fingers of minarets
When bullets slit prayers and left nothing to enclose in your name

Go and tell the last prophet who drew barakah from your wings
My yearning for the disappeared sons that repose in your name

I saw the towers spill, debris calcified my tongue
When they came for me, I had nothing to disclose in your name

Not secrets Asim, personhood is what torture extracts
If only you had something dangerous to expose in your name

dear Bambi/

be careful / don’t let them know / the deer they’ve killed / is a doe. / Oh Bambi / why does
petting you / feel like burglary? / Morning light / licks you off your bones / your home is a field
of exit wounds / a rubied mouth. / Morning and the men / are after you / Bambi, be careful / you
are a trophy / only when mounted. / They want to coax / a knife into your mouth / cut you a
smile. When / they say your name / you hear a burned-down forest / a mountain peak / like your
mother’s teat / Milk the color of skin. / Bambi, dance because / they’re watching / Your antlers
budding / like blood. / They want to climb / into you / like a high / window, don’t you know /
your whitest spots / are just fingerprints? / That violence / is a kind of / weather? / All around
you / flowers give into / opening. To bloom / is to confess / your color, Bambi. / There’s a badge
/ couched in your mouth / a policeman aiming his headlights / his shadow scabbing into nighttime
/ Animals aren’t afraid / of the dark / but night is an abduction / Bambi, don’t / you know? A
bullet singing / through the body / is our national / anthem

I’m feeling dizzy and you’re making whole bodies
disappear under a trick-stage. The matinee
crowd loves you—girls are falling out of their theatre
seats, and how impatient I am to leave the show
before it’s done, before you even take a bow.
A few years ago, I watched a street magician
and you are not at all like him. He took his time,
showed me the backs of his hands. I need an aspirin,
the way you handle doves reminds me of someone
throwing snow in the air after having given up,
it’s all so dramatized: the rubber saw, the fake birds.
Houdini hid keys in jail soap, Penn and Teller
shot with special wax bullets. In a way, it’s my
own fault; Once, I watched a man hold a burning sheet
of paper—he let the ash fall on the sidewalk,
his palms were so clean, how could I not believe him?

Before
we give up our country to give you
a country of your own. You can’t have

my eyes, but we’ll speak
with the same tongue.
                           Someday,

you’ll hear sand in my voice
when searching for what is lost

onshore. I want you to have the truth,
but truth is as seductive as a storm

settling over the earth. Many nights,
my mother cried in another room.
I heard lashing. I saw fire—

how scalded skin, to some, is
                           love. I hope you don’t need to pray

for cinderblock walls. For the sky’s colours to steal
our words. You can’t yet know

that men can be bent
like branches. That women must kneel
too often, their eyes on the red shore

behind. There is a moment when I touch you
and you are real, not a shadow

of shed skin as we turn to dust
on the hardwood. If you go somewhere
without me, my face candling


into melted wax, you must understand—I fell
in love while we were falling, the devil

wind tearing at my mouth and nose.
All I could do was smile.

When you step away, look
at the ground I’ve given you. Dig

until your shovel hits
the trees’ twisted roots, spring

water gurgling below. This is the proof:
our hands on these shafts,

my words held in your mouth
                           like stars that forget

                                         they have to fall.

If I were a classical nude, the distance
between my nipples would be

the same as from my nipples
to my belly button, the same distance

from there to the split head
of the pelvis. The body: quiet bone

construct can be charted
in the faults of its architecture.

*

When the eggs of a Japanese carp are endangered,
the male will suck them into his mouth

and hold them. His mouth, master imitator
of womb, makes teeth from them.

He spits them out like they are dead, finds
a new mate. To begin in the middle

he spits them out like they are dead.

*

Once, my mother and father slicked
their bodies together, tried to see

how far inside of each other
they could get. Maybe my father put

his fingers inside my mother’s mouth.
They attempted to create one body

from two. My father: root/glacier/bone.
My mother: earth/ocean/socket.

*

Gilgamesh taught bodies to fear themselves.
His own body: a ziggurat, a spirit trap.

From animal spirits the gods made a man,
Enkidu. Enkidu drank the milk-rivers

of the beasts, ate the greenness of the earth.
A temple prostitute offered her body to him

in supplication. He entered her, did not exit
for seven days. Afterwards, he was so split

from beasts that he could do nothing
but become a ziggurat too.

*

I cannot chart the moment
when I left boyhood. My bones

had not finished growing,
only stuck their pale heads

into the light of my flesh
and opened their mouths.

The same choices keep coming up
as either/or buttons sewn into
each cheek of your childhood
undies and you still laugh pre-
tending when friends show you
videos that they think are funny.
We evolved for this, she says, and you
think: Tinder. Siri. Uber. Pleather.
She says, babies, and you fill with dis-
pleasure. You’re in a new city now
and can smell yourself, feel the square
map in your back pocket and almost
believe you know what is over
the next hill. And now you are
back in the woods behind the house
where you grew up, holding a branch
as it turns into bone and you drop it
recalling that these woods were once
a horse farm, the bone once a horse a-
gallop between these same trees. Now
drop into a bar where Nirvana is playing.
Ask for a beer but receive water. Think,
Robot. Diamond. Meatball. Hangman. Your
phone lights up and the bubbles read:

            My killed himself

            ***My brother

The passenger cars click south
on the mountain’s feet, serpent
the Hudson’s length like words
in a poem you love but won’t
ever show me. We watch
the leaves flare out again.
My mind dresses towns in flags
full of stars, slim-motored
vehicles, men I won’t meet. I
open: a linnet brushes the glass,
light attempts to enter the skull
or leave it. Soon, your body
will set out for dog-eared
maples, alpenglow.

There are machines for this — 

lifting back the skin of the map
so the border can be laid down again,

the pieces of river
placed at an easy angle.

You want to be sure you won’t slice
any place you can’t handle

seeing stripped. Carry a tape measure
set to whip back

when you’ve gone too deep.
The hills keep humming their low sounds.

A sextant flattens the terrain
but the eye unaided

is sharper than a shark’s tail.
Distance is best left in rain,

to soak until the pages
become a clump, wet mush

of the actual world.
Cut the sweep spare

enough to throw a bridge across,
a sturdy one, so you can cross looking down.

Water makes you want more
distance, and distance starts to resemble

other things — your yellow tie,
the orchid crumpling on your windowsill.

From here, anything
can be another thing.

It shores in a southerly
seam of coral

Perhaps it has seen a long
desert stretch and stars cut

into reliquary stillness

It came by post
wrapped in blue paper

and I held it in hands

struck by its integrity

by its corrugated
and steep passes

Just then discerning

my desire
shuts on nothingIn the evening museum, the plaster horse hangs like a relative
hoisted from a ceiling rope. Girdled, bone-eyed, it’s a sweetheart

daguerreotype, the white body taut and spidering, a Conquistador’s
mount caught between invisible ship, invisible shore. I have been

this horse before—a horse dreaming I am human, stuck in the museum
with clock hands wiping the longest day of the year down the pleats

of my skirt. Outside, the city’s dirtiness cantilevers into dark.
Somewhere a ballet is starting, and all the world’s lovers making love

every second collapse, begin, collapse again like stopwatches.
Stuck in the museum, I stare at the plaster horse, run a hand over the cake-pan

jowls, up the flat bone of the face to the hollow place above the eye
that collects rain. Bronco, untamed spirit of the West, the plaque suggests

symbolic heritage, the discovery of new lands.  And true, the muscled
flanks command the weight of earth and hooves to cast, the back-curved “U,”

a magnet pulling down-turned toward the green expanse of marble floor—
a prairie, or a sea.  I am convinced of magnitude, but really, he’s a metaphor

for you and love’s geography, all we need to know about each other
saved in symbols, signs from other mapless bodies: the boy with three nipples,

or the scar above her eye like a question. It’s a blind guess
to undiscovered places, the landmark hairlines—could I ever

sculpt this or catch our bodies’ breath in plaster? That one time, remember,
the trees shattered? No thought burned the treetops—no arms no legs

no mouth, no empty and no not empty—just my shirt wound like a bridle
around us in the grass and each blade opening its eye to see.

Sometimes sadness like a colorless snapshot of a 50s
naugahyde trailer, or a tractor rolling noise down the road

inside my ear, or pushing through a thicket of hands—
I am trying to breathe inside the death of another red animal.

When I was twelve I put my horse to sleep. Needle to neck, his head
like a folded coat on my mother’s lap as she sat in the paddock in her nightgown.

His ear like a red boat moving out, and that lake above his eye
that could catch rain—meaning only that he was old, so old now.

Old animal, you tilt a rickety table of clouds now, weaving on jerry-rigged
legs. Old animal, you slant the field at the edge of no more breath.

It took a backhoe to bury that horse, to lay his red body in the ground.
And I have no idea what it means this morning, thirty-five years later

when I tie my red dog to a tree, thinking: he will like this—to lie down
inside the intoxicating wind and slanting light that falls across the field,

this cloudless morning, sun and air, the impossible
inevitable next breath that moves a red river inside everything.

Who knows how it happens? I think: my dog will like this, to be tied
out in the day. Because he is old, so old now. But I have no understanding

of death. And I have no idea what he thinks.

Our wings are made of green water towers and post-bark
but unlike ferns we hide from nothing.

*

At lunch our words eat themselves, quarrel and then
the bone falls from our feet. We unfurl again.

*

Praise the blacksmith taste of horse-shoe lawns,
the coined constraint of beetles.

*

Inside our mouths we’ve sunk whole prayers. Desire
is a deep butcher.

*

Inside our shadow’s error, dark swoop over
barns: only straws and coward leaves.

*

And here’s late afternoon, shining like a buckle in our eyes.

Supination is a softer answer, our pinprick sailboat
buttoning, unbuttoning the horizon.

*

Now in the sharp cradle
of sunset: the smallest leaf

menagerie and fiercest borrowing won’t free
us from wind’s tossed palace.

The leanest sheep yield the toughest gut
and thus the strongest voice, the intestines

cleansed, extruded, bound into the dark
strings of harps that shiver, as storms do

and the closed eyes of animals that dream.
God knows what they see, if they hunger

for images of grass made of music, of wind
whose hand soothes with a gentle rustling.

Song began somewhere, we do know that,
and its voices tend to flock together

because they must, they want to continue
in each other, to survive as one

of the choir, to survive, as one, the choir.
The hungry are the most fierce, most alone,

long before they weaken from their hunger.
What they would not give to open up

the basilicas of mouths and swallow.
And the string made of gut remembers.

Even the blade that takes the lives of sheep
blazes the abject warmth of immersion,

the eyes that open when another’s close.
Music knows.   Departure is our calling,

our home, like the father’s funeral a boy
dreams for years until that day it happens.

The cry you hear is not song, but it tears
now and then through the body of song.

The harpist grasps a chord and pulls it
into the air, but it is the gut that makes it

fly.  The gut that lingers there, in the hand.
Hunger is always returning.  Just what

it returns is, most days, a wordless thing.
But today there is a singing in it.

There again the silent music, the body
that opens its box of sparrows at dawn,

and the sun that is a harp on fire
sends shivers through the cold hard ground.

 Afterdamp of April, evening thaws.
A hungry mutt
                           yowls a bruised gospel,

            its body a dying star—
throat aflame with want.
                  Night thickens

            with the reek of things unwanted
by heaven. An owl calls to a hole
                    in the sky where the moon once fit.

            Wolves circle this village,
snatch blind children mid-street.
                     Lord, make me the hound

            that crawls beneath the porch to rot.
Let me return home, alone,
                   unravel each worn ligament

from bone, dissolve
            into this tilted hour.

heelscrew

drifthead

heartdim

bone circle voice, bone circle vision, swallow down the spine

fingerbough

hipblade

collarpoint

joints spun with nerves

spillroot

splitseam

openend

ark of ribbing sewn shadow width, ellipse the night sails by

gravitylit

scourbreathe

exchord

the name for the word untangled blank

The bomb opens like a pocket knife
& so we sit inside it for hours.
Now, bombers toss finches out of the sky’s
white belly & descend, silent as skin,

into the stratus gums. We catch the birds
in our laps and see, with wide eyes,
how simple & dead light unfolds in our leave.
They unfurl their small bodies into peach pits,

paddies that spring only teeth into the hand.
We quiet our fists to split bark, rooms steeped
in childhood & mercury, & bury them in alcoves of marble.
In dark rooms, we wear prayers on our mouths

like oil glazes & duck our heads for roofs
collapsed into light, bones burned white as old winters.
We unroll the blue fallout flood like a carpet,
pressing our foreheads to the seams

until we spit the fires from our own jaws,
spring them up from old skins instead of ash.
Once, we were thick with brine & marrow,
slick in the palms of men who grew

shrapnel like skin. But now, the air thickens
with our teeth, gnashing and thunder-dark.
& the men have vanished into a roll of mosquito coil.
Now, we find nests of bullets between our ribs.

Now, we are new debutantes, hungry for pearls & salt—
& so we spin the green rain around us as a new veil,
taking razors to our hair for new prophecies.
Now, we count each ember the bombs cough

up from their thumbs as the black tufts take root—
no doubt, there is something holy in the way
things burn, how carpet bombs purge themselves upon entry—
like how our brothers once doused themselves in gasoline

& wore saliva in the caves of their hands like a switchblade.
But it is our turn to become smears of unfired light
& wield this red torch through the air like blind women.

& for a moment, we can hear our names shot out
of the barrel of a Kalashnikov: shucked & napalmed.

The earth turned inside out. The earth scarred
by shovel-blade, by hoe-edge.

Like any of us, water seeks the easiest path to the river—

as the moon knifes across the sky
we are frost-wary, rain-hungry,
almanac-in-hand.

We are moat-diggers, barefoot-dancers.

Today, the pure unrelenting magnificence
of life could undo me. Joy
is a horse, galloping through the stomach,
foaling in the throat. Joy
could undo me.

Tomorrow, whose burning carriage
awaits me? What wild surge
will course through, flipping switches
on & off?— a poltergeist in my heart,
knocking loves off shelves.

I can’t make up my mind about life—
miraculous, mundane—
life— the beauty, the bane—
but even after everything, it’s clear
we’re the lucky ones.

Tomorrow is a darkness.
This moment is a darkness.
But I am a keyhole into it,
a winged chink, an intercessor of light,
& today, joy is a horse.

Orphaned by indifferent kings
on a roadside, I find you glazed with rain.

You glitter with colorless light
like an urchin the sea coughed out.

I dream my skin calcifies, curls
and peels. I chew sun-poison flecks
beside you on the highway.

We aging exhibitionists
dimmed under wind wear,
we two gypsies hunch in ourselves,
listen for a mother in the car screech.

Your absence is a lion’s den: I sweat and wait it out
or it consumes me. My days are grey apostrophes
to where you were, unroofed columns;
the dead legs of a bug on the bathroom floor,
untractioned of you, no you to hide in from the light’s
               white cast.
Our mirrored world detests a pairless thing.  I wear
your hand’s medallion on my palm, screw
your shadow to my step, doubled with your memory
like a phantom limb. And every night the moon
lets slip the light’s white lattice from her shoulder,
bracing for her plunge into the aspirated dark.

once, women swallowed dead nettle,
bitter buttons, pennyroyal, chamomile

a fable unraveled, a feeble new moon
then fragile raw ruin, chamber silence—

now, dilation and a curette,
a filter, a cast net

like hair caught in briars and combs,
strands waving in drains to decipher

an open window, a handkerchief quiver—
corroded chiffon, lacerated gauze

barely an outline, sunken shiver

Our heads full of someone

else’s story, we
empty the theater

without words, and shuffling from
one dark to another, wander home,
the plaza dead, the bar

closed, someone crying in
the street. For what? To whom?
No one
knows. The doors

locked, we lie
in bed and dream
a language of
our own.

If a box is a room,
let there be a door.

If a door, a window,
a boy in a blue shirt.

He climbs the green
hillside, acres to

be parceled out,
sold. If you hold

the picture of the boy,
you hold the boy,

you hold the ground
where he stands.

A man and a woman touched

at night under stairs,
pinball machines ringing, and,
Sundays, he drove her to

the springs of Coámo, the chapel of
San Germán. Had she ever known
happiness? The road
littered with mangos seemed

to go on
forever. She thought,
The people can’t eat

them fast enough,
as if she were not
one of those people.

And Then

I forgot what made
me angry. Or
was it afraid? As if
a fever, tumbling through

the dark, had broken.
Months ago, you listened to
me sob into
the telephone. I tried

to thank you, dear friend,
after all—for all
the years. It’s as if

we said goodbye
before we knew anyone
was leaving.

In America

They ask me
What’s it like being a brown woman in America?
I want to say
It’s like screaming in a dream
And expecting a reaction.

They ask me
What’s it like being an immigrant in America?
I want to say
It’s like wearing perfume
And everyone is allergic.

They ask me
What’s it like praying for change in America?
I want to say
It’s like pressing your ear to the dirt
and hoping to hear the sea.

Some things stay
forever in a body. The flavor
of an old fruit, or my father’s humming
from the distant front seat
of his car. The color of a childhood
room, or the rearview mirror

where his eye glanced up for seconds
to see me. His voice, a breeze
snuck through the cracked window.
Some things the body
holds dear. Others, it leaves
behind. How a voice
rises, an eye shakes.
The body drives past them.

I am at the wheel now, father,
and the breeze is humming
outside the window.
On the road, the lines lie
like ribs. The sky is bright as my old room,
the one you painted blue.

Mom watches plastic America on TV:
All My Children and General Hospital.
I page through her notebooks, words she’s written down
from these operas: “jerk,” “ditzy,” “klutz,” and some tips:
“Vanilla isn’t the same as banana,”
“Say cola to the waitress instead of Coke,”
“Bring molded JELL-O to welcome neighbors.”

Maybe my mom’s really a writer,
thinking of jokes for Reader’s Digest—
“Life in the United States,” the comics
she now finds funny, after my childhood
of watching ABC and cooking shows
over Campbell’s soup and TV dinners with her,
her notebooks still filled cover to cover.

Instagram has made its way
into my dreams

I suppose it’s how looking
becomes seeing

I dreamt Elsa broke
her foot but walked

I dreamt you broke
my heart again

In my dreams you call
me boring so often

I don’t know if it’s a word
you said or only one I heard

Imagine the underworld
as a dark nightclub

where one could take a tab
or a joke the wrong way

The ewe’s foot has scald
but the milk stays cold

I mishear a mishap
I misspeak I miss you

I don’t think birds
would be good at Twitter

Woolf writes about a young man Orlando
who—overnight—becomes a woman

Gender is a drag and he dreams
himself into her but here in this world

Orlando is a city where forty-nine
Latinx queer people are shot, killed

Grief and platitudes fill my newsfeed
a dizzying, looped chorus of sorrow

Kathleen tells me to scatter her ashes
in the Small World ride to shut it down for a day

I think about the silver studs
in the peachy plug of James’ ears

I don’t think there are any words
that can fit the hole death holds open

the way an earring glints
and keeps his skin from closing up

A senator wants to put a gun in my uterus
and Woolf was Islamophobic

My whiteness is a condemned house
others are renting out, dying in

I know I shouldn’t bank
my pride with a corporation

Nothing is perfect, least of all love
so I promise to try harder

The bravest among us edit
pronouns and grammars: spell themselves

In Latin “disco” means “I learn”
In the end we all cross

the river to the nightclub
drawn by a wiseman in a hoodie

For all its smallness
the world terrifies us

In my dreams I move on
a new bereft: wake swearing

Burying my thumbs in gesture
Brushing my teeth with daylight

To avoid repeating
the same smarmy song

in this small boat
in the dark

Trying to make the morning after
less stale less stifled more lit

like a pyre
or a candle or a club

The boy quit drawing the sea.
Here’s an afternoon just for him: blue sequins
in the gin. Like the idea of loving him: I set the dolls
along the windowsill. I gave each a bullet & a little scrap
of news. Somewhere my mother’s prayer
clots to the ceiling. Somewhere she’s calling me angel.

On my side of town, I swallow an angel.
He loves yellow light, gold mirrors. The glow of the sea
drawing. Waves are animals. Animals are to lick, as lick is to prayer.
The boy is sick on grunge. Kitty Sequins
was his drag mother. A glass eye & wing scrap.
Like any real icon, she died swallowing. Dolls

in the attic. Bye-bye! waved the sweetest dolls
from the window. I wanted to cry inside the drawing. I was the angel
in the motel mirror he loved & loved. A plate for scrap
bones in the hall. In the right jeans, I open like the sea.
The bells of St. Mary’s ring up my mother’s dress. Red sequins
line her skull, like division or prayer.

I’m feeling historic in my leather choker. A wet prayer:
his body rising from the black sea. The boy teaches dolls,
who know nothing but burn, pucker, sequins.
Later he’ll draw a heart-shaped angel
with his mother’s face: veiled, covert. The sea
drags at her heels like a missing child. A scrap

of paid miracle. The evangelist tongues an orange scrap.
Someone slides a finger into his mouth. Buried prayer
hangs limp in the scrolls of his beard. What about the sea,
those boys? We know him. His body. The wet dolls.
Their dresses harden in secret. They are buried in the quiet white of angels.
The drawings. The lines. Terrible sequins.

Subtract the wet of my mouth from my mouth
and it is winter. Winter dry, then festering
like a lesion. I dip myself in rosewater to be a real girl.
I bunch up my underwear to stain like a real girl. I chew sour fruit
for too long so my cheeks are sore like a real girl. Like a real girl,
I study my skin before I hide it. I say yes, or
I say nothing at all. You have to understand–
I wanted to be kind. I wanted someone to open me up
like a window. I open the window. In come the flies
with their soft bodies, the softest touch and
a fly is softer still under my sudden palm, is still. What was I to do
with my skin startled from stillness? My skin startled
into the moment’s maybe, me startled into touch?
What could be kinder than the softest thing? When I was born
I was soft. My mother cracked her hips open to let me in.
When I was born I did not breathe.
When I began to breathe I began to scream.
The last sound before my first breath was the wind of a slapping hand.

Looking at the North Star this February
evening, I can feel the word “father” pulse
down my jugular vein and hibernate
in the phalanxes of my finger bones.
“Father,” vellum whispers to the bull-god
in the pasture. Call this lowing, religion.
“Father,” apple mouths as it scuds to earth.
Every sad thing in the human heart weighs
the sum of dust motes dancing in sunlight.
Call this truth the portage and redemption
of a childhood memory alchemized
into bramble and ash. There, my mother
remains locked in the basement, a barbell-
shaped bruise throbbed tuberous under her blouse.
“Father,” the rusting bayonet rumors
to the plastic-wrapped full dress uniform
starched on a hanger in the bomb shelter;
its sharpshooter medals shine like astral
doubloons a-glimmer in the galleon
of a distant nebula’s wrecked outline.
Here in America, trauma and rage
dovetail, become birthright, counterclaim us;
the wind brinks through plain poplar and linden,
consecrating the air above your grave.
Your face was always etched like a tombstone,
I say to the mirror in the morning,
and there you are my father, a bequest
of crow’s feet in an era of warring
tribes and constellations, and brilliant claws.

How American history restarted and you couldn’t tell if you were older or it was worse. When
one color is no longer one color. Numbers through tears. The wrong shoulder the trampoline.
When I didn’t know heat runs through metal and smoke filled my door. Unwrapping the tuna
sandwich. Handing over is the same as last week. Women say sorry too often so I’m sorry. When
asked if I defer I referenced this man. My sister wants to be not me; in this way she becomes us
all. The adjacent squares like cows. Thick and alive. Which is to say we’re branded, except the
other way, popping out. Accommodation means giving up faith. To go from here and here to
there without knowing how. This is why we return each week. The water eating away my toes
and the silver painted on my nails. To fill a space becomes obligation. Silver like the light beside
the bed. Metal sheets like paint. Each line an unwavering loop. When I was younger I wouldn’t
press hard enough. My teeth stuck out and in.

I saw the coast emerge despite the fog.
Arrhythmic and abrupt, the shrieks of gulls
sent our deckhands scurrying to lean
into salt-spray. They made a row of Cs,

the muscles in their necks taut as hog-
hide. Beneath my feet I felt the hull’s
strained planks groan. Dingy little sunbeams
mottled masts, my prayer book, these jaundiced

hands that split and bleed each night in greasy
pot-suds. For weeks I dreamt I threw my face
back at kerchiefs shooing us across the sea
and woke to molars wiggling loose. With haste

the mates struck up a song of London Town.
In all these dreams I knew that we would drown.