Boys are taught to kill early.
I was five 
when I shot a chick in my first ritual.
I was eight
when chickens became easy 
but turkeys drew loathing.
I was ten
when I killed a goat. I was made to stare 
into that goat’s eyes before pulling 
my knife across its throat.
Amen.
I thought it was to teach me the agony 
of the kill. Perhaps it was
to inure me to blood.
To think nothing of the jagged resistance of flesh,
To make the smell of rust and metal and shit familiar.
I didn’t grow up on a farm.
I have never killed a man, but 
I know how, I know I can,
I know that if the timing were right I would.
I am afraid that I might not feel sorry. 
I am afraid that I will enjoy it.
Let there be love.
T-shirt for Terrence:
“And you say psycho like it’s a bad thing.”
What can you say about growing up in Nigeria?
Does anyone care that you picked plump red and yellow
cashews from trees and ate them in the sun,
the sticky sweet of them running down your arms.
And later, the seeds collected and roasted for the nut.
Can you talk about later in prison? 
Writing names on other men with the sap of cashews.
Names to obscure their real selves, 
names to protect what might be left over
for when they returned to the world from hell.
It is an old trick, to fool death by writing 
a new name on your body.
I was afraid my soul would be obscured,
and in cowardly script, almost invisible to the eye, 
scrawled with the tip of a needle: Saddam. 
It has faded to a nice smudge on my belly,
where a network of hairs and stretch marks 
pretend it never happened.
 I learned alchemy in prison.
Words mean only what you want them too.
You say, sunshine and you mean hope.
You say, food and you mean refuge.
You say, sand and you mean play.
You say, stone and you mean, I will never forget.
But you do, but you do and thank God, thank God.
When they called from the university, 
in all innocence, they said, 
there is a letter for you from the president.
They had never heard the words Dele Giwa uttered
before the bomb blew him and his family to hell.
You tell your friend who runs the place.
And you sit turning the letter over and over,
while she gently clears the building 
and then comes back to sit with you as 
you turn the letter over and over.
Fingers ignorantly searching for wires.
Over and over you turn wishing you were American
and could have the naivety to not fear a letter from
your president. To feel only pride or the gentle rise
of acerbic wit as you prepare 
to decline whatever is on offer.
You smile at your friend who has no reason
to be here except she won’t let you die alone
and you rip the envelope open.
There is no explosion,
A letter spills out with the crest of the president.
You are crying, tears running down your face.
You are glad you are not dead.
You are glad that your country is proud of you.
You are glad to see the day when things can change.
You are confused.
Your friend is holding your hand.
Dear Eloise Klein Healy, 
blessing be upon your name.
Is this what it feels like to have your father love you?
To not fear his return? 
To not expect to be hit when he reaches for you?
What can it feel like to believe 
that the world is inherently good?
Let there be love.
I am not a pessimist.
I believe in love.
It has however, often been a foreign country to me.
This is the body of Christ.
Sanctificum 

                            I
The way desire is a body eroding 
into a pile of salt marked by a crown of birds: 
and black. This fall is not rain, grain too subtle 
for that dissolution. A constellation wrapped
in a stitch spreading like sand charting 
thread across time a tender weave 
and hope. This is resurrection.

                             II
And the sky is red
                        And the moon
And light is this rain.

This is all the terror we can bear:

            the moment between flame
and where shadow begins
            but only so much as can be cupped
in a child’s palm

and yet to say: the loved one
            has slipped to ghost.

                             III
What attempts survival here has no words
but hunger. A white backcloth that devours
the blackening. Then red cut in lines thick
as paste and obscuring the once figurative.
This desire wears cerements of yellow and sun.
And at the edge of this world, a box of wood
and canvas; light and light and light.

                             IV
Everything here can so easily turn to mud
and the recalcitrance of dead leaves and bugs.
There is hair here too. Not so much brown and animal
as rough; I speak now of sorrow, of weight
beyond measure. There is a drowned woman 
in the dark swirl. This paint, buoyant and light, eddies.

                             V
Whatever guilt drives this brush is nocturnal and heavy
with the smell of the cramped darkness under the stairs.
But night will not be blamed. What good are words
when the green light over the ocean is all we need?

                             VI
What passes for night here has more to do with the place
where the body is flayed open to sorrow and wonder.
The boy on the bridge drops a feather into a lost river.
A rusting lawn dreams of grass rude and fescue.
A match held down to tobacco still burns with an upward flame.
There is no truth here.
Dutifully the mist comes down the mountain. What else can I tell you?

Turning the key shuts down the engine, air conditioner, the radio, the things that don’t distract anymore, that we’ve become accustomed to, talk over as if they were sound tracks laid on the discs of our lives. In the silence, our breathing sounds like a small herd of antelope trapped in this car, loping breaths as if we’ve been running, as if we’d been herded into a three sided canyon, stopped still, dumb founded by our own pumping muscles. He says, “It’s the third element that matters, the one that completes the equation, that computes to love.” This engine gone still still hums hot underneath us, our bodies receding in their own dying geometries, but our voices go soft and breathless as a turning key, a fading song, a last rush of air, the tufts of hair on the swiveling ear of a lone animal listening hard for the first wind of an idea.

it was in the middle of night
middle of dying     houses slept
we did not sleep     it was not
dark     it was not dark

memory not so much a plow
not the fierce direction     into
the layered ground     but light’s
refraction     light’s breaking

we surround the hole of the
room of dying     of her mouth
the hole of clear air     portal
of waiting     watching the hole

breaking against one bright
surface     alighting on others
on leaf and on face     on
water     gray as a breastplate

oxygen    the instruments of
medical measure     ministered
below the dresser’s figurine
Mary     dress pink as a mouth

breaking against one daughter
taking a pulse     one praying in
a corner     in the breath’s
duration     in the indrawn span

to see it simply as lost     blood
pressure     breath’s cessation
one unreleased gasp     to see it
as body     parting with function

her face     a fall leaf parchment
I am writing     her face a love
I am writing     a parchment love
the parchment     I am writing

breaking against the huddle of
us     the scatter of us in her room
in other rooms trailing     news
of the one     the one breathing

and no alarm     in the arrival
something like a cheer     going up
among us     the accomplishment
of the arrival     cheer and wailing

memory not so much catching
as caught     in the labyrinth
designed like a thumb’s whorls
caught     while in wonder’s order

then there was the speck they
saw     in the room     the green
live contraption     contriving grief
the grief green in December

It’s easy putting your vest on back to front,
It’s easier never to do what’s recommended,
what your mother told you would be the death
of your tiny days should you not grant her complete
immortality with your smaller soul, pounded out
by the counts of tender-soled feet.  Barefoot
should not be a way to see the vest for what
it actually betrays:  the torso hot with thrumming
escapes.  Do you remember back at school
when that teacher crashed his bike?  You watched
ants carry off his bloody puddles, back to summer
cabins and the queen’s hut of a loose dirt hill. 
You wanted so much to reduce this world
to that exact moment the fleshy bits would be
too large for an ant’s meal.  I’m not going to talk
about any place anymore because you don’t listen
and it only makes things worse.  You are the me
I hold in a distant envelope, torn shoes,
broken sky above her head, watching the bike
toss his legs beneath it.  Every object suddenly
had a purpose to behold, an impurity to withdraw,
if I would only watch and listen
to those not invested with the power of plenty,
the permission of superior beings, but ones that
crawl from this vest pocket, turn a corner away
from the ambulance who screams for attention,
with a mutated ear for the underbelly, knitting
socks that never demand, only asking we see
a way from a path that keeps us safe and criminal.

The thing to do with a pretty girl
is own her outright,
edge your way in
with deeds, a few vows,
own her
with every fire
you land smartly in,
turn into flames,
the flickers of your red licking

In the midst of tutelage
walks the small of a back
unnoticed, unstroked,
the spine neglected
by a child’s grasp,
a lover’s pressure
as promised:
find her here by your heated hand—

Maybe the sky will shine
or clouds sound freely:
hold hard a heady thrust
untyped, letter-bound,
payback with motion
that makes even smoke burn
and our stories run
together turning to poems
that find us, bring us apart,
both ends fitted, fire based. 

I’m thinking of visiting your stained-by-pee futon
with the hole in the end for mice in the spare corner
for a week of your translucent coughing if you’ll let me
go out for the Thai you love not to eat most of all
to walk with you the moment you have strength on the roof
for ten steps toward the Hudson and throw
the phone he never calls you on at New Jersey
where he never calls you from perhaps to watch you smoke
long after you should have stopped being alive
against the window as rain doesn’t fall and you slip
on the lapis wig under the gaudy influence of which
you said last time lifting your arms in a cross
I suspect of feeling like needles “I resemble
the Final Solution” and promised to apologize
to the lighter blue numbers on your aunt’s wrist
or “help me wash the windows” like the time before
clean as ammonia smells painful so the old man’s
windowbox roses were a clear picture in your life
it is dusk you say all the time I believe
it was the right choice to let you spell
to run from triple score to triple score
in Scrabble pustule with an extra s like language
was hissing at us I am thinking of visiting
I mean it this time very soon I promise
the field we played in to see if it’s been killed
by a mall or if the grass I find there remembers us
and tell you as you’ve always had the bright bones
to do the truth that I can’t look at anything these days
but Speed Racer over and over so we could sing I suppose
about the “powerful Mach 5” if I brought the CDs
and not get tired of the announcer saying
in almost every episode as if to reassure us
benevolence is watching and we’re part of it
that Racer X is Speed’s long lost brother Rex
and feel all things are brightly drawn and connected
just below the surface by sly equations like Racer X=Rex  

The cutting board falls sideways
because of the cookie sheet behind it
and breaks the Krups carafe.
I go on-line thinking Krups
made munitions for Germany using Jews
to death to find they sell the carafe
for not much and order it,
hoping slave labor’s not involved.
I make coffee with the press-pot
and notice that we’re out of pain killers
for Sasha’s hips, when they don’t
actually kill the pain, do they,
just like I don’t really love you
to death, I do actually love you
for putting the green bottle
of no more pain killers out
where I’d see it while I was thinking,
thanks to Krups, of tefillin, sacred words
on parchment in kosher leather boxes
strapped to the forehead is excellent
devotional weirdness in my book and how many
cups of coffee does this press-pot make?
Sasha limps more and more these days, as do I,
your ears are ringing off the hook, God
is calling to say He’s not coming, a local kid
was killed yesterday in the war, shot
clean through the head. What’s clean
about this? Dirty through, nasty through,
toothsome and biting through,
I’ve been working on the lexicon, all
the live long day. While my coffee’s
too hot to drink, the wind picks up 
to tell me I better ask if you’d prefer
not buying anything by Krups, like you don’t
want a Volkswagen, even though the new Bug’s
cute, because of the six million
instances of ash you’re a part of, like every drop
of water’s a citizen of its cloud. We can do that,
cancel the order, stop drinking coffee,
use the Greek word phylactery instead
of tefillin, which I enjoy saying, phylactery,
it sounds like factory and prophylactic
put together, doesn’t it seem
like every second, if you stop, has this whole life
inside it that is so completely yours,
it would die without you dying to never be
without it? I want to live to be three hundred
and sixty two. We should have
a new coffee pot by then that doesn’t makes us
feel like we’re waking to genocide, though we are
and good morning.  

Glasses off,
you are beautiful.
My glasses.  

New emotion, call it feeling
like the room must be removed
from the room. And still,

you know what the painting of the girl
standing on a cliff is thinking,
so the next person in the chain
removes your memory of the painting
and the removal of the room. Yet these

persist wherever they are removed to,
so that that place, if the new emotion
is truly to be a washing away of the room,
must be removed, and the memory of that removal
removed and taken some other place,
which must then be removed. We are quite

far away now, hands aching from all the lifting,
the sun barely visible over the low buildings
of the square. On the work end of this new emotion
is another, call it feeling I’m a snow globe
waiting years to be shaken to a pulse
of whitenesses burning against the glass,
ticklish for the moment they settle again
to peace, dependent on you to feel it’s time
for a little storm in your gestures, to set
your adamancy free.

Mr. X

Thinking of a kid who doesn’t want to say he’s still
using heroin. He’s six minutes old and the cut
below his eye’s on fire just beneath
the visible wavelengths. I suspect
he’ll drop out of college and washing his clothes.
He’ll go to New York, which is my favorite actor,
how tall it stands and green in the middle
of murder or love, and then Africa,
because getting around is like practicing death,
the unknown cliffs and call to prayer in the morning
in a city he can’t speak to. Were I a sailor,

I’d cut my ship loose one night and miss it
the rest of my life, go looking in ports
with my eyes closed. I sense wandering in him
on a suicidal scale, like he’ll pick a fight
with the ocean. When I came into Heraklion,
I spent hours on the concrete blocks
along the shore, they’re shaped like jacks, those
we scooped as tots while a ball bounced,
and three times as big as a man. People
and sunlight went by and that was enough for me,

but this kid, I fear he wants a bullet in every second,
for time to be furious and piercing
and will make it so by putting his face
through a windshield each day. There are so many
round things, like an O in the arm, the O of poets,
that gasping sound, that syllable of praise
we offer in lieu of sense. How romantic,
the poem he’s writing in his skin, this kid
who doesn’t know what he’s trying to let go
and so throws everything in.

 

My most interesting job

I was a tummy phffffter. They train you
with babies to bury your face to the lips
and blow. Kept the terminals giggling, wriggling,
it got Pavlovian, my voice equaled smile.
So many rooms in the hospital, had to run,
shave thrice a day, be nice, that ouched
my mind. The older the more like pussy
willow, pillow it was to hide my crying
in their dying, I was trying to make amends,
the something rends, soul I think, never loses
its baby smell. Quit. Up and. Tried for days
to pretzel my head to my gut to feel what all
the fuss was about, struck out. Paid a woman
fifty bucks to explain: it tickled, the fart sound
distracted me from me, so of course I said, again.

 

Once more & accidentally, epistemology breaks out

The picture of a black hole in my dictionary’s
neat, a funnel though not functional,
otherwise it would swallow the dictionary
and my guitar with its broken g-string, my sexy,
sexy guitar. Nothing’s this tidy, even scalpels
have doubts. It’s only occurring to me
now that a black hole, offered a mirror,
would suck it down. What a lonely existence,
never seeing yourself, like Paul Simon
singing, I am a rock, I am an i-i-i-island.
That’s an old song if you don’t know, I’m an old guy
in case I’m trying to pretend, with silver
hair on my neck because I haven’t shaved it
all summer. My deer wife dearly wants me to,
I’ll discuss black hole existentialism
with her today at lunch, we’ll wonder
why they’re called black holes, if it’s a racial
or sky thing, I’ll promise to shave my neck
if she’s been having a bad day, work is often
a suck-hole of indeterminate color. The edge
of where things break down should be edgier
in depiction, I have faith it is in fact, the star
or dishwasher being torn apart not wanting to be,
the hunger to tear knowing only that job:
the rabbit runs, the wolf chases,
winter seals its mouth around the wolf.
But it’s wrong of me to pick on a dictionary
that’s served me so well. What’s this, I ask it,
usually it tells me, though now and then,
it shrugs. I like that, when it and I
are sitting here, stumped, the sun
transiting anyway, and I go forward
with this small hole in what I know
joining the vastness of my confusion. The Buddha
would tell a black hole, desire only feeds
desire, right before it squished him down
to Buddha matter. But of course he wouldn’t mind,
Buddha doesn’t mind anything, not even
that the mind takes what’s offered
without thanks, wanting only more, as if
on the other side of us
it’s putting together this one room
in which everything fits, and the light
pouring in never has to leave, and we’re not there
to mess things up, so pristine does consciousness
want to be. So I need to say to consciousness,
the hell with you, but it won’t let me.
You see the bind I’m in. Spell-check
just misbehaved and I learned the word transude.
Every day I get sucked in deeper
to knowing things and knowing that the things
I know won’t keep me from going where I’ll go.
At least I know how quicksand feels, never
being able to escape itself, even when I throw it
a rope.

 

The naturalist

You wouldn’t know, to look
at a pileated woodpecker,
that its tongue is bifurcated, begins

on either side of its nostril,
wraps around and under its skull,
enters the base of the palate,

the halves finally joining
at the tip. Freaky. What a mad
scientist nature is. You still

owe me twenty bucks, by the way,
and I’m still in love
with your wife. Keep the twenty,

buy me a strawberry poison frog
instead. Elephants walk on their toes.
It’s pointless to study the heart.

Call and no       response

I will not call you           candy

           Or I will not call you                  destroy

I will not call you           immer

           Or I will not call you                  jamais

You are not argyle and rope
           You are more slub and taste
                       You are each book in the endless           library after
                                  hours when the checkout desk is closed

When the checkout desk is        
                                            closed you are not        

                                                                             molecular and someday
You are not the scent of burning             cream

           You are the olive pit I search for in another woman’s      mouth

In a land of       green you are                persimmon
In a persimmon of         land you are                  sugar rising
            And the olive pit I search for in another             woman’s mouth is a library
                        And the library does                   not ask

They ask me what they should               call you
            No they            demand—
I say it depends on the  fabric
I say it depends on        when jamais comes

They like their shiny       keys and they like them              always
            I don’t              care much for little        prisons;
I do not relish the sexual            nature of unlocking
            —the insertion of hard               metal things into slick                 places—

            The subsequent             releases through forces of          will

They want to call you                things
I say it depends on the   key

If the key is       shiny the answer is        silence

If the key is       intricate the answer is                silence

If the key is       mine the answer is         silence

If the key is       jamais the answer is                 I will whisper into your ear like a woman’s

            mouth whispers in a
                                    library when she has forgotten the

meaning of all the

                                    words in all the whispering books when she has forgotten the
                        meaning of       
            whisper  

 

Movement across an invisible barrier

How you come to bed damp,
           bring the place where you were to the place where you are

The way your hair carries stories,
           tiny grains of sand

How the five small moles on your stomach
           form a constellation

           How the moon is a mirror

How something with no doors
           can be entered

           How you are your own horizon

How you breathe
           beneath the sea of sleep  

 

Philosophy for darling

If you were a seahorse you’d
           be loyal but you’re a man
so perhaps it is not your fault
           you like to breathe air perhaps
it is the dry dry oxygen making you
           thirsty for what you can’t
have if you could breathe
           water you wouldn’t need
mermaids if you were a
           fish I’d always be finding you
flopping around on the carpet not
           making your grand escape but
                      just seeing what it felt like to rub
           up against the synthetic beauty of soft
strands for feet you didn’t have if
           you had feet you wouldn’t need to
escape you see I see it all so
           clearly you see your reflection
in your little glass bowl you see
           with the perfection of one eye on
one side of a flattened
           head there are two sides to
everything you would say if
           you said such things
if you were a man
           and not a flippery creature
if I weren’t so busy cleaning up
           the wet tracks on the floor
if I were even
           listening.  

 

Which begins as a color unless it begins

as a sound:  we didn’t know what it was exactly
            but it was weeping. 
We both agreed about that— the fact that it was
            weeping. And I agreed that it was
beautiful and you agreed that it was
            nameless and after an hour had passed you
decided it must come from
            Japan and I agreed that it must come from
somewhere because only the weeping
            would have been here before.

And it fell like stars.
            In the manner of a star falling.
In the manner of a thing which begins
            so it has a beginning but now it is on fire
and we will only ever know it for
            its otherness.  Or we will never know it. 
Because once a thing falls then
            the torn space remaining—  then
where it is going to go—

Orphanage keeper, handmade, suitcase bearing part of the sea,
in which mirror are you least reflected; whose boots
have you tossed away?  Take this shovel
to the far shore, and forge a campsite
in the darkened harbor, low tide
restless with fog, and the horse you borrowed
might steal the black fruit from your bags
as you bend to warm your hands over the fire.  
Can’t blame him.  Poor guest
to your desolate margin. When night arranges
its small breathing distance,
what is left on the bones
you boil to broth. Posy:
a fistful of salt.  You’ve left
the animal to carry its own damp sleep
from the kindling and still she catches fire,
but no one is there to say
spectre come; no one is there to put the fire out.

After the name corrodes the engine
says this: open the envelope carefully,

water the flying-out air
with licks you left halved under

the girls’s lucky nickel.  The
method you wander through echoes,

the wander you echo through leaves
a started nest unstarted &

then started again.

                        ~

As real as the purple plate covered in
the remnants of the tires you blew

out on your way to a benchmark,
this checkered flag folds into the

working brain of a cat.  There are
sounds that become circles when you

hold them beneath the wheelchair
wheels.  This is what the runt of the

litter writes with a single bared claw
across the dead cactus: There

are places to go to hold hands.

                        ~

       for Stephanie Subway

When I’m sad,
my mind hears

songs from the lion.
After 13 days of  

writing blood in
the wet cement, I

stretch my finger toward
a tomb & poke a hole

in the tomb.  Marbles
spill out, follow

a lizard to its skin.
What’s sad is the

geshundheit of your
skin.  What’s sad is.

                        ~

I’m cold.
I will not borrow
your skin, slip

your mitten feet over.

A piece of lettuce on my face
a cartoon pig holds an umbrella

of real tripe over.

For my next poem
I’ll need to borrow
your sheep, make

you an owl
out of a beard.

I love you.
Gesundheit.

                        ~

I found a baby at a funeral
& lined its hands with lipstick,

black lei around its neck, neck
to the tent stakes.  A dozen

crabapples creak under the
gesundheit shoes & everybody

whispers what to the werewolf.
A baby in a black lei stares

at another baby in a black lei.

                        ~

I found another baby
at another funeral

lined its hands
lined its fingers
lined its arms
lined its belly
lined its earlobes
lined its blotchy
umbilical cord

with lipstick.

Lost

She packs her bags
Unready      her heart refused to sing
Still unscoured by the relentless wind
The island’s breath so much stronger than her own
She fights the clothes onto the line
Pins each twice   towels and shirts fight for release
as does she
from all the times past whispering
the door always unlocked always words unbidden
drowns her.

Over the ferns the sea rolls in the distance
The sun past zenith falling down to the western coast

Others are warned   do not disturb
but what is there to disturb?
She begins to feel guilty
even the ghosts are bored

And the moon rises a hair-breath smaller 

 

the noise

this noise
                        that is my noise
cicadas but not cicadas                    and whine
                                                cacophony for one

sometimes music         a long
        way off          a hymn     without words
instruments unknown                             forgotten prayer

a winding cloth raps             an interment off key
                                    ricochets    
                                 ear                  to                      ear

 

escape  almost  when inside roar
      falls in between outside                  shurrrrrrrrrrring

                        white

noise machine        or              water talk           

no silence possible               be careful
            whatyouwishfor                       

                      mocking  bird     
        still sings
                              Satie             Pärt         Glass
                                    notes cross and send filaments to
                                                mingle but not muffle

                    in the laps of sound

I sing myself inside out


Jacobin

We are not extremists.  We are not
Adherents of slipslop.  As a matter of fact
There is no matter to our facts, only fear
For the slack rescue attempt, the saving grace
That scissors our faces from the painting
While leaving clouds, sea, and apple frame.
Most evenings, we sit on the front porch
To watch the semi-colons roar down
The expressway.  Our green screens are so
Wide-ranging you cannot escape
Our ogre.  On full-moon winter nights
We like to take the beast out to scent
That curve, where the hapless nouns pile up.
Grab that tuba; air this balloon; lose your head
To cherry cobbler; Main Street is so long,
Sucker, you can’t evade our parades!

 

Psalms from the Dewey Decimal System: 1930-1939

I’m on the inside peering in

            ~

When you remove your spectacles
I can’t see you

            ~

In the water it takes a great effort
To go nowhere

In the air, not so much

            ~

Soft rays, the babies we bore

            ~

I don't really know you, though
I've come into

Contact with you in various
Card catalogues

            ~

When you remove your books
I can’t see

            ~

Let me live, anon, let me
Never escape

            ~

I’m on the inside looking

            ~

I've come into acquaintance
With you

In various hotel rooms
In the air

Not so much

            ~

Travelers are buoyant

            ~

The fix of emollients to
A diseased limb

            ~

Out a window, watch the snow
Reek distance

            ~

When hegemony becomes
A prayer

Print the application

            ~

X-rays reveal old beauty

            ~

Psalms are messages on paper
Ships, placed

In a plastic bottles

            ~

I’m gigantic, it’s the screens
That got small

            ~           

I live semi-permanently
In a hostel

            ~

Anonymous, I love you, anonymous

            ~

Uncork the bottle, fish out
The ship

Pull up the covers (flashlight)
Read away

            ~

The application of emollients
To a lamb

            ~

I’m on the inside

            ~

When you remove your numbers
I can’t

 

Speak

The first word is the best word.  You’ll never phoneme like that, again. 
There’s virtue and joy when you just don’t know what you’re saying.

Every word after your first word is business.

I’m not going to tell you your first word. 

No. 

I don’t wish to change our whole dynamic.

 

What to Take on an Ark

Zip lock bags, duct tape, two bathing suits, hi-lighter pens (to hi-light activities on the ship in the newsletter), panama hat and baseball cap, deodorant, rope, nail clippers, collapsible water bottles, binoculars, driver’s license, extra pair of reading glasses, white gloves, fungicide and Crichton, bird feed, sandals (and flip-flops?), prophylactics, hand sanitizer, phone card, cufflinks, flash cards, waterproof watch, passport, casuals, list of medications, chargeable batteries, shower cap, tranquilizer rifle, lavender oil, room freshener, two belts, kibble, medications, rubber bones, PDA, insulated cup holders, deck shoes, pajamas (silk & cotton), kimono, maps, laptop, power bars, dove call, slippers, two sweaters, tuxedo, hair dryer, underwater camera solar-powered calculator (for reckoning tips), compression socks, portable DVD player, two mucking shovels, workout clothes, noise canceling headphones, CDs (soothing music), prescription sunglasses, raincoat with hood, sunblock, Capri pants, global positioning device, white bucks and two cell phones.

Storm

I rend a hole in the window screen and bid the rain in—
          with the tip of my pencil—

a small hole, a few drops of rain
          to wet my fingers.

                                        ~

Wait for the weeds in the culvert,                 wait for them
to finish sprouting between stones,
                    for the electric blue flowers to spread open.

I have given in to them.

                                        ~

Sometimes, beauty is the broken window, or the peeling
          paint of the porch rail;

it’s overcast or it’s partly cloudy,
          and sometimes, it’s birdsong.  

 

After Van Gogh
                                    (Musée d'Orsay)

—noctilucent clouds splash the edge of space.

Mulberry leaf lifting your skirt . . . 
    smolders d'une branche sans ombre

—your tongue, rough petal, on my neck.

Flash of dusky light, field of daylilies.

—the evening you rendered me wide and starry.

At Genesee
             September 15, 1779                   Western New York
Two weeks before, Barton’s party
opened fire on the Iroquois,
then skinned two, from their hips,
for boot legs—the ones that warm

his ankles now against the morning,
as against the cold of last night’s march
into Chenisee Castle, where Lt. Boyd
was waiting, his head beside his body.

It appeared to have been whipped
in many different places,
a great part skinned
leaving the ribs bare. The cramped hand.

Now the light plays like cannon fire
across his face, sun
musketing through leaves.
And if he thinks of a Genesee

riding warm beneath Boyd’s leather,
if he wonders at the cool
on the dead young rifler’s
missing head, no one can tell:

the orders are, as always, from above—
The whole army employed
till 3 o’clock, gathering corn
and burning it in their huts.

To starve the Redcoats’ Redskins,
the word from Sullivan, from Washington
at West Point, writing I am led
to conclude he has completed the destruction.

The huts burn down,
and now the heat settles through
vest and kerchief, strong enough
to keep the fogs at bay tonight,

so Barton can forget the extra skin.
Boyd is buried now, with honors of war.
A few slim ears
roast beside the fire.

 

Aubade

A penny would stretch to an ear
     in the heavy spark,
hold the freight of all that sound,
     a boxcar on its back,
a dead man hoboed there.
     It would gleam like polished rails.

You found the stone, a coal-dark
     lump in the railbed’s slag,
this piece of glass or shiny black rock
     that holds your face.
Its Coke-bottle cuts
     rhyme the coin’s cancelled edge,
the one you wanted flattened.

     From the bluff above the track,
the tunnel’s push smells like sickness,
     the hum of swollen ears
rasped wide, snap cold shocked
     by thunder. And when the train
rolls, storm over the snow-grey
     slag,

             shards of obsidian wake
then gather to a cloud
     of breaking glass and boxcars
singing off the tracks then burnt
     to an iridescent feather,
the train a starling
      in the wing of the flock,
its one, twisted syllable
     flown over and over again.

 

DeSoto, After
October 19, 1540

Night, smoke braid in their braids,
thick as native, their campfires dying

maps of a town remade in fire,
the spread of coal and ash behind them

where a thousand Alabama lie.
Every twinkle here’s another

ambush’s vesper, glint of a dancing girl’s
pearls enameled new in moon. And then

an arquebus pushing from the pines,
another armored Spaniard risen

from the dead, provision yet, another friend.
But quiet closes every movement

till the embers blink, two thousand eyes
awaiting signals deep in Maubilla’s night,

the flank’s ten thousand teeth
ten thousand pearls lustered bright with fire

gold as the gold that sparked this all,
a heat even gauntlets cannot stand.

 

In Arizona When Howard Finster Dies
2001 

The Catalinas do not rise
          like George Washington,
and the sand paintings do not rhyme

with revelation exactly—
the pyrrhuloxia no messenger
          or mourning dove

but a cardinal burned white, calling
          quick, quick, through the mesquite,
the marl. There’s no help here,

like you said, No Fire Extinguisher In Hell—
just a creased Apache raking leaves
          from the sand

and sculpted gravel of the university
          grounds, tattoos flexing
Ruegme o abrase. Off east,

the coppersmiths work on,
          and the kiva fires go up
over an un-Englished landscape

as I look through the paloverdes
           and agaves, the limetree
and the palm, and pray

for the North Georgia forest
and the bank account in the hill
          and that other,

unraked garden for my Bible
and the credit card swipe behind
          the Sunday word.

Even now, as the saguaro
          raise their arms against
the day’s last burn, needling stars

over the glass catastrophes
           of the mountains,
into the wound night gauzes

like a cloth of brown recluse,
          even now, old man,
even now, I feel the heat.

Johnny Appleseed Contemplates Heaven

                 “Swedenborgian doctrine, which holds that everything here
                 on Earth corresponds directly to something in the afterlife,
                 might explain the strange and wonderful ways Chapman
                 conducted himself in nature.”
                                                —from The Botany of Desire by Michael Pollan

The Angel Chapman with His sacks of seed.  How like
to me? I sometimes wonder, feedsack
shirt?  Cooking pot for headgear?
His feet are bare.

Who told thee that thou wast naked?

(For crushing a worm, I’ve made John’s earthly sole to suffer
mortification of flesh, cast off its shoe leather.)

I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; 
it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel.

There is in Heaven one thing & on Earth
its counterpart,

And the Lord God planted a garden eastward in Eden 

that we may know the Lord’s Ways.

and out of the ground made the Lord God to grow
every tree that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food.

Thus, the Celestial orchards, their bees,

And the Lord God took the man, and put him into the garden
of Eden to dress it and to keep it

the Sower more Beautiful than Ohio John,

the tree of life also in the midst of the garden, and the tree
of knowledge of good and evil
as the fruit and the Heavenly worms are more, and the blossoms a Perfection
of Eternal transience.  Seraphs like wasps cluster
the windfalls              Of every tree in the garden thou mayest freely eat

                       already flowing with Honey of ferment.  Desire

And when the woman saw that it was . . . a tree to be desired
to make one wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat 

which is There the yearning for God & drunkenness

I will make mine arrows drunk with blood, and my sword shall devour flesh.

the Knowledge.  I will hide my face from them.  For Paradise

Behold the man is become as one of us, to know
good and evil: and now, lest he put forth his hand and take
also of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever    
                                                                                 your
earthly Apple-John eats of the Fruit, seeking its Stars.

In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die.                                         

I scatter my sackfuls along the Ohio, for the Flood

and a river went out of Eden to water the Garden

of cider running out of Eden.  For Revelation, Lord.

 

Learning Again to Call the Sun

Reach.  Flex.  Rotate the wrist.  The fingers
must remember to squeeze.  Making

the arm do what it wants to forget, training
it to increments of pain.  The risk,

he says, with this kind of fracture is freezing.
Like in the dream:  Going back

to what now hurts.  When I was a Mesopotamian
priestess, mummy-wrapped in a linen

sheath, smooth and slim as polished bone.
Body that, even then, I knew wasn’t mine,

face I couldn’t guess.  When I was fearful,
slipping back to the temple I’d had

to flee long ago (from what threat?).  Hour before
dawn, when the air was quicksilver.

In a private room, dressing for the dance
of Call-Forth-the-Sun I could no longer perform

by heart, by body.  Would have to teach myself.  Reach. 
Flex.  Before a beaten-metal mirror, placing

the silver-gilt headdress on a sweep
of black hair.  Over the fixed, unfamiliar face.

My arm is now this foreigner.  Rotate
and squeeze.  Learning again to grasp.

Making myself remember.  After the dream,
when I didn’t know if I’d ever performed

the ceremony or stayed frozen
before the mirror’s face, if I were still

in danger, I walked out in the mercury-dawn.
I was just coming back to poetry then.  I thought

it was a metaphor.  Morning star
somewhere behind the trees,

where a little horned moon hung,
still hung, an old reflex, tracing the curve

of an elbow once extended and now bowed
back against the bracing arm.  So suddenly new

I couldn’t be sure I was walking in wet grass or leading
the acolytes, hand cupped to beckon, arm out.

 

Murder:  A Pocket Grammar

Preposition of the trigger.
Pointed at.  Pulled
and the body falls.  Distanced,
you watch the crumple, cause
becoming effect.  You feel only
exploding into, not collapse, hear
for the moment only the roar of.

Blade a conjunction.  So you feel
all the way up your arm, not
from far off, the body
opening to you, releasing.
Knees turn to sponge.  You sweat,
and your salt can’t be extracted
from the other salt, metallic,
red, slicking your grip.
So the body in surrender shudders you.

Pillow over the face—sweet adverb:
Peacefully.  In her sleep.
You too adverbial—silently, invisibly,
in the dark.  Your fingers remembering
only forgiveness of down.

Poison, that intransitive verb.
You sprinkle, pour.  In another sentence,
on another page,
someone gags, groans—not yet body,
still human, in his curious dance
of jerking and vomit.
You don’t even see.  It’s nothing
to do with you.

And after everything, the hard,
immovable nouns:  Judgment.  Grave.

 

Underworld

                May it be right to tell what I have heard . . .
                That I describe the deep world sunk in darkness
                Under the earth.
                                —The Aeneid (Fitzgerald  translation)

I see nothing—the nothing that last week
was a road.  I’m as close to the barrier as I can get.
Sinkhole.  Fissure.  Chasm.  Hauled-in rock

in useless piles, asphalt crumbles.  I don’t know it,
this gulf, except in dreams, and a half-remembered
history of coal veins so long played out

the rights to them no longer appear
as clouds on titles of surface land.  In law,
there’s nothing wrong.  This road—its dirt and tar—

spilling into the old web of tunnels, returned
from the upper world.  “Chthonic,” “of earth,”
scholars’ term for worship of the buried dead

and their deep world with its ores.  Pluto’s
name means “riches,” but here the miners
were slaves—go down, stranger, where there is

no day and your voice comes back to you in moans,
a hundred mouths with rushing voices.  Cave-ins,
explosions, breath smothered in soot.  Still, someone

can always be made to go underground.
The men in my father’s stalag dug, week on
week, night after night, with spoons and jar lids

under floorboards and a bunk, pockets filled
with dirt to carefully palm on the exercise field
during softball games.  Late and silent,

the last night, they surfaced in deep woods,
beyond barbed wire and searchlight towers.
Two prisoners mimed goodbyes and crawled

out of sight.  My father was meant to be the next
(May it be right to tell what I have heard), but dawn
turned him back, once more he’d have to wait

for dark.  The guards that morning herded them
to the field without their bats and balls.
Another sport instead:  two bodies dumped

across each other in the dust, eyes fixed
on darkness, dark crusts around the narrow gape
of mouths, hair black and stiff with blood.

Two bodies—and my father saved (Unconquered
friend, throw earth on me, the unburied beg
Aeneas)—and the secret dirt they’d mined and carried

and scattered on the diamond, sliding home.
Tunnel dust, coal dust, flurries up a moment,
then settles, sinks down where it started from.

Museum District, Richmond, Virginia
                                              after Frederick Douglass

I
Reading on the back steps of the library for the blind,
I’ve decided the building’s abandoned,
rose bushes a tangled mass above the door. 
Old blue-gray paint sticks to my thighs
in sharp-edged flecks; my water bottle beads. 
Just one of Douglass’ days.  College kids speed
by on track bikes, brakeless.  (For how much
must we prepare?)

A mile away, I visit an old estate nearly every day. 
I want to know what stood there before, if the owners
once held slaves.  A park now—I wander, wary
and amazed, the waterfall rushing from Italian gardens
to Japanese, koi blanching the rippling black.  I know
where to find the lizards skittering
over the staircase before it ends, opening
to a vista thick with tulips.  
On the other side of the park’s huge hill,
bison scruff layers of mange,
their profiles hunching brown against green.
Yesterday, one buck under a magnolia tree
shed its antlers, stood braying by the fence,
two bloody nubs on its head.   What
is it, luminous in the pink lobes of the dogwood,
that makes those blooms shine so bright? 
In high school I had a math teacher
with a monotone who taught us the plug and chug—
put the numbers in, execute the drill. 
Just one right answer, x equals something. 
With each bound page I imagine today’s moment
on the pad I used in class, light green, graphed . . .

Just one of Douglass’ days.  “Feet so cracked
with frost that this pen
might be laid in the gashes.” 
Staring at my teacher’s shellacked black hair,
twenty years ago, I considered the lesson of the hour:
Two non-parallel lines, even to the most minute
fraction, will eventually cross.   
How meager their representation on my sheet
of graph, how they might have to travel,
so my teacher said, all the way to California
before they touched.  No one seems to know
if these library shelves still house books,
the building’s small squared windows
obscured with marbled glass. 
I come to absorb the quiet in the sun. 
Patrons must have once rubbed fingers
over bumpy bindings, discovering what—
I can only guess.  Their language,
regardless of darkness or light,
would give me no entry.

Consciousness is a terrible thing. 
It strives, endlessly, to curve around
the slickest of surfaces,
any understanding sliding off like rain. 
It bends again, forms an ellipse
of every degree.  One day.  Corn meal
in a trough.  All of Douglass’ words
fade from the page, all mine dissolve
like bits of bread dropped in water.  

II
Today, as I read, sheetrockers across the street
flash their white squares of wall past windows
of the old retirement home.  Condos, after the building
sat for two years in marvelous, deserted slumber. 
I find the movement of the men awful, their trucks
ripping up boxwoods and ivy, their silver work trailer
signaling the end to emptiness.

That any thread could run between then and now,
between Douglass’ days, ours.  That one captive hour
joins these steps, these flowers. 
How the mind keeps taut this rope,
the human bracing for either extreme. 
Easy, then, to believe that two parallel lines
can travel forever, then further, and never meet. 

 

Persistence

This island is full of doves.  
They purr in olive trees to assuage
the near-dead.  Perhaps,
in their incessant song,
they are like the disembodied
head of Orpheus
floating down the Aegean
toward the town of Molyvos. 
It bobs past the port town
of Skala Kaloni, past the mess
of white masts leaning
and rocking into each other, past
the distant, scrubby finger of Turkey.
What are we to learn
from constant refrains, from such refusal
to end?  The doves simply repeat,
like a mother who answers
the same question time
and again, while the mouth of Orpheus
lives like the body of a chicken.
His drifting head goes on                                              
not just speaking or reciting
but singing, as if happy to be rid
of bulky torso, of floppy arms and legs,
as if freedom is being the mouth
alone, the mouth and water,
the water and song.

 

Watching Soul Train at Forty

At least no one else has to know.   Twenty years ago the fabled
Saturday night, grilled on Mondays for what you did, might cast
you into this realm or that.  Wasted, some concert with a beer-caked

floor, in and out of The White Hen too many times, buying cokes
in flimsy cups crunchy with ice.  You could run into someone big—Craig
Wilkenson, Tim Cottier even—your whole life changing in an instant,  

recognition from the stars. Today, DVD’s come to our door.
After you’ve yawned your loudest yawn I watch the post-flick extras,
one dog at a time allowed up on the couch.  They sigh and sink

their fat necks into leather, peer back with Malted Milk Ball eyes.   And when
nothing else is on, it begins, the locomotive of cool, Don
Cornelius’ voice, luring me toward the few chosen guardians

of funk.  I can’t help but think the dancers on the screen can see out,
one at a time, smiling—sure—at me.  Blue tickers start to run
through church snow closings at the bottom of the screen

as if Soul Train’s converting entire congregations.  Above,
teen and twenty-something girls with bare bellies
and hips like laundry in a washer window slosh

to some song featuring the nouns junk and hump. 
Five songs later the girls start to seem sad, how much
they love the camera’s eye, how it seems they would do

anything for it, from any view.  I want to tell these girls:
terrycloth shorts, rainbow tanks and glitter tees:  I was there. 
But they’ve got those hips, those flat stomachs and plump

skin; they remain immortal even as the snow wears on
past two a.m., even as the First Baptist church on Monument
Avenue cancels all Sunday services, through three sets of Do 

You Want an Exciting New Career in Technology and Tell
Your Insurance Company We Mean Business.  In second grade
my best friend Jackie and I discoed on the bed, tripping

in her mother’s sequined, ruffly skirts and spiky heels.   When the show
was over Saturday afternoon had just begun—boxes of dolls’ clothes
or the tire swing or some brightly-dyed treat
to make us crazy.   We had her mother’s closet and racks
of gargantuan shoes.   My mother’s wigs and rhinestone tops.
An evening of sweaty running up and down the stairs

from her apartment to mine.  Whatever it was,
it was endless.  Now I check the locks on the front door
for the eighteenth time, Windex countertops, turn the heat down
a couple notches and, in bed, lights off,
I’m certain no one is watching.

Brooklyn nights

My neighbor searches his garden by flashlight.
Across the way, another never pulls her shades.
On Fridays, she snaps herself into black lingerie
and makes regular love with a pot-bellied guy.
Out my rear windows, omnipresent televisions
exclaim in a lunar light, an all-seeing blue
lapping over me in a rising tide, starfish too.
Some say all the magic has left the borough
but the dark-haired sisters two houses over,
they still dress in silver lame sheaths and loll
outside their mother’s flotsam-filled bar
luring dry-docked sailors to a watery fate.

On hot Brooklyn nights, the air is so thick and blue
I can open my windows and swim to my neighbors.

 

Elevated

When the F train rises over the jaded Gowanus
The slapdash fence you’ve all made of your faces
Will be splashed with the paint of the sun
Thrown over the sky above Bayonne
Where giant cranes rush like a herd of giraffes
Towards the last watering hole of the day.

 

Resurrection-proof

I want to die with Keats in my pocket
along with a jar of honey,
a piece
of your underwear (the one with the bow),
some of Magritte’s nightblue sky,
a coin
for the Ferryman poling the river,

And enough smooth stones to weigh me down,
Proof against the promise of my ascent.

Blessing Will

And I wish you time to age, your
useful head hair gone, erupting
from your ears and eyebrows,
the drama of your face tribute
to a poet. I wish you lips to kiss
the new bare skin above your brain,
and levity for a head-heavy
life. I wish you too many
books to read, too many journeys
to take, too many women to
love you. I wish an echo
to your stairwell, bay to your
fish, eyes to your lens, skies
to your pain, friends to your friend,
apprentice to your shaman, music
to your mouth, moth to your moonlight.

 

Chicago
After Edward Hopper’s “Nighthawks”
Tonight it was a couple suits and a red dress. Every night’s a different cast at the diner, that’s the thing, it’s never boring. No. I bet that guy who came in alone was wishing he was sitting next to a woman with red hair. She looked like a cardinal, with this hair and dress against her skin, white like it’s the snow or something. And quiet, just sitting there listening to her suit and me talking. I think she had something on her mind, the way she leaned on her elbows and looked at her cigarette case, turning it around in those long fingers. Don’t get me wrong, it’s not like I was looking, but you notice things. I kept the coffee poured and talked to the suit, which is what you do when they feel like talking. You can always talk about sports, and believe me in my business you make a lot of talk about the weather, we got a good view of it the way that glass curves all around, the streetlights shining in. But this guy had other things on his mind, seems he and the red dress are thinking about leaving here, and I told him my sister lives in Chicago. I told him maybe I’ll get out of here someday too.

 

The Clothes Whisperer

I don’t see dead people or
whisper to horses, but since turning
46 this collection of clothes I carried
from state to state has started
to speak to me. I know
thrifty—shirt and sweater
cast-offs from
my uncle’s mother, now passed,
neighbors, cousins, daughter
in middle school. I don’t know
why now
I hear them, the violet-
turquoise-fuchsia turtleneck saying
Hands off, mister! I’ve got unicorns
to catch,  salmon cardigan
and chocolate cable knit with
nautical buttons, I’m in my 70s
and I wear clothes too big
for me. Nothing shouts
like overalls, In my spare time I play
in dirt!  the stuffy maroon sweater,
Sorry I’m late, I was just talking
to the Mother Superior. The pink plaid
blouse spoke to my daughter:
I am a tablecloth. Bags of sartorial
comment marked GOOD WILL
stack next to the mirror, my
new clothes ignore the cries,
Shoulder pads were popular
in the 70s! Everyone has an
electric yellow polar fleece vest!
Red athletic socks are coming back!
They will not have the last word,
the loafers with the tire-tread soles
proclaiming, You could walk to Norway,
blue rubber rain boots with their
Let me rub your ankles raw, striped
turtleneck scratching, I don’t go
with anything, that white sweater won’t
pull the wool over me.

 

Essay Question

—What is your most prized possession?

The playful clothes—yellow raincoat, planet
socks, stripy underwear, zigzag earrings

dangling pink beads, or the slender coat
and its soft collar, new black shoes

with a stylish nip at the bone—I can’t choose
one more than I can pick a day, though

Monday’s class is my favorite, but is it mine,
any more than the view of the old horse

in the pasture at dawn? My camera
has seen what I have seen, Wisconsin ice,

children selling cookies at a worn card table,
a tree born from the rot of what lived.

I don’t know what made me cry—the wedding
rings, or the note from my grandmother’s pen,

For Karen. Do I possess my cat or just his
daily returns through my door, or this oak

door with its beveled glass, or the stone fireplace,
the swirls of kitchen ceiling from my grandfather’s

hand over my mixer, stock pan, heavy-handled
flour scoop, the glass bowl on its stem,

the old linoleum that catches the heavy
steps of good bye, the dancing?

 

Lost Child

So there you all are, everyone you know plus about a thousand extras, trying to find the missing child, looking at the map and taking every form of transportation you’ve seen in your life. Finally the alarm goes off and you shift on your pillow and the extras begin to wander off, except for the two women with accents and the man with the map, they stay, even though the map never actually leads you to where you need to go to solve the problem you are trying to explain to everyone. So you start getting ready for work and then you realize that when you went to the store yesterday without the list, you forgot lotion, which has become an emergency

since the cold snap dried out the air, so you go canvassing through the house for the nearly empty specialty creams you got for Christmas and you put them on, blueberry, peach, cucumber, and you wonder if everyone at work will suddenly get the urge to go to the salad bar, and you’re throwing the empties into the garbage, which is full because you forgot to take out the trash again. So you start driving down the highway and it’s a mess from the deep snow a few days ago and a truck kicks some slush onto the windshield and you turn the knob for some squirter and that’s when you discover you’re out—you get this little spit and it smears around and you can’t

really see anymore, you need new wipers anyway but you’re a little worried you won’t be able to get them back on and then you’d have to put your hand out the window when you’re driving and wipe off the snow. The women at work are telling childbirth stories and you make a little comment about Lamaze, and they ask Lamaze?  and they don’t know you very well and begin to think you’re not very bright. So the day goes on like that until you get back into bed and get ready for the man to give you the map that isn’t very helpful so you can go and look for the lost child, and the last thing you think before you fall asleep is that it’s funny that even in your dreams, you don’t stop to ask for directions.

So You Know Who We Are

The wisteria and bill collectors colluded
to swallow our household whole so we dismantled
it, rivet and splinter, made two piles on the lawn:

1. belongings the quality of lead
2. belongings the quality of dandruff. 

The blue stoop, its yellow roses,
a peepshow each time the door opened,
my dog-eared book on serial killers,
the painting with the wandering eye.
We stacked all our stuff on the yard
like we had done a dozen times before.

My father insisted that staying
was akin to calcifying. He hated the geologic
permanence buried in heaps under the grass. 
He buried his employ instead.
My mother sewed nickels into her hem.

We children were assigned the task
of packing only the most relevant bits of us
into milk crates stolen from the grocery store.
We wrote our names in tiny letters
on the walls of our rooms
to put down a trace of our stay.  
The leave-behinds
we picked over:
a giant jar of buttons,
my mother’s engagement ring,
a red satin jumpsuit,
a doll with galaxies painted onto her eyes,
strands and strands of hair. 

How the West Disintegrated into Soundlessness

As the night sky, transparent against calamity, drew its curtains,
the cinematic landscape, a nation’s industrialized pastoral rusting
behind the ears, flaked into a pile of iron oxide.

There may have been a message lost when distilling the past into
earthenware.  There may even have been a mix-up at the
crematorium.  But the drone did not submit under an obscured midnight.

            Cathedral organs simulate grandeur in the pantry
            where suburban women, sheltering their brood, check expiration
            dates on perishables & count the miles between themselves & danger.

It was the transference, from one form to another, which made
the ashen sunset memorable.  At least the first few days.  Afterwards,
it was the absence of all the things they thought they had.  But didn’t.

            To reclaim the three-piece suit, long ago set aside for more
            fashionable garb, becomes his latest crusade.  Those finely tailored seams
            are everything he dreams of in a Rockwell reproduction.  & a pipe.

From reel to reel, establishing epitaphs to childhood,
forgotten secrets encompassed the playground & broken vignettes of yesterday
lay waxen behind the façade of digital sunrises.

Sooner or later, they had all known it was coming, but stubbornness
let them imagine it would be their grandchildren’s problem.
All those analog loops were set afire in the blaze.  Smoking like tinder.

 

Upon Reading Richard Rorty’s Online
Curriculum Vitae
                                 —for Hausman at dinner parties

If Rorty’s CV is not a mirror that reflects a storied academic & philosophical career, not a glassy essence that contains objective realities of a mind espousing cultural pragmatism, not a metaphor for aluminum covered in glass so as to reflect the light which strikes its surface in an effort to tangibly chronicle mimesis, not a chemical reaction between silver nitrate, distilled water & ammonia, then what is one to make of the series of 0s & 1s digitally engineered into a sign system that contains the truncated tale of a New York-born leftist who traveled to Chicago & then to Princeton, donned olive green to serve a nation, & traipsed through tomes & lecture halls in search of a steady paycheck? Bookmarked next to free pornography, robust search engines, saturation from the blogosphere, & log-in pages for email accounts, we can sigh in unison with a digital lung when we envision the link to, & subsequent text of, Rorty’s CV as a matter of conversation and of social practice, rather than . . . an attempt to mirror nature, an instance of explaining rationality and epistemic authority by reference to what society lets us say.  & if a possible society lets us possibly say that a possible institution bestowed a possible honor, possibly entitled Doctor honoris causa, upon a possible individual, then such a myth should possibly exist if it is in accordance with that which best possibly serves another possible individual when negotiating the possible world of cultural politics & possibly singing sweet lullabies to metaphysics & epistemology as they fall to sleep, possibly, forever.


Fright or Flight

Citizens of secret cities polish floors
beneath their beds with the crisp fronts
of shirts. Skies of springs and foam
held up by posts and frames never rain

and no god sags in the clouds drawing
the wrath of outdoor threats. The snow
of interiors piles high in shoes. Bootstraps
are put to rest. The safety first students

graduated from under desks and frequent
fliers shifted their compartments from
between their knees. Chased by a sense
of fear, mop heads show up for work

and crawl after pay checks. Backbones
of dust cloths never stood against evil’s
thin air in an epoch of blue capes
and telephone booths on every corner;

two sets of neighboring eyes have
never confronted each other at
the attitude of between five and six feet.

The Turtles’ Tank Needs To Be Cleaned, There is no turning back.

The Turtles’ tank needs to be cleaned.
It is Monday.
If it is Monday I must be driving away.
If I am driving away,
I must be listening to the radio.
K.C. and the Sunshine band is singing
“Please Don’t Go Away.”
If K.C. and the Sunshine band is singing
“Please Don’t go Away,”
and it is Monday, then I must be crying.
If I am crying while I am driving away
and it is Monday and K.C. and the Sunshine
Band is singing, then it must be August 1981.
If it is August 1981, then I am twenty-one.
If I am 21 years old in August, I was just
married. If I am twenty-one years old
then I must be in Florida.
If it is August in Florida then there is a hurricane.
If there is a hurricane, then there is an eye of a storm.
If there are eyes,
they must be watching.
If they are watching
then they are standing.
If they are standing
then they are running.
If they are running
then they are swimming
If they are swimming
then it must be 1979.
If it is 1979, Jimmy Carter is President.
If Jimmy Carter is President, then
The Mariel is headed this way.
If The Mariel is headed this way,
Miami will never be the same.
If Miami will never be the same,
then it must be 1959. If it is 1959, then
I have not been born.
If I have not been born,
my mother is getting married.
If my mother is getting married,
then she is soon to regret.
If there is regret, there is no turning back.

 

Waiting on the Sun

An old weathered man named you
ray through clouds when you offered him
a ride from Petaluma to Novato.

Tomatoes and California avocados
became ripe in the back of your truck.

You said a weathered old man named
you ray through clouds one day
when you gave him a ride from
Sonoma to Santa Rosa.

There are phone booths by the side
of the road. There are hitchhikers
by the side of the road.
There are vineyards by the side of the road.
There goes the tumbleweed.

You said you gave a weathered old man
a ride while from the back of your truck
birds of paradise and poppy flowers sprouted.

You said an old weathered man named you
ray through clouds when you gave him
a ride from Sebastopol to Manzana.

I was busy picking up stones from
the bottom of the Russian River.
I was weighing the consequences.
I was speaking to a Redwood.
I was burying my hand into the sand.
I was talking to a clam.
I was having my belly cut open.
I was eating cake with the moon.
I was dancing the tango with salmon.
I was waiting for the sun to stop revolving.
Or was it the other way around? 


Estrangement

I build this fence because I choose
to.  This is my garden—a green so thick
it taints even the fruit.  The figs will not sugar
here. They remain, nut-hard, a violent red
inside that is none-the-less bitter.  You speak and I
choose not to listen—the bed cool and
untouched.  O violet sheets.  In my garden,
the hose flits, unguided.  So much water spilling,
spreading across the turned earth.  It would be
easy to call me stubborn—I will not pull the
weeds, the mustard flower, the Queen Anne’s lace
with its fragrance of sweetened water.  I know how
they grow—spreading roots under the ground,
a necklace, linked chain by chain, unmaking our
lawn, already ankle high and heavy with bees.

 

Getting Over the Fear of Form

I wanted to go back to undivided light,
the bruised stem of the pear,
wasp-body, heat, the slick of green across
the skin, but I wanted these to
endure; I saw already the fly-flit of
years across my territory.  Here, my eyes
dimming, skin raddling.
It was the crossing I could not manage.
The notion of what would be left.

The strictures were what would bind me.
I would carve them, leave
what small traces of myself—  In the ghazal
the last line must contain the poet’s
name.  It was not my name I wanted.
It was the outside, the undivided light.
Here, the fig, the pomegranate, the 
flecked stone.  Here, but with my
eyes watching, mouth opening.

 

Ghost Time
(for Evan)

We drove down Rock Creek in the
Buick that swerved sideways,
crashed into all the parked vehicles, 
crushed steel, a glitter like 
shook foil, your eyes
unreadable behind your
sunglasses, gangster jacket,
red headband crushing your hair.
How to explain the rage of the
dispossessed, why among so much we
felt so hungry—your parents
both lawyers, risen up and out 
to what? In the big house
on Northhampton you said I could
junk everything, days cutting school,
sex, chocolate, opium distilled
from hearts of lettuces.  Of course,
I loved you—worse than any
teenage novel—the way my
heart kept pumping uselessly,
my breath a flutter, a luna moth.
It was everything we wanted,
but when you kissed my cheek I
traced already the shape of
our decline, brief arabesque,
then the descent to indifference,
easier to just walk away
but the window, your corner
still draws me.  The elm trees would die
in a few years, but then they fanned out
with their amphora shape,
crackle of worm and seed, the toxic
greens along the highway softening
with spring.  Your hand, 
the burn of its shape, its cup
against me.  I was sure you would grow
weary of us as of every other thing,
but I should have held you anyway—
the two of us so locked in ghost time,
the blur after Southern Comfort or Maker’s
Mark, our joy in not knowing for the
instant where we ended, the world began.
The taste of you strange
on my tongue.  I could have palmed
you like a bright coin; instead I flung you
away as if you were the wish I would
make on eternity.  Now you are dead,
and I see what terrible things the living do.
I walk past your house and do not miss a
beat.  This forgetting, the complete renunciation
I was already practicing—

 

Numinous

Today driving to work across Solano,
a wide and ugly street of Sonics,
and used car lots, pay-by-the-month appliance
stores and all the motley messy details
of daily life in the fifth poorest statistical
metropolitan cluster in our nation, I glanced
down at the slim white scar on my wrist,
and for a moment I could not remember how
it had gotten there.  The usual story: the razor
the bathtub, the failure to cut in the right 
place or the right direction, the discovery, 
the shame, the emergency room, the friend,
the psychiatrist, the little two-tone pills—pink and
blue, yellow and red with names like
Ambien or Zoloft, all better now, their 
stated mission; and though I could bring back
all this so clearly, I could not remember
what had led me there, not the actual steps
but the inner logic, the burning wire, the me-
that-wanted-to die.  It was in Vermont, snow
blocked the roads, blanketing the churchyard,
which I loved, with its uneven graves of hands
finger crooked like St. John the Divine in the painting
in the Louvre attributed to Leonardo, the hands
almost concealed under thick white crusts,
like so many half sandwiches given up to the slate of
sky.  Mark Lyon took me there. The days I wasted,
believing myself so in love with him that nothing
was better than pacing through that longing.  I cannot
remember that either.  I now inhabit the world
of the mother, changed, reduced as sauce is reduced
to the hunk of meat, the tender bone.  I care only
for what will keep the fire stoked, engines rolling.
And that white scar, it shimmers like some kind of
Hollywood heaven.  What a fool I was, how little
I knew, etcetera, etcetera.

 

Spectators Across the Interstate

The Camry was crumpled between a
Taurus and an Explorer—the Ford monopoly.
Somewhere in the middle, my sister had
tried to get out, purse flung wild— 
reel of coins scattered across the interstate,
the blood gleam of pennies, bright thinness
of dimes, thick quarters; she was fine, and you
are waiting to hear this, curious like those who
followed us to the side of the road where we
waited for the ambulance.  No blood, 
no obvious bruising, just a crush in every bone,
a knowledge of the solitudes.  The peanut
crowd, the gawkers so unsettling because
we were like them.  We knew how close
someone must be for us to mourn, linking fingers,
the eight lanes of highway suddenly obscene—
such a rush, a roaring—what for?   Queen Anne’s
lace sprouted near a broken pipe that led
who knows where, pure smell of grass and
mint, among the tossed cans, the disposable.
Midges and dragonflies buzzed between us.
We swore we would remember, but I forgot,
until this poem, which is about the death of
someone never mentioned. 

Character Study

                 Benjamin Blood, the “outright crank . . . held that each letter of the alphabet has its own                  personality.”            
                                                —From New York Review of Books

A
Like any pinhead,
he plants his feet firmly apart
and thinks he’s invulnerable.
You could easily kick him in the balls
if he had any.

His arms folded together
across his chest say,
“No Intimacy Allowed.”

B
Roll her over on her side
and see if that helps.

She’s tried everything:
purgatives, sit-ups;
the water cure.

It’s not her fault.
Big, bulbous, bursting
and beautiful. Don’t forget that.

Think of her as beauty doubled.

C
Some folks think he’s a yawn,
but his friends appreciate
how he can hold his one note so long.
He went to Juilliard,
where his peers called him,
enviously, The Mouth.
If he couldn’t be part of some song,
he doesn’t know what he’d do.

D
Damned if I do, damned if I don’t.
What do they want from me?
Perfection?

But even perfection won’t do:
how boring!

A circle is perfect, but I’ve got
a tough spine.
That’s the problem.

I prefer to meet my self half way.
Damned if I don’t.

E
A dead ringer for Western Man,
he’s all right angles and straight lines.
None of this curve-of-the-earth shit for him.

“If God had wanted me to flex,
He’d have made me like some of those
other letters, whose names will go 
unmentioned”
he says, jabbing his finger three times in the air.

F
No jokes, please.

Or at least be original:

“He’s just an E with a missing limb!”

“A quarter note without the note!”

Actually, I can be funny, formal, 
even ineffable at times.

Far from that infamous foul word.

G
I could have been a complete zero
but at the last moment,
before connecting with myself,
bent inward to ask,
“Do I really want to do this,
close myself off, a safe zone
with no passage in or out,
a world unto myself?”
You know what I answered,
or I would not be here talking now.
I love my little window,
and the little ledge
on which I prop my elbows
and look out at the likes of you.

H
He’s balanced                steady
two uprights           with a strut
Open at both ends               he
refuses              to be boxed in
clasps his thin hands across his
chest and says             I stand
squarely           on my own two
feet          then bracing himself
asks        who needs their help

I
I love staying thin,
to be just a line
I can sign myself on,
giving away a life,
or I can walk it,
performing an act
high above the crowd.
It comes down to a
matter of passage:
to go through the eye
of a needle,
to slip into the
toughest locks.
And there is always
the old-time movie
I’m trapped in: at the
height of the chase I
turn sideways and
thousands of policemen,
of friends, of lovers,
race past me, thinking
I am only the sign
of a man.

J
I am an I with a bum foot
a bent nail that’s been battered
like a point driven home too often

K
Member
of a superior race,
I can multi-task,
salute “Heil”
to my master
and goose-step
at the same time.

L
Here, at the edge of a wall,
I lean listening, lulled by voices—
soft, lascivious, as if afraid
of being heard—how they lure me,
these murmurings, unintelligible
betrayals that keep me huddled here,
ear pressed to the upright,
though now I kneel, not in reverence
but jealousy (a lousy way
to live) like some loony supplicant 
always suspicious, stiff with fear:

O love, who might you be lying with now?

M
My head was once
higher than my shoulders,
but now it sags, hangs,
I’m hangdog.
Don’t ask me why.
It’s a long story.
It would bore you
till your head started to sag.

N
Z’s my cousin, twice removed.
H a tight-assed uncle no one likes.
M, V, W, the Perpendiculars
who married staunch Diagonals
whose offspring look like me,
all lines and angles neatly joined—
and great-great Grandfather N, 
a hero in the Language Wars
who wore a sash across his chest
from shoulder to hip, ringing
with medals: noteworthy, noble,
unignorable. A national icon. Nice.

O
I’m one long exclamation.
This world deserves it.
O that was great honey
or
O the horror the horror.
Either way, I needn’t
change my appearance.
“O O O O that Shakespeherian Rag”
summed it, and me, up.
How far can words go?
Not far enough.  Say O.

P
Sack on a stick, he’s always
on the move, never satisfied,
plenty of reasons to abscond.

Property, for instance, a bond
he’d rather slip, debt a perennial
brake on pleasure.

Please don’t lecture him 
about responsibility or duty.
One word, he’s out the door.

Q
I can’t keep my tongue in my mouth.
I’m a hot, thirsty dog.
Pant, pant.
Or maybe it’s you
I’m panting after.
I know my tongue
is not attractive
but think of what it can do.
I’ve tried tucking it in
but I choke.
Think of it as a magic wand.
Think of it as a friend.
And the way it looks
maybe when I’m old
I’ll use it as a cane.

R
Fat man walking!  
He rolls as he rambles, rippling like a tent. 
Restraint? He knows none. Reels right
then left, swag-bellied rake, redundant in his torso.
His little leg sticks out as if testing the ground,
then takes his weight as he wobbles forward,
resplendent as a walrus in his blubber.  

S
What kind of man
would look like
a cobra about to strike?
Only the softest, easiest,
to protect himself.
He practiced hissing
but the sound was mistaken
for a susurrus of leaves.

T
Wide-armed, cruciform, I welcome it all—
a level-headed lover of the world.

No matter that they scorn me, 
that my hidden talents remain unknown.

There is room beneath these tortured wings
to shade them with a benediction.

Let them turn their backs on me, failing
To recognize my worth.

Their curse becomes my blessing,
my blessing their curse.

U
He prays, arms upraised,
all day long.  When it rains,
he looks like a fool
trying to collect water.

Imagine the pain
of that posture,
and silence as answer.
He’d give it up if his legs

hadn’t already withered away
from disuse and there weren’t
so much praying to do—
for you, and you, and you.

V
I’m just a letter, but sometimes I’m more.

I crop up after wars, announcing peace.

When war begins, I protest for peace.

I make a rabbit of you in your photos.

I obtain a table for you and your date.

Turn me upside down, I’m a man walking.

A symbol, an icon, larger than life.

W
Up and down and up and down.
His mood swings compete
with a stock market graph.
He’d like to be steady, uphill,
a slow, inexorable ascent.
But he wobbles, wavers.
He’s one with the weather,
for better or worse.

X
Count me out.

Y
Ballet virtuoso, she’s extended
her second leg so perfectly
behind her, you can’t see it.
As the symmetry of her arms
completes the arabesque,
she wishes Balanchine
were alive to savor it.

She’s a little disciplinarian.
She’s a little cold of heart.
She’s all technique
and playing to the mirror.
How can a royal entertainment
live in a democracy?  She’s why.

Z
You think I’m a big snore,
that a line of me could put you to sleep?
ZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZ
How did that make you feel?
Like a bright blade bearing down.
Here come the locusts: getting drowsy?
Don’t think I’m zip because I’m last.
You’d have to be a chump. A real zero.

At the Commencement of the Year of the Safflower Oil

Why am I dead at the scrape of a letter?
At the Choptank drop of a hat? This
is a serious matter, one for the heart—

or a man of letters. Turning away from
the mezzotint effect of your longing, I
pine (for my own longing is opaque) and

dine at the hatchery. How long, asked 
Bono, must we sing this song? With a
quaver in his voice and a rasp for a

life saver: I commend you upon arrival.
To the bath-house! This fish is starting
to stink! And my nerves! My nerves say

I love you!

 

Draft

Writing this
like being

tied to a tree
unbecoming

as one unties
the aftermath.

Birds rest in
a bloodbath

and the birds
are silenced.

This, a voice
to sing with.

You, who are
my birdsong.

 

The Moscow linguistic circle (not to be confused with the Prague linguistic circle)

who would have thought if i had not 
                had i thought it
if i had not taken part 
                in the mystery of his poetics were his 
name Roman Jakobson 
                but it is not and he is not
a poet but a knot in our throats
                so that when we speak his name
the poet dies and he is not Roman Jakobson
                but a penguin who suffers the torments
of guessing what meaning is meant and
                if this is poetry surely
we are all doomed but
                when we call her Roman Jakobson
she dives into the ice and others dive with her
                and Roman Jakobson is lost 
because our eyes cannot distinguish one 
                penguin from another and when they come
to the surface they are the tide
                which brings us a new poetics
more critical than we previously imagined
                and so we continue
but differently
                calling everyone Roman Jakobson
and when they turn they look at us
                like penguins they are confused
and they do not dive but ask why
                Roman Jakobson is not yet alive
since we imagine only the name and
                 we repeat the name again
and again when we’re confused
                because the poem is a mystery
and we begin by calling out “Roman
                Jakobson! Where is your poem?”
and the world takes one last breath
                before exercising the demonstration
that is language and wrests it from
                the current belief system and
when aquarium volunteers look at its throat
                they find the knot that is Roman
Jakobson who hid from the world
                when we spoke his name but if
we had not taken part in the ritual if
                Roman Jakobson suddenly
revealed itself as the ground of being
                and this was the light of being
if Roman Jakobson took part
                in our destiny we would have 
had souls we would have 
                made progress we would have 
written poetry and called it Grigory Vinokur

 

Name

I’ve passed on, passed
on, passed 
the hat around
and clapped on 
the light.

Minute discus 
of infallibility,
motion sickness 
in the Agon,
terse mention 
of my name.

I seem to project 
a voice but you 
state I project 
a verse.

Sing, then, 
of the chorus, 
and ask who 
is sitting next 
to you, “May I take
your hand,
bend it, back,
again.”

As such, I am
named. That is
your name
for me.

A Question and the Idea of a Question

For once in my life I am beginning to think 
Like a man as if lost in the woods
But I can feel the rug slid back under my feet

And how many people live in this house
And how many people love a house

And how love of a house can best be seen 
In dirt swept out the back door
In a grain of sand brought a thousand miles inland—

I could never guess just by looking at a map
Which valley could possibly cradle a town

I could never protest silence with silence
A question fed back to itself—

 

Delirious Hem

Fight attendant blue, 
the color of memory

where I find myself
in an airport,

a metaphor
unraveling,

unraveled, a metaphor 
for travel even

though I hold 
no ability or

boarding pass
to slip through

security. I make
sense of the universe

by thinking it 
to be a ghost

of myself, 
the million

parts of me scattered

over an Ohio
landscape,

a farmer not even
looking up from his work.

 

On Silence

A longing for blaze—                          The field of noise

           There was bread then

The smell of bread—

                                            In the field of mute gods
            
           The bowl, the trajectory of light, the light itself

All of them 
                        
                      And none—

           Then a diner                           Nearing the twenty-third hour,

What you wish           Or wished to hide

           Inside the hull of a broken egg           Safe for a short time

But the sound of a bottle—

                      No a brick—
            
           Against a wall

Brings back what used to happen next—

                                 A laugh meant for a museum

           Sprung up—

                      A sky not meant to be.


At the Boundary of Desire

Count to ten, 
                     Once I saw a woman spray-painted white.
roll the ball with each beat.
                     White panties, two white fig leaves—
Miss a step 
                     and it’s back to the beginning. 
One, two . . .
                     ceramic—over her breasts.
Good job, I tell her. 
                     Closing her eyes, 
Good job, she says again and again.
                     she posed as a statue in the square.    
Sometimes, 
                     she even looks at me. 
But if I reach to touch her . . .
                     Crowds passed by.
she’s gone, lost
                     They dropped money 
in an autistic spin,
                     in her cardboard box.
arms planed, eyes turned inward.
                     She centrifuges me out of her world.      
If you touched her 
                     marble finish, 
the surface would give like overripe fruit, 
                     paint would flake.
So I never touch her,
                     No one ever touched her,
sweet apple dangling still.

 

In the Victorian Language of the Fan

Milky galaxies pulled apart, broken
stars, patchy ground glass, the dark mysteries

of my asymptomatic lungs 
have been unveiled on screen. I held, going

through the donut hole, my breath, the rapid
whip around of tiny cameras, whir,

whiz, snapping every angle to reveal
Lady Windermere’s Disease. How lovely—

flutter, blush—a name I could drop over
tea and crumpets graciously, that would not

stop traffic, the raw inflammatory
processes from fastidious,

habitual, suppression of the cough,
painless penetration. Take a deep breath,

hold, breathe, surrender. Test after test, 
the ravages of age. We are fading

you and I, all except for our eyes. Legs
intertwined, sheets starched, the insistence on

hospital corners, bronchiec [stasis]—
can you feel, how my body, man-of-pause,

has turned against me, my mother hiding
behind the curtains? Why does medicine

have to be so dry? A minute ago
we were talking about children, trick or

treat, Halloween, the blonde, brunette, redhead
slipping from our descriptions, the white hand-

kerchief falling. Folding the fan’s lace, mesh,
wooden ribs—slowly, your hands unfasten

me, the harsh afternoon light. And there is
always that moment after when we are

both catching our breath, as if we had been 
swimming a long, long time underwater.

 

Keeping Thomas Company

It isn’t just the words, “girl, really”
that suggest what he wants
me to see, but the cocky
tilt of his head, the quick glance back

at my face before he shapes
the horse’s shoe again, leaving
her for a moment, suspended—long
black hair, endless legs, skimpy halter top—

poised, in his description, on the swing
hung for his ex-wife. He seems thinner
than I remember, gray curls a little
further down his neck. I try to change

the subject, but no,
we’re on to a conversation they had
at three a.m. It’s not that I can’t imagine
them together, having watched

how his hand slides
the thoroughbred’s leg, voice
low and sweet, coaxing a give
at the knee. I stare

at the fine lines
on the backs of my hands. Squirm,
think I don’t fucking need this,
while he struts

a too-practiced “Yeah, baby!” Stripped
of the ace bandages and back brace; arthritis
meds, glucosamine and MSM hidden
in a drawer, he must almost feel

sixteen when he’s with her. But here
and now, he’s measuring differences.
The shoe’s giving him problems,
and I’m no help at all.

 

One of the Slow Cats

I lean down, offer a hand quickly met by a wave
of nose, spine, tail. Some Siamese in the pointy face.
“Bojangles” on a frayed blue collar. 
One of the slow cats. Holes in the road
patched by this morning’s rainwater, he hesitates
at the edge, crouched beneath a tangle
of jasmine and live oak. Barely visible through the green,
the weathered brown of a frame house. 
I’ve never seen the owner, just the handmade
“Slow Cat Crossing” sign. You would laugh,
if you were here, all the ways it could be
read. That last summer, freckled, legs 
propped on the deck railing, scotch
in hand, you babbled on about your mother,
shopping, the weather, children. Cancer was in all four
quadrants, the doctors said later, epithelial ovarian tumors
growing, dividing, wandering. A car
is coming, the cat trotting off across the road
so goddamn cocksure. 


Acolyte

The white cross pales
further still, 
            its nailed arms 
watchful as window-light

furls over the backs of our knees, 
as lavender shadows
            cut across 
our young necks

in this makeshift classroom 
church where I kneel with 
            the others, restless 
on the cracked leather

kneeler—how I crave 
these cream candles, 
            how my hungry 
tongue sings

fidelis, fidelis 
as I imagine Mother 
            in her kitchen 
humming 
black and white

film songs as she curls 
her hennaed fingers
            around the rolling pin’s
heavy back and forth

while Father rocks 
in his chair, the Qur’an 
            on his desk open to the last
page, the dark words

blurring as his eyes close, 
seeing again the shapla-flower
            shaped epitaph 
on his father’s

tombstone.  Now, with my head
bowed, I whisper amar
            naam Tarfia until it is 
a prayer that grows.

I help stack the hymnals
higher, and
cup the candelight away. 

 

Monsoon Season

She shatters ceramic plates into blue
and green-splintered birdbaths, fills
a mason jar with buttons. Outside,

a Texas storm whips a paintbrush 
plant free of its delicate arms. She 
paints her nails pomegranate-red

until a hummingbird hover close, 
suspended like an elegy over her 
breathless hand, the afternoon

closing in with its piled, helpless
waste.  She falls asleep in her 
chair, dreams of monsoon season:

poor children cutting themselves
apart to craft the long, dark arms 
of sitars, the mouths of fishermen

opening, closing, while a young 
woman draped in black unhinges
the damp swath over her mouth

to touch her lips to a river dark 
neck.  When she wakes, her body
is a shivering, hungry argument

that ignores the fact of poleaxed
streetlamps flickering on one 
by one.  As she slips back into

sleep to grieve the wet distance
between her shut eyes and a country
that she cannot bear to cut herself

away from, the rain starts again, 
bears down on the disused file 
cabinets someone has emptied

and dragged down to the dumpsters, 
the bruise-blue drawers doubtful 
and damaged, lying alone on their sides.


Arriving

An owl calls from the shadows
ahead where dark crosses the mountain.

The owl’s not asking, he just carves air
as all music carves air.

Hunger makes the owl’s cries hollow.
How to go where his call carries me—

away from my room, its lamp and book,
its glass of flowers, slippers and medicines.

Up from the sea a candled moon rises.

 

Away

Here are eight laurel leaves
from the Djerassi forest.

A feather, a foxglove,
the trace of a hoof print.

Here is my breast in your hand.
Here is the thrum of my heart.

The live oak claims the field.
I sleep dreamless in these mountains.

 

In This House of Broken Sticks and Feathers

I am fulfilling her ravenous losses.
She rides me, gestures through my hands,
seizes control of my legs, my shoulders. 
Three years she lay nearly unmoving, 
when they put food in her mouth 
she tongued it down her throat, reflex 
of an infant, sleeping. Now her years 
spin back through me, she is the woman 
whose hands begin to gnarl, whose skin 
is blotchy, whose bladder’s leaky. 
I speak her, she speaks me, my beloved 
whom I watched and could not talk to,
whom I bought tapes of music she could
not hear, who lay three years unappeasable.   
Catching her back from the dead, catching her 
filling me, I say again mama, and such grief, 
I can’t go to her, tell her I know 
how she was lonely.

 

Leise Rieselt der Schnee

Leise rieselt der Schnee, the boys’ choir sings
in the Fribourg cathedral: quietly the snow
sprinkles over the streets, against the windows
and doorsteps of these old clustered buildings,

and drifts against the cliffs cut by the river,
mounds like a little hat on the glass-covered 
photograph nailed in the rock, of Margrit
Imfeld, age nine, killed thirty years ago

by a falling, thigh-thick icicle. Once, 
a child, I stood in my mother’s kitchen
in Pennsylvania, and listened to this
same carol she loved, the boys’ voices

on the record clear as new-rung crystal.
Beside myself with tenderness, I began
to sweep the room. My mother, baby Jesus—
with every broom stroke I told myself,

This is my gift for them. Now Margrit gazes out 
at the trout ponds emptied for winter, 
the fir trees clinging to the river bank, 
the trail wandering off into the snowy mountains. 


Black Blossoms
            after Goya, Madrid

Sisters, with your grinning skulls hovering above the gutted stomachs of your bowls,
your teeth look so pretty when you pray. Say the word broth, say the word mutton

and the kitchen mocks you with dust. Even the cupboards have picked the teacups
clean. Say famine and the black magic of the word rewards you with resolved

conflict: dead now the old debate over poultry or fish—the chicken coop wireless,
the lake a sand trap that swallowed the dog. When the dog refused to yap at its dark

luck you tittered at its only act of bravery: the deliberate leap into the mud.
Poor desperate bitch, teats like beads of hardened wax, the dandelion of its head

jutting out in spite of its wish to forget the pity of you mummified mistresses,
the wooden spoons in your hands the reachable crucifix you split between you.

You might have eaten the dog, but it had three legs and you none, your femurs
long-since tapered to the floor. You stare each other down and laugh, consuming

the only edible resignation: humor. What is misery now that the last spring
you will ever know has already been forgotten? What is pain when the final blister

has been chewed off and digested? Old widows, with your backs to the windows
you won’t need light outside of your widow gowns. When the sun sets next it will

blossom with the blackest mushrooms and the moths will lay their eggs on your leathery 
smiles—O wicked wicked larvae bubbling in protein much too late. Isn’t it funny

how whatever moves from this minute forward sets itself into motion without muscle.
Your hollow throats chuckle as your dimples ingest your cheeks, as your tongues

deflate with your thighs and breasts, and as your bodies spasm at the last chance
for sensation: the pucker and stretch in the sutured centers of your gray vaginas.

 

Mortui Vivos Docent

I
In the trunk, a blouse with breasts, a skirt
stretched open by hips that have shaken off 
the last whiff of talcum powder at the pothole. 
Clumsy dancer, dropping her shoe somewhere between
Mexicali and Calexico. If she were breathing
she’d let the whiskey tell the tale,
sultry syllable after sultry syllable—sí, mi amor.
Mummies are this century’s mermaids,
rattling songs that will stop a heart. If we let them,
says the whale-eyed sailor, hands cuffed 
to the steering wheel, mumbling the madness
of a man who found a woman whistling
beneath a Mexican moon—music so pretty
he just had to keep it from ruining the terrorist world.

II
This is how you ruin the terrorist world:
cut out the yellow heart of heaven,
drop the bloodless stars into the sea,
blind the women who sit to wonder on the shore.
I knew such a woman. I’ve kept her comb in my purse
after all these years, since the night my father found her
walking home from the Cachanilla hills.
You know the names, El Abanico, El Dollar, La Puta Eva
y El Pinche Adán, places so plump with pleasure
even the air turns to stupor, drunk with a sensory coma.
Clarification: she was not the body in the ruby corset,
not behind the pair of tassels, not inside the scent
of tangerines. My mother was the mop and bucket
wiping off the fingerprints on the promiscuous wall.

III
This is how you press against the promiscuous wall:
drill the pair of diamonds on your back and moan;
hold your breath, float face-down on the vertical pool;
sway with the shadows set in motion by a swinging 
chandelier—an angry father come to claim his child.
He did not catch me then, but he caught me
walking home, my knees still numb from dancing
with the men who love their mamacitas pink
and puckered as if they’re sipping wine transparent
as the cloth across their thighs. What could I do
with lips like mine but kiss or whistle loud enough
to be the visible woman my overworked mother 
never was? So, papi, keep us holy as you stuff me
in the trunk: I’m wearing mother’s blouse, her skirt.

 

Weimar

(after the painting by Otto Dix, The Dancer Anita Berber, 1925)

Strawberries are just as shameless, flaunting their freckles in daylight, making believe
they entice us because they’re strawberries and not because they look like nipples.

~

They say she knew the cut in her toe would start to bleed when she pressed her foot
on the stage, her ex-lover in the front row, seeking evidence that she still loved him.

~

The autobiography of red begs a coda when the hand twitches the moment the paint
runs out and the second hand, the one holding the brush, provokes a stigmata. 

~

She likes her women to flush in the usual places, yes—the cheeks, the chest, the valley
of the mound—but nothing tickles her more than their palms getting warm on her back.

~

War as Woman is what it should be called, this dress stretched open like a battlefield,
this arsenal of fingertips and bullet kiss, this bloody bed with a skull rising through it.

~

They say she could detect a woman who had just miscarried by the smell of dry fruit
escaping in the woman’s breath, by the silence in her step—a crib coming to a stop.

~

On the streets of Berlin the walls shrink back like stomachs kicked in and people toss
in their sleep like forks in the sink—all night the clanging sweats on the canvas.

~

A bath after midnight cools the burning in her calves, but she soaks inside another
dilemma: will she set her throat on fire with whiskey or with the dark-eyed neighbor?

~

The secret to the perfect angle is to use blades instead of bristles, is to carve a jaw
the way one would cut into a birthday cake—with knowledge of one’s mortality.

~

They say she could bend down and suck up the diamond in her navel to her nostril,
not because she was flexible, but because she had the pull of a tornado in her nose.  

~

Red, he said, because there was no other way to keep her still, this devil that slipped
out of every dress except for the one that coated her skin after her body sliced open.

~

My name is Anita Berber and I no longer dance for anyone, but I will keep my eye
on you, you who will pirouette your soul like smoke through the crack of the world.

~

At Night, in November, Trying Not to Think of Asphodel

I’m no use for parties, for the idle language
which is all how hellish are the days
and dark or where did I find
that thread count or what do I think must be
done about et cetera.  So I smile
and nod and never say much,
happy to be thought impaired
or mute and when asked 
to name what I couldn’t live without 
were I marooned on a desert island,
I say viable organs.  Not a book and its pages
slipping from cheap binding
and not an album
that’s not an album
but summer’s totem forever
and not one deft lover
and not the red ringlets
of her hair let down in a grotto beside the sea.
To be consigned there,
to that island, that home
to the fetish of consolation,
is nothing I ever want
to want.  To be stripped of desire
as if it were a bandage.  
But here in the night made of alarms,
a train shambles
through the dark
and it’s hard to hear the trees speaking
the language we made
for them.  Or I did,
thinking of you
who taught me regret.
There are nights when I dream
of stolen oranges.
How we ran away with the sun in our arms.
And there are nights
when I can’t speak,
not even to the wind
in the strange tongue of the dark pine trees.

 

Austria

Easy in a college town to hang Klimt
from your many times repaired wall
or life and easy to think this better,
somehow, than violence or routine
or the kaleidoscopic degradations each waitress
in her kindness prepares
for you.  Lord, a long time
I have thought of what more there is
to say.  Lord, I have thought
this.  Sometimes committed my flesh
to unbearable action
if only to gain speed in retreat.
If only to wake in the dark strangeness
of agreements:  falsehoods
and broken words and spasms
of summer.  And now a loveliness passes
and it does not matter
of what it is made or when
or living and named and nightly possessed.
Lord, it does not matter
that any of us keep on
but we do.  In great numbers,
in harrowing efficiencies,
we cannot do anything but this
persistence that will not go.
I am trying, Lord, to love this world,
however it is fated
to end.  Behind the wall a girl
is making love.
Two rooms distant I can hear her
and want to leave
even through the spill of rain.
But I stay because
there is nothing to leave
my mind will not carry with it
in a kind of tortured attentiveness.
I know her name
if only by her business card
given to me like I would have a use for it.
Like I had waited there
for her name.  Not
all my life but a devoted time.
What else but her name and her nerves unspooling now
could I wait for?  Besides
silence.  Or mercy.
Or deafening rain.  Her sign to now, now,
Lord, be still.

 

Bordering on The Tragic

We kept hearing good things about Muncie.
There were meat-eating flowers
in the very same world.  Ravenous weeds.
A long time I watched her kiss
the waitress she held like a secret.
I watched her drop like a tooth into ink.
She never told me.
When I left, children sang.
When they sang, the world was less a riddle.
All the dreams were deciduous.
Litter in the night.  Scant cities
dumping light in the sky.
Who could say to them the sky had enough?
The birds rattled bones
time had hollowed for flight.
The children had tried to sing like them,
their belongings in bandanas
knotted to switches swung
across their baby-fat shoulders.
I was never proud to pitch bricks
through bakery windows
when it was dark, to sift glass for crumbs.
That was hunger, I think,
though I never feared
the end of my body
beneath the trees where I hid from time.
Ambulances sang
about blood, blood forever.
Through green wood I heard every hymn.
And then they’d pass into the silence of others.
Whose hearts splintered.
And I hadn’t caused it,
not in my distance
or in all the nearness I had left,
but to the air I confessed all the same.

 

Oblivion:  Letter Home

Thanks for the bleach and the directions back,
even though we’ve had this discussion
already.  I should tell you before I forget
or the crushing pain roars back
how much Emily appreciated the red yarn.
She couldn’t stop smiling.  Until
she vanished one night or decided
to leave.  When I think how much the same
those are, even my bones sigh.
Down the street there are children
who need baths and when I find water,
I carry some in my hands and tell them
I’ve found another hidden river
in an owl’s nest or inside one of the leaves
running mindlessly about
as the dead tend to do here.
I try to reveal their faces
or slick the knotted hair from their colorless eyes 
or let them drink a little 
but all they want to do is run.
I go back giving water to the ground
and names to their miner faces
and trying to recall the gloves I wore
when I was eleven.  The trains I tried to believe
were only sound.  The box
I sent you should be there before long,
though inside it all I placed
was a cricket’s green leg.
I’m sorry about that but I was thinking of you.
All the weight that I could afford
and the only thing at night
singing that will not want to eat you
or wound you for sport
and before you ask, yes, I was careful,
though there were times
when all that saved my skin
were Grandma’s prayers so give her my love.

 

Oblivion:  Letter Home

Thanks for the cucumber lotion and coupons
you cut out of the Sunday paper
though I had to bury them in an old thermos
or sink them with bricks and twine
so nobody killed me.  Reading the obituary
for Mr. Kondrackie was sad
though he once beat me with his walker
for guessing wrong.  We all have our faults,
I think.  Dad used to tell me that
before locking the door to the basement.
He’d spend weeks down there
with his electric putting range and German
films.  Did you ever figure out
what he ate?  I think about that
when the glow of major cities burning
is strangely beautiful.  Almost comforting.
I’ve been fixing up an old culvert
cannibals once used for a stop-over latrine.
It takes a lot of imagination
but I think you’d be proud
of the flow from one end to the other.
It’s been raining here all week.
And according to the woman
who pitied me during the night
and wanted nothing for her time
or the shadow of her body near the fire,
three years have gone by,
all of them marked by endless rain.
It seems hard to believe.
The people here are nice.
The ones capable of more than 
savagery or tandem autoerotic asphyxiation,
at least.  The food is bad
and you wouldn’t care for it
in that it barely exists.
But it’s been good for me.
When I laid the rags I wore
beside the woman
who had been cold when I found her,
I wasn’t afraid.
I never once thought of you.
Write back soon.  Tell everyone I’m not dead.


Atmosphere and Door

Allow me to suffer. Allow me to build my house of burned brick and
then. Allow me a pasture of Here.

Allow me the Grace once called question. Because if it is ever the
answer I’d want, I’d never.

Allow me Good News.

 

But Sight

Too, my ready hand

drops to the feet of boy.

Incomprehensible skin

sweated. 

So I roll undone, open.

And pleasing boy barefoot,                          atop.

Long ago there was a Robin Hood

now sleep.

 

Speak

I am no                       jewel                thief     cutter.  I am not the red haired giant I seam

in this place. Certain I’ll show that no one I say is as big I am as I draw my forged 
mouth. 

I am not a robber the color of

I am not my blushed hair.

Some say        no                    I say

how tall I am can be frightening & how I pull my false teeth out

how I mourn by fire and arms         how I am a baritone &

how my house is all too small, it folds up and into me.

                                                                   “I know who my comforter is”

 

Whole

An evidence:

       This is a window and not a house
            & a door & not a house
            & a roof & not a house.

       Who lives in all these pieces.

            This is not a shoreline
            or a river
            of river.

            This is not a remembered place
            not lake
            not sand.

Brain Damage

I don't really want to be here.  In a poetry workshop for four people with brain 
damage, I ask them to become animals.

                                                            What do you dream? 

                                                                          Where do you
                                                                 carry your heart? 


One becomes a dolphin.  One a pig.  One an eagle.  One a spider.

                                                                     How do you

                                                                        speak?
                                                   What are you afraid of?


I dangle inside my own head.  I speak in sparks.  I carry my heart in a pouch.  I
speak in webs.  I carry my heart in a cloud.

                                                                                                            What are you 
                                                                                                 afraid of?
                                                                                                 What do you love?


I carry my heart in mud.  They draw nebulous pictures.  The thimble sized spider.
The pencil pig fills up the page with its hunger.  The dolphin is hidden in blue 
ocean streaks.

                                                    What is the secret

                                                            no one knows about you?


                                      “Wound words.  Broken teacups.  Shattered eggs.”
                                             Possible answers.


A heavy redolent apple hangs inside the skull.  The brain like a big sunflower 
burning, throbbing in an empty field.  A fat walnut with luscious marrow.  One 
man thanks me.  He says I am making him think, and he hasn't thought in a long 
time.

                            One man reads 
                    his poem twice

                                                                                                because he loves 
                                                                                                the way it leaps.

                                                About to burst the sky.


As I leave, a pig grows portly with contentment, satiated, unable to budge.  A 
dolphin arcs in and out of the circles of paint like shiny buttons in the tray of water 
colors.  A spider is stitching his silence to the walls.  I tell them I will come back—
a horse, hooves sparking.  None of us believes it.  There will, of course, be other obligations.

                        A damaged eagle

                                                            bangs

                                                   against the ceiling.

 

Prologue / (Wake)

I attend my wake.
“Hello, dead me.”

Writing instruments
Connected directly to the pulse.

My tongue waits.

Attach the living to the dead,
The inhale to the exhale.

I write with a plutonium rod,
Dotting the i with light.

Connect my waking to my
sleeping.

Transfusion:  
Why is it I forget to wake.

Reconnect the father to the mother,
Fire to water, earth to air

“Gee, I think I look
better with my eyes closed.”

The dawn is bound with light.

Attach mouth to word.
Attach wind to writing.

“My breath marries the air.”

The man drops his dark
Window—the once conjoined twins
At last reattached.

(Book as alembic)  “Now,” It says, 
“you can finally write.”

“Next,” says the welder.

I am a tongue
Waiting for lips.

 

(Wake) / Epilogue

Wake up the light.

I am lips
Waiting for a tongue.

The diamond cutter
Splits the atom.

You can breathe now.

(I dabble
In elixir and physics.)

“I don’t know
What got into me.”

A trans-fission of light.

“I create the horizon
With a knife—

Split words
With a glass cutter.”

Separate breath
From lung,

Words from books;

Crystallize the quintessential.

I separate the 
Conjoined twins.

Two hearts.
One brain.

You can, if
You so desire,

Breathe:
A word of it.

International postage coupon 
APS

(I received your communiqué

        speaking of elephants
        on their knees in some unknowable
                savannah

                the death of stars)

We are alone
        in the universe, you 
                said, in bags
                of skin, millions of miles

between atoms
        there is only beauty
                to touch us
                it survives voyages
                        no test animal could make

We send it occasionally: photographs
        of women praying in cathedrals, ear’s fine-haired edge.

(How
        this body is a galaxy to what’s inside it)

 

Night walk

St. Eustache:            

        :streetkids holding up signs, one girl bent on the shoulder of the other one

        :this is the park at Les Halles

        :just that everyone has a lot of hunger in them and not all of us can ask like that

For hands                                paper birds             For the holes

in sky where birds used to be    a train schedule      You cannot offer

a body with sweetness              built in                   You are only

a girl     between places                                        Is there another flight

this afternoon or                               has it all gone now      I swear while we were sleeping

two bulbs blossomed  

        :walking at night, first sound, then—
     
        :nothing is that isn’t touched by us
                                                       waves      pavement     particles 

In movie theater’s humid air              It’s likely     to unfold like always

bone calling to bone                          body           warm air over salt water

hands equal birds                             worse          hungry animals  wolves

 

Second language

Who knows when it started but it was whistling all around the empty spaces before long

The way something bad whistles, like a woman
You know she ought not to be: she is

Overnight the sky turned into gray flannel and descended onto earth
All filling up the space in between, tip of the basilica baited wading into cloud

If we can’t have the long line, the long lunch hour, the long legbones there is something wrong
           with this world

The infidelity carved itself on mountain
It was a train line and it ran over animals

No one noticed; numbers covered by blanked paper, last five digits missing

There was nothing grave about it, just a rucksack full of no and cemeteries extending 
           toothed plots to the gate

We had seven centuries of watching women burn on stakes made by our hands
Winter days and now wrath upon us

The Caption Changes but the Picture Stays the Same

When he leaves her
The weather is glorious of course

Unblinking sunshine

           He walks away
           She touches the edge of his sleeve               I touch his sleeve
           Black jacket flung over his shoulder             Black jacket over his shoulder

She is not a beautiful Buddhist 
The sound of crickets pisses her off

Fragment of a dream scene comes back to her
As she writes this a veil lifts:

To move forward into words is to accept the sentence

~

           Disconsolate
           Wild elsewhere
           As if . . .

Green rectangles of grass
Separate her from her neighbors
She walks the sidewalks of separateness

The Freudians were right
So were the spiritual teachers whose feet she kissed

           Tattletale
           Hateful
           Kissing up to the authorities

~

God’s eyes are hidden in the face of man

~

Too many layers to our relationship now
I present you with ideas instead of my hand

All ideas are seedy in themselves
And the heart, ungenerous, is a trigger for tragedy

~

Now is not a doctrine

No words can touch the rim of this city
Shrouded in leaf fragrance

 

Return to Prague

1.
She missed her train 
at Hradanska

and the pre-communist world 
rose

around her
the memories

the lingering loss 
of a life grinding down 
in its bodily

not wanting any longer

but fed by images filling her . . .

steep dive 
of the escalator 
into the underground

the polyester skirts 
and plastic shoes the women 
wear, carrying branches
of bread 
like forests sprouting

Nothing but

the hot realness
pressing down
waiting for the train

women standing
light on their faces 
growing clearer

2.         
Her apartment on the long block 
of buildings once she rose out 
of the underground

rose up to the habits 
the habitat enclosing her
onto the steps 
and the mailbox

kitchen
 
bottle of milk

bottle bruised with the scent of 
her mouth 
after drinking it

It was the same square of darkness 
                       then light 
where she waited for him 
though he never came

though her body bent to 
beginning 
the mechanical

again

to forget herself 
remember him 
listening

but gone

 

Soft Fibers Adorn the Diminishing Landscape

When they finally dragged me in, pinned with stars and a promiscuous love 
for the mentholated bushes, I was willing to admit anything: 
that my life was persistent, that my arms were meticulously rendered 
and quelling with haste, 
that my stone heart feasted on solitary meals 
fed through a slot in the door,

That I am my own suffering.

It wasn’t so bad. My time here was limited.

To be healed completely I needed things: a red plastic handbag filled with copper pennies, 
The ginger and gentian of another’s eyes,
A man’s face pressed between black pages.

But in the story by the time he decides to love me, 
I’ve already left, bereft of him, floating through halls, talking to God.

In the end I searched through hidden drawers, avoiding the FM voice in my head, and there, beneath the creased papers and illuminated manuscripts, with the sugar, 
some loose change. 
And I found the dark spelling of my life. 

The Dog Has Since Come Home

Though the dog came back that night to your home,
it still says nothing of the world—
only that the right spot between his eyes
can be scratched, making him forget 
the other end of the leash 
and why he howled that night in the darkening street.

You heard threats from a gang as you strolled down the street,
before knowing, near dusk, you wouldn’t be going home.
The gangs brawled, fists thrashing skulls. You yanked the dog’s leash
just as it felt like the end of the world
would be tiptoeing toward you. Neither would you forget. 
Now, I’m staring at the pink “missing” poster, your virgin eyes

glaring back at mine, as if two pairs of eyes 
can cancel each other for good. Did you hate that fight on the street,
thinking: how hard it is to forget
how many lose their way home
to the sad condolences of the world—
the only option to pull tighter on the leash?

How loud was the sound of the leash
as it flicked and writhed on the road? Did the dog’s closing eyes
and ravaged scent take in that world
or only the rankness of sewer from the street?
A field, a garage, a bench: anything can be a home 
if you escape from what you know, forget

the laws, if any remain, forget
what forces controlled the leash
and how the dog was led back home
by the clear vision of his eyes.
Did you fear everything around you in the street— 
the last representation of your world?

You shouldn’t have known about this world.
And wouldn’t we like to forget
what happened that day in the street?
Before he lured you did he cut the leash?
Did you see the color of his eyes?
And what, after that, was your definition of home?

Now, the leash balled up somewhere in your home,
we try to forget this world—
your eyes still flashing: what happened in the street?

 

Elegy Ending with the Voice of Edward Van Dyk

“Dr. Van Dyk was one of the best.” —Ron McMullen, president of Alton Memorial Hospital

Quickly the children plummeted from his grasp—
          someone mouths each flawed word after white sheets 
                    shroud bodies below makeshift tents, as if interred

on the street among gray eyes of every person 
          passing. Two small sheets. The third for a man. No more 
                    suicide note scrawl, as if it’s even less important now

for everyone to know why. And who knows how 
          they fought? If he accused her of affairs she was finally 
                    unable to cover. Still his website’s accessed: phone number,

education, insurances accepted. The small photograph: eyes 
          rim the frames of his glasses. Mouth a dull O and empty— 
                    eternally waiting. Wish for feigned stock footage: a man gripping

his first son, dragging him to the hotel balcony, the sirens already 
          floating around the nebulae of his arresting brain. Throwing
                    and kicking, biting and the letting go—I love you or no warning

or God will take care of us. What can hide in the mind so long
          that it ends with this audience, this sacrificed blood?
                    And the second son, eight years old, confused and destined—

we can’t know if there were words or screams, if he floated
          like Icarus, falling toward ocean, hoping angels 
                    would scoop him into diaphanous nets. Sometimes

I wish I could call the number, listen to his voice 
          on that distant machine, magnetic and repeated before the phone is purchased                     again: You’ve reached Dr. Edward Van Dyk. Erase.

 

Unreal City

In this city, at birth, all are given time to trade, gamble away, live 
          with what they have— 
dusk on a beach for a clean syringe, seaweed for a washed-up body.

A boy buries himself in wet sand, stares at the sea. Casinos take 
          their bets: slots 
for minutes or hours, blackjack for days or months—some playing

for decades. A woman catches fire, pushes everything. The last moment 
          she can suck the life
from her brother, the wires puncturing his stomach will not

transfer time. She seizures, a crowd circling her body, blond hair 
          spastic, radiant 
off the slot lights and swirled casino floor. At the same time,

at a pawnshop down the street, a man trades his art collection 
          for one more month—
stolen museum prints from his father: paled Monet’s, Bosch’s

rid of claustrophobia, knife-slashed Picassos, the faces
          now real: blurred
and waking dreams. Trust me: somehow I see my face in them all. 


Imperial Vestments

Loss
the last ground

alights at daybreak

Waves spin at the steles

 

                          Soil
works
in desultory cond—icating

 

shadows

             work

—creage 

beneath laddering fennel

 

Imperial Vestments II

Orchards clear

but hornfuls 
numerable in the underleaves 

Building palm-earth 

We walk 
walk the handsome lotus 

Hot luvia 
Streamers

in the lust waters 
Eating

Graves 
court the accidental

reformation: formations
the story resources: reinforces

titanium 
hung Vegetative

green 
from the lights, a

moan 
at dusk

 

Imperial Vestments III

Fig Alm Wart

Air, ow 
ow—ow            Diamond 
            Arms

Burning Dumps 

New armatures 
flower 
in musk The Discount Tent

 

Imperial Vestments IV

Lifted

the flood
against divers roots

pounded open, laughing

blink 
the thistle fence 
down the highway

never 
leaving the backyard 
river of carbon

burned, but towers

Left him there
Combed his hair
With dye

 

Imperial Vestments V

Chinese camp

Miniature vestments 

Imperial silk

 

und / y / to     skeleton

 

(our way back 
from the valley 
within the valley proper, O Lear— 
Order strapped to our chests 
They had no chance Let’s leave them)


Phoenix, Colorado

The woodstove at the cabin’s center,
where every star collapses, stirs up
its apparitions: aspens, mule deer
beguiled by song from the salt lick, 
camp robber courts for Steller’s jays
grazing the rail in sunlit crowns.
That creek becomes the Colorado—

Earth’s curve intensifies downhill
beyond the glacial glass in frames
of beetle-killed blue spruce. In folktales,
some nests hold snakeling eggs, some cages
don’t hold, and some things never die,
damn liars, but wink from grates and doors.
A ring where trees retreated—beneath

the gravel, char. Like stars, this family:
one generation fuels the next.
Pentatonic music, rocks
forgotten on the mountainside.
We reemerge and wait all night
for sizzling rain on the steel roof,
then rise in sun, no longer ashen.


Without Glasses

The masses in the television merge.
Murky and thick as exhaust
fan growl, the kitchen counter

clutters with knives and bottles.
Hard angles of the window smear
against winter’s vacant skyscape,

drafts in veins and coils breaking
microscopic cracks. In the mirror,
hollow sockets call from a skull,

but how are they visible? Alarm
clock light, doubled up like eyes.
The world folds inside an envelope.

Outside, a dead man waits,
arms spindly and spreading. No,
only a sapling, leafless in snow. 


The Translucent Nature of Irises
            for Valerie Persinko

1.
dark bloom  etched.

see,  i am not afraid
            there were thin lines
            of blood, rising in beads
            
            see, i made this my own
i can make decisions. i can watch them   stick.

it is so important
that you know the story

there is a story

            [the particulars dissipate
             a long garden, stretching against pavement
             the scent of it, rising]

2.
sky broken into bars
filigree of blue 

carved and curved  

can i take a knife and slice each apart?
            i have heard of golden filaments of sunlight
            it was a dead girl 
            who wrote those words
                        though not yet.

                        she laughed that afternoon
                        exposing her neck                      

                        i wanted to touch it she said
            
                        later, but of course later, she died.
                        or was killed.

                        it varies on the telling.

3.
is this how i will be remembered?
            sunbleached.

how is she remembered?
            laughing.

4.
there is a paleness to my skin
that looks unfamiliar.
            as if i were disappearing

it was seven years ago
            delicate girl  thin bones
            i wanted to touch it she laughed

            later   of course, later.

i had forgotten about her.  seven years  a lot happens

even so  certain things
can no longer change

            i make sure of this ::  etched 
            always the same state of  open
            always the same state of  closed

5.
what would she say
about the faded places here?
            it was the sunlight
            tangled beneath a new jersey forest

            that she curved her hands
            to show me 

golden bars   golden filaments
each finger trailing

i           walk beside lizards
            press my hands into sunwarmed rocks

while she slips   into the dark spaces

how did i forget  the circles she made against the air?

       
6.
bright bloom

i am used to cold  being the downfall of petals
            here, it is the heat that kills

a few, though, survive
            shake their heads
            and bend gently

                        see, i have lasted
                        i can continue

            even beneath this
            everpresent sun

there are others
equally strange in this place

others   [imagine innumerable fields
              imagine, then :: two  and the way
              each compliments. corresponds.
                                        makes possible.] 

Poem for Brandon Shimoda

Lavender smock of spotted light & clam shovels 
for the dirge to gather us out.  Well, you found

what you couldn’t’ve come for
& it keeps finding itself in your own

messages—crow lines to carry the voice
of the poem back home, home here,
now undoable nets of the past.  I can
see your thread.  Your thread is

not invisible.  My grandmother is
in San Francisco and it’s 1944.
Oppen’s brick, all the days go off
like wheat.  Lice.  Fruitrot.

Can I say I hear it and still mean
I’m not coming? You go through it
with the reparation smudged out.

You laugh like a fire.  Pines.
Ice boots.  Gossip to rinse your
wrists with.  Wetter than the moon
in Stanford’s poems, well, no. But
you sing listening throughout.

 

Poem for Mathias Svalina

Here is where the dead go
to get noisy tromping out
songs to glove through

collating the meat with giant
hooks.  Says the night 
wants from us what the night
cannot do for itself until

the lantern’s shaky song
gets twisted out.  Copy lengthwise,
elliptical star votive &

methods for boat wrecking
crews of this known only
for callused laughter,
crippled star of bees.
Socket say sorry but you might not
live this night through.  So say it.

City get us back with your wrong
cuts.  Even some of the missteps
are better than the so-called up
audial now.

Outskirts: Winter without People

this shining
of light from from the world
along the revetment (o empty malleability
of dead resonance! —

o of smooth-free 
pure soul-lessness 
near the heights!) —

even — flowering
(with the juices
of time) —

along the lifeless
gleam
of faux-modern buildings! —

this 
shining:
blood —

the empty-colorless — cold! — soul
of cold — so without-breath-alive-emphatically-stern
clear
high
worthy

of itself

Once again: in breaks between sleep

that which watches
always ceases:

and day!  and world!..

unique is the 
unceasing —

is it along its visage that
the soul slides:

like dust! —

and the world of the watcher
does not always open! —

and the shifting dust:

not illuminated! —

is shed

Bidding Shalamov Farewell

only
one who is hungry
(if he is firm
and free
in his forgetting) —

has detached-tranquil
purity!.. 
(for no one) —

to take
into the cold 
of Epiphany —

(harder
than hard:
as the foundation
of purest silence) —

as if in the barren stillness of a field in silence-country simplicity has been achieved —

to absolute-exhaustion
resoundingly self-possessed to the end:

human — light: as if the last! —

of life for bitter-cold-Russia and a book with no address

People 

So many nights
the lines of chairs, frames and bureaus
I have accompanied with movements
of my arms and shoulders
on their constant

and unknown path.

I didn’t notice
how this carries over onto people.
I must admit: speaking with them,
I imagine my finger measuring

the lines of their eyebrows.

And they were everywhere,
so that I could not forget
about life in the form of people,

and there were weeks and years
to say goodbye to them,

and there was the idea of thinking
so that I knew
the patches of light on their pianos
had relatives

in hospitals and prisons.

Summer with angels

1.  Prologue to “angelic” bagatelles

wind: God lost his cyclamen poem journal

2.  The appearance of cyclamens

angels play cards of course angel cards

3.  Autumn: fog

birds fall leaves fly south

4.  Continuation of the cyclamens

God’s geese go to pond

5.  Flowers to the right of the cyclamens
(Christmas star)

called “mama is getting married”

6.  Pleasant vision (or: Ts-18)

angels are going to school — first grade

7.  And to the left — a lone azalia

wind: sniffly God dropped his handkerchief

8.  Once again — small flock of cyclamens

angel installation — of Mary’s flower

9.  The same azalia

and one-eyed God cries in fog

10.  Further:  Ts-21 (i.e. twenty-first entry on cyclamens)

angels at hippodrome

11.  Of course once again about these mag-ni-fi-cent

with compasses and rulers angels in heavenly constructors bureau

12.  Unforgettable vision

angels lead Saint Dominic to army

13.  And once again returning to them (cyclamens)

confusion among angels in drawing class

14.  Ordinary event

angels arrive at “green” congress

15.  Once again flowers called “Christmas star”

blushing mama behind loom

16.  Simply Ts-24

angels listen to one angel’s new poem

17.  Autumn leaf-fall in the garden

and falling days of youth turn up old age

18.  Once again they (cyclamens) — like an angelic string ensamble

miniature wings bows wings

19.  Here’s Ts-25

angels are the People’s assessors

20.  Ts-27 (or: in a certain heavely workshop)

angel shavings

21.  Once again — «Christmas star»

mama under red sun cuts rye

22.  Cyclamens’ new transformation

seconds stopped and put on white hats

23.  Simply: cyclamens-34

angels on a plane

24.  Cyclamens’ latest transformation

seconds put on white gloves and advanced

25.  Ts-37: what really happened among the angels

strange: for some reason fluff and feathers fly

26.  Once again — unforgettable vision

angel feast

27. Further — Ts-41

angels say farewell — wave wings

28.  And: long epilogue

angel cart moves off and disappears 

In My Numb Heart a Prick of Misgiving

I want a poet who can be toilet trained to prevent the shit from spilling out of his mouth. 

If you can’t feel the tickle on your genitals that this poem provides, please contact the manufacturer. 

I like to cuddle.  I am loyal and intelligent.  And I will sell myself for the mere thrill of seeing my name on a bathroom wall, or anagrammatically in the pages of Paradise Lost. 

I do not own this poem; it is the responsibility of the poetic community.  

If you cannot sex this poem, then listen harder. 

The wind has fallen.

The words don’t know what they mean. 

Four out of five poets complain they are jealous of new arrivals. 

The best poet in our town lives in a cage at PetsRUs and says fuck the son of a bitch every time a customer walks by. 

I prefer the jargon of capitalists to the jargon of poets. 

I love the word:  “liquidity.”

I love the world:  “asset.” 

I learned from television that the area between the testicles and the anus is called the runway. 

She slid her finger along his runway and read from the Cantos of Ezra Pound: 

That profit on deposits should be used to cover all losses and the distributions of the fifth year be made from remaining profits after restoration of losses no matter how small with the sane small reserve against future idem, and so on.

I believe in the rapture of syntax, and I take no responsibility if this poem suddenly falls into a coma, or if the economy of the poetry market experiences bloated bouts of inflation due to the overvalued chunks of language that glitter like diamonds in the glistening pool of vomit that spreads across the floor like the shadow of a lover long forgotten. 

The poet scared her own children with her excruciatingly meticulous word choice.

She exhibited aggressive behavior in public when she recited her serventesios.

Her best poem consisted of three hundred and fifteen gaseous staccato eruptions

The emcee suggested that disappointed consumers contact the manufacturer. 

The poet was lifted from the tenure track and dumped onto the customer service desk at Home Depot.

The poet went bust but the bank took over the practice.

 

State Poetry

This poem was written in the office of a state employee, and typed on a state-owned computer, and as such it is a violation of state ethics rules which prevent state employees from using state resources for work that is beyond the employee’s job description. 

Because this poem was written on a state-owned computer, and printed on a state-owned printer, and copied on a state-owned Xerox machine, it is, by law, the property of the state.

This poem willfully submits itself to state ownership.  

This poem feels that there is no better owner of a poem than the state. 

This poem feels that state-controlled poetry is the poetry of the future. 

When the author of this poem is appointed Poet Laureate of Illinois, this poem will instantly transform into an important work of literature. 

This poem has an active staff of fundraisers who are seeking corporate sponsorship. 

This poem is static, and in the stasis of this poem, a community of poets shall be blown to ash by a force that believes in art as a government and military weapon. 

This poem speaks of the world, but in its attempt to speak of the world it is interrupted by bureaucrats writing poetic memos; by generals writing poetic death orders; by refugees writing poetic love songs to sheep, Israeli Uzis, and virgins. 

This poem carries guns, prayer books, maps, cash, and manuals for heavy machinery.

This poem contains poet-interrogators who shove into terrorist mouths a variety of sedatives in preparation for gradual neurological reprogramming. 

This poem is to be read through a walkie-talkie at a convention of poets who long to be institutionalized. 

This poem institutionalizes poets by granting them immediate tenure at state universities they will never be able to leave. 

The university is a fitting place for these poets:  lots of sodomy and bitter fights over misplaced semi-colons and poorly formed ideologies. 

In the world of this poem, a ball of dust is a Neanderthal man with a club; a cobweb is a poppy field full of landmines; and a horse on a road is fourteen illegal immigrants in a stable. 

Critics hate this poem. 

Editors laugh at this poem. 

Poets shit on this poem. 

Babies and graduate students eat this poem. 

There are bivalved mollusks in this poem, and hemorrhoids, and a dog named Chucho, and coyotes who kidnap immigrants. 

This poem speaks of a sheep-herder’s wife in the same breath that it mentions a cheerleader from the Upper East Side who fashions pom-poms from the hair of poodles captured by her Canine Detention Brigade. 

This poem is an ally of the Metrosexual Insurgents who waged war on Banana Republic after maxing out their credit cards. 

This poem is actively recruiting insurgents to terrorize exurban outlet malls. 

This poem is a representative sample of the Chilean-Jewish school of Western Pennsylvanian Poetics. 

This poem is rhythmically unappealing. 

The form of this poem has little to do with its content. 

This poem feels slightly uncomfortable referring to teriyaki-flavored-tofu dildos and macrobiotic lesbians. 

This poem longs to be doused in gasoline and shoved into the mouth of enemy combatants at Guantanamo Bay. 

This poem has no desire to withstand the test of time, and its author recommends that all copies of this poem be burned two years after publication. 

This poem is firm in its convictions and compassionate at the same time. 

This is a people-poem, not a political poem. 

This poem is committed to public service. 

This poem is simple, unobtrusive, and easy to use or ignore as the reader sees fit.

List of 50 (12 of 50): Electric Jesus

1. This past weekend, two days before Christmas, I witnessed evil that stilled my heart. 
2. A small Korean child, roughly six, brutally beating a live crab with the butt end of metal tongs. 
3. His smaller sister there beside him, flinging crab bodies from mid-crawl, while a few feet over their parents fought amongst a crowd for fresher specimen. 
4. Hours later, in my head still—the way the crab, shell busted, seemed to reel.
5. There in the market, where they sell piñatas of 5 sizes. 
6. Where there are aisles of candy from countless countries, named in languages I can’t read.
7. We took cell phone photos with a huge green hollow piñata bird in the crowded dairy aisle.
8. A small woman with three children smiled at me with her crooked teeth and blinked. 
9. Afterwards I watched a young Spanish boy shadowbox the bird where we’d left it leaned against the light.
10. I would have paid to take it out of there if it hadn’t already been missing its right eye. 
11. Instead I got an electric wall hanging of the crucifixion, $10 flat, in cash.
12. I did not attempt to dicker, as every other customer did. The salesman wore a fanny pack.
13. Neon Jesus, wrapped in bubble wrap, stuffed into a box with plastic handle.
14. Neon Jesus with red, blue and yellow light strobing from his ass. 
15. Still mesmerized an hour after, on a sofa in the dark. 
16. His light creasing the room.
17. The crab-crushing boy still at large in my head. 
18. Our midnight construction of a gingerbread masterpiece served a nice distraction—ginger home, woman and man.
19. We iced the woman into the darkness under the roof inside the house.
20. 8 pounds of Kim chi from the Market in the refrigerator. A Christmas gift, not given. 
21. Here now alone two hours after Christmas, the day feels like it never happened. 
22. Brand new remote controlled space heater blowing mercilessly at my back. 
23. A cardboard box brimmed full with candy that will be eaten in a week.
24. Wondering what the other customers of the International Market are doing with their evening. 
25. Wondering what new junk the crab-beating boy is abusing in his room.
26. So many places I will never know exist, however thankfully or unthankfully.
27. So many people with their own machinic brains, each absorbing on its own.
28. Average number of thoughts per waking second: 10. 
29. Therefore, per hour: 36,000.
30. While sleeping, the rate moves back a decimal.
31. Therefore, per day, per human: 604,800 thoughts.
32. Current estimated world population: 6,446,131,400 folks.
33. How many of those thoughts are evil? How many are the same? 
34. How many equate to: I am hungry. How many: I want to buy that electric Jesus.
35. I remember once having wanted children. Not certain when that desire died. 
36. In the noodle restaurant after the market, a father to his son: STOP IT. STOP IT. STOP IT. STOP IT. DO YOU HEAR ME? STOP IT. STOP IT.
37. The evenings I’ve overhead my upstairs getting beaten by her husband more than twice. 
38. The air of my bedroom somehow vibrating with her scream.
39. Such evil thoughts I’ve had lately, uncontrollably.
40. As in last week I found myself wanting to climb through the window at a child staring at me from the backseat of his parents’ car.
41. What future selves that child will bury.
42. The portals of his eyes.
43. Such beautiful heat from the space heater. Drying out the skin along my back. Bringing itch that keeps me curling. Scratching my skin cells off into the air and breathing them back in.
44. The cold sky beyond the window. My window as big as two large doors.
45. A world of rooms on the horizon. Flush with people I’ll never see. Their thoughts all replicating, bruising new remembrance on the flesh.
46. Their tongues, their lips, their nails, their wallets, their knees, their hair.
47. So many windows on nearby making the stillness seem evil even more. 
48. So evil now I’m going to turn on this electric Jesus. Plug him in and dim the overhead.
49. His ass, neon, radiating. 
50. His light creasing the room. 

 

List of 50 (16 of 50): Death Toll

1. In 2003, one out of every 113 people died, according to biblehelp.org.
2. Roughly 1.78 people per second.
3. They have a counter that estimates 244.4 have died since the time I opened their webpage when I began writing this list . 
4. The tally growing larger while I sit staring.
5. Tonight I fell asleep in water so hot my feet were numb.
6. Nodding off every couple minutes, banging my head against the tub.
7. Half-dreaming people from sometime else. Faces I hadn’t seen before. 
8. Another 102.4 people estimated expired while writing the last 5 lines.
9. In the mirror finding a small bruise on my forehead that I don’t remember getting.
10. Soon I will remember less and less.
11. Outside again tonight it’s raining.
12. Other things are less obvious.
13. As on another website I’m reading, planecrashinfo.org, which claims the last words recorded on British Air flight 5572, June 22, 2003 before its crash-landing that killed the pilot: I have nothing in front of me.
14. This short quote brought before me by the internet, here alone 11 PM on a Friday night.
15. For some reason my whole head seems to itch.
16. The walls of this room are blue. Drinking ice water from a plastic cup that is also blue. Not sure why that matters.
17. Such an evil night tonight.
18. In addition to the mortality counter, biblehelp.org offers a U.S. abortion counter, a world abortion counter, and a destiny counter, which estimates the souls condemned to hell.
19. The rate of condemnation supposedly comparable to that at which a warning light on an ambulance flashes.
20. These counters are ideal for presentations at churches, conferences, and rallies.  These counters can run on laptops for small groups (Bible studies and Sunday Schools) and on projection screens for very large audiences. 
21. Having just now got up to fill my blue cup and at my return seeing that 80.2 more have died. 
22. The anticipation of this number having actually affected the way I walked. 
23. Last words recorded on Vladivostokavia Airlines flight 352, July 4, 2001, which crashed killing all 145 aboard: That’s all guys! Fuck!
24. Not surprising that quite a majority of these crashed plane logs contain fuck in the last words, in fact.
25. Also very common: Oh God and Holy shit.
26. Though certain camera’s recordings note only rattling, hissing, noise.
27. Wondering what I’d say if I knew I was dying; if I’d be more eloquent, or if I’d just curse.
28. Last words of Hegel: Only one man ever understood me.  And he really didn’t understand me.
29. Last words of Conrad Hilton, father of the hotel chain: Leave the shower curtain on the inside of the tub.
30. Actually, saying fuck while on a crashing plane seems eloquent enough. 
31. Imagining there will be a significantly higher death rate this year than that established in 2003.
32. 2107.2 people have died during this list now. 
33. I’m confused about knowing certain things. 
34. What else could I be doing.
35. Here alone with an itch, an ache, poor posture. My cell phone silent beside me on the desk.
36. Abraham Lincoln died laughing, so they say.
37. J.M. Barrie’s last words: I can’t sleep.
38. Heinrich Himmler’s: I am Heinrich Himmler.
39. I think I’m going to make it. Richard Loeb’s
40. I could call someone but I don’t want to. I want to take another bath.
41. I’d like to sleep straight through tomorrow so I’ll have more energy the next day.
42. 2700.1
43. Not even willing to imagine how to consider a percentage of a person. It’s still early enough to go out.
44. The Captain, last words recorded on Airwave Transport flight 9807, which crashed killing both members of a crew of two: I have no idea which way is up.
45. The First Officer on Atlantic Southeast Airlines flight 529, August 21, 1995, which crashed into trees during an emergency landing: Amy, I love you.
46. The walls here are still blue.
47. An estimated 229 die each year in the U.S. from botched circumcision.
48. More than 11 million children die each year before reaching age 5.
49. 4061 and counting.
50. I don’t want to look at the internet anymore. 

tensor: singing backwards

We imported wooden clothespins from Sweden. 

                                         Trifles, playthings

Of all—nearly half here, in memory

                                         of little comfort for

white linen from a thousand lines, & mind                        

                                         the mind, partitioned as it is,

starts, rushes through (she is just on the other side) 

                                         by disbelief:                                 

a momentum: stirring & the long rows

                                         new dead are arranged in,

multiplying. A frantic reach—

                                         under pines, the resulting lacework

one flapping sheet & tangled loose

                                         the sun made itself

by a grip (as in a mesh, vertical)—some fall,

                                         a failure.

it comes around again

it comes around again.  dullness, reverberation, this act of repetition.
however, ochre and eggplant, blooming in small circles,
tiny and beautiful, a wish a dream a scene.  my last thought was your
yelling. but were you, on the corner yelling, or was that the fact of
the earth coming back around again in the morning— where i remember
your arm heavy on my arm and hurting a bit but not in a way that would
cause protest or movement, but just a crease that could be the sheet
pressing skin for all i know—the way the mind folds when it wants too
much, or uses too much of itself, ugly and lonely and pink, smashed
between paper in a textbook or pressed into a jar, laboratory.  pink-
flecked electricity, rubbery and small. 

or you could’ve been yelling after all, your hands in your pocket where
i couldn’t see them.  that makes sense.  i’ve always frustrated things.
i think there was a light behind you and i crossed my legs to put my
toe in your shadow. 

i remember when your glasses made a crease in the side of my face
and then i imagined you crying because it was impossible to think you
would, but i wanted to feel salt, along w/ the crease that you
made. and the blood is still filling in that space on my cheek and it
tingles w/ every year since, w/ its filling back up.

the texture of the face in sleep is gelatinous but powder. boiled bones
and hope.  i walk over the same floor boards each evening and there are
times when i cross my legs to make shadows. maybe to say loss or maybe
to say love i really don’t know.

 

loneliness: cross-reference

the avenue is wide and flat
dotted with early morning traffic and birds
the nail salon on the corner is closed
a man walks to the stoplight w/ bread in a plastic bag.
we sit in front of the laundromat
warm drinks in our hands
we lean against the plate glass
and make shapes with our breath.

inside it is humid and noisy
out here, cold—a siren, somewhere—
we are far from museums and coffee shops
here in the neighborhood where you 
were a child, where your mother put you
in braids and kneesocks, where you 
drew pictures with chalk on the sidewalk:
sweeping lines, people with small bodies
and large heads, dinosaurs, and fire trucks

out here we laugh at being adult
as your work clothes make steamed, wet circles
through the clamped windows of the machines
we laugh at how far apart we are
how our age has made us smaller
and bitter around the edges—
you put your hand on my face
and tease me for never leaving the place where we
became friends

i have nothing to say—
there is knocking at the window behind us
a child with juice at the corners of her mouth
braids and glasses, holding a rounded book,
presses her hand against the glass.
she is wearing a small, gold ring.
you turn around and open your palm,
strip off your glove
and flatten your hand against hers
next door to us, a man unlocks the metal door 
to his bodega.

 

the men laugh outside the gate

the men laugh outside the gate. the cold of the night is an inscrutable veranda, caught on videotape. rewound and rewritten.  the long dark plank of sky muted by the noise of light from the city is either loneliness or independence, a perfect day.  you might call the police because you’re afraid of the voices in the alley, afraid they might be your own.  mind calling back to itself with the electricity that only the friction of their laughter creates.  what is it? you ask from your bed.  what is it?  your voice is the next step of waiting, the atomized ring of the stove warming up, warming wood.  the house lights up with your voice and all others remain outside. 

 

monotony’s resurrection

a comma a serenade a swell a comma a skin a curve a biceps a glass a bow a comma puddle a leaf a mirror a blanket a glass a line a curve a light a comma

a grey mirror a defeated call home a pair of glasses a forwarded address a black dress a broken bell a blue light a room full of lanterns

 

she paid the cashier in change

she paid the cashier in change . . . a big bag of coins:  a lesson from petals

minutiae, she touches my forehead w/ her finger and it’s cold again music in our ears and wind in our noses it is winter again and we talk about it as if it never happened before— 
this cold

ness this feeling of things moving beneath our feet and what is it?  this movement and petals underground.  waiting for sidewalks to become pliable and for there to be something more than wind and moss. 

Alcatraz

The cell is black and cold, like a shoe box exiled to Siberia. To survive, he learns to tear the button from his shirt, to toss it in the air and seek it out on hands and knees. He fastens it inside his palms. Long ago he thought of escape. But the button is old and cannot swim.

 

At the Zoo

The giraffe loved popcorn.
She loved the thuds of kernels bursting,
loved them nibbled warm
from her handler’s hand—a good
thing he figured, when the real artillery
began and her response wasn’t fear,
but hunger, though seeing 
the zebra and his stripes succumb
to tear gas stunned her appetite.

She herself collapsed in fright
at the next report at the zoo
in Qalqiliya, which can’t afford more animals
dead or living, so the ex-vet
turned taxidermist stuffs the creatures
and exhibits them in the snake pit
to anyone who’ll visit.
Nearby the handler stands, palm
outstretched, unflinching, as he did in life.

 

Civil Unrest

Father, forgive me
for wishing since 
there must be children 
without them
(wishes I mean)
I wish the war
finished and then
lots of peace and fish
a sturdy house
with table and chairs
at least one chair
where you 
and mother could take
turns sitting since
being dead must be 
very tiring
your spirits journeying
without your bodies
resting properly
all this time
like legless birds
who can’t land 
anywhere father 
forgive me
for not crying
out when I saw
the hand 
with the machete
you taught us hands 
are not intended
for such things and so
my voice hid
behind my tongue
I hid behind the tree
we all loved
from which the handle 
of the blade was cut
which like me 
should have cried out father

 

Detective X on Retreat

Four hundred acres in the woods—
nightmare and dream: this is a good
place to scatter bones,
including those still wreathed 
with flesh that breathes
(like yours or mine).
They said I needed time
(who doesn’t) from my life
of reconstruction: years spent
meaning to connect the fragments
of a skull that’s fractured, to re-enact
a girl’s last day, to say, in fact
she isn’t dead but goes on 
going to the pawn shop
with her box of gold encasements,
to a film noir, still spectating.

But I am meant not to fret
(that’s it, isn’t it?) to forget, 
to let pure nature infiltrate me.
I see the deer mouse cross the field
and know she’s running from something
or toward another, I can’t but cling
to who I am. The robins
pulling worms up past the fence
are swallowing the evidence.
But one must look both ways
upon a path: through the haze
and back again, then at the self.
In my hobby room I have a shelf
of broken parts: the wedding ring
without the finger, photograph
that’s torn in half,
the unsipped glass, unfinished task,
the long glance on a mountain pass,
before the summer light retreats.

When did I forget? Life is still sweet
or else I’d let it go on
disappearing. In the clearing
I watch a Fibonacci series
repeating, life is sweet, in the pine
tree’s cone, it its tar and in its resin,
in the winged seeds conceived in air
and steadfast hurled into the care
of earth and all it tenders.
I may leave now. I remember.

 

Detective X Captures Pygmalion

There are facts you do not need to know,
details we keep out of the press, because
once you are acquainted with a horror, 
it has a knack of dwelling in you. Beauty 
is different, flying into the fringes 
when you’re introduced, say, 
at a bal masquée, with you 
always running after what you think 
is there. Pygmalion was a good 
example. One accepts eccentricities 
of artists; in him there was
 a festering after the incident in Amathus 
in which the guests were butchered, the guilty 
men transformed to braying bulls, the women 
stripped of undergarments, hardened into wolves.
People like to look for reasons.
Perhaps this is the core of why
Pygmalion shunned women, why he
retreated to his stone and tools and pulled
the perfect lover from his studio.
He knew she wasn’t real,
and loved her in spite, or else
because of it. He brought her offerings
of colored glass washed by the sea,
sweet peas, and beads and speckled eggs.
He brought her figs, a fens, scented geraniums,
blueprints for the thousand villas he would build her.
He was in a bad way until
he asked and Venus listened, until she made
the ivory go soft, to breathe, and to respond
beneath the klieg lights of his gaze.
Opening her eyes the first time
to Pygmalion and to the world, 
it’s easy to see how she confused 
the two, how willingly she made
her fleshly way up to the altar,
opened her alabaster brain
to the notion of him and to progeny.

What did Pygmalion expect?
She grew tired and less sumptuous.
She saw beyond, into his self-regard, into
how he bullied her toward being.
In the storybooks you read
the happy ending. An object has to stop
somewhere, and yet the story keeps on going.
You can imagine for yourself
the crop of terrors she inherited,
invented by so selfish a desire.
You can imagine Pygmalion’s wrath
when finally she said, I wish 
you’d never made me, when she turned 
from him and when again
he raised his battered mallet. 
This is the part you never read, 
how she bled and how her blood
stained a whole sea red, 
though this is all in my report, and how 
Pygmalion on that same sea fled,
which is where I tracked him down,
in a dark, unseemly galley, where he’d chained
himself onto the oars, disguised his mean genius
in the tattered garments of a slave
while not far off his son
and an island grew synonymous.

Glassjaw Grinding Legs

You tame the spider
with the back of your hand

You don't have to knock here

Our wallpaper is 
a bookshelf repeating

The spider perching near 
dried apricots or plums or pears

I will never grow into you

There are only so many ways
to enter the room

This is how I eat the spider
No one knocks when leaving

 

I Have Been Scraps and the Fingers That Picked Them Apart

Coral bed, my gravely noise.
Intoned and lonely terrain, blurring

a year’s smoldering stock.

Little scraps scraped into little chances
to dye, to turn, to take alive.

My fingers frighten me most when they
convince me I have never been.

Clay feet and a wavering will.
Grind coral to powder my sheets,

Turn the fever with wolfdust.
When I least expect to have a chance.

 

There Is Also a Tug-o-War Competition Open to Anyone

Let’s plan a novelty event for the children.

A guest speaker for the tug-o-war competition
open to anyone.

Territory turns to a clock tower
where the storm can be spotted.

The juggler with a shortage 
of skills is seen from above.

Let’s pull a tent over the historic range 
and keep it dry. Legwarmers for everyone.

Mountaintops no longer foresee
the future bedecked in bark.

A heyday of ferns, and the triumph
of tire marks turning snow.

Let’s stand a magician in front of the children.
Open mouths for the water squirting flower.

The novelty is: it appears perfect 
the first time they watch.

The competition will attract elite players.
Rope tugs back and forth many

times so that every child falls 
backwards with triumph.

Their hands will burn.

Daughter Like Me

There must be a billion daughters just 
like me. Afraid to speak. So many years 
have piled up. Did I ever have
a voice? Before I was born, did I talk to the stars? Maybe
then I understood the sound of blood moving through
a body, a million reasons to stop searching for
a million different moons to capture. If only I were 
interested in the moon’s path cutting the undersides
of the lies. I think I’ll grab my markers and trace my hand to 
make a Thanksgiving turkey. I never did that before. I never saw
Lassie Come Home. I never understood the rules for Easter egg hunts. My father 
used to hold me on 
his knee when the world 
was large enough to taste like lemons and
the feeling of his hand on my hair. Let me explain. When I 
was small enough to fit in his mouth, my father
swallowed me. That’s why it starts to end whenever 
I begin to find my way around it but 
I always end up walking through the gate and
over the same hill. When I listen hard enough I realize how 
many daughters it takes to lift
up the corners. One to grasp
the meaning, another to stop up my mouth. All the rest 
keep silent while I hold up the quilt and he
slides under.

Dreaded Wrong
        (Poem Starting with a Line by Dara Wier)

Much of the breathing we’d half-dreaded had materialized
as ripples across our unmade bed. 
We were constantly setting sail, we were sea-sick, 
and unsure of our paper boat, but we believed 
in the trade winds, and said our prayers 
to the promises the other had made, 
the only unfickle gods, the only ones 
you can depend on.  What we dreaded
were the mythic monsters that waited 
at the flat end of the world 
mouths opened to swallowing all 
who followed the fickle, or the ill-winds, 
or blood sacrifices to petty deities.  
We followed ourselves 
and inked maps so we would find our way 
back along the jagged coasts.  If I tell you 
what we dreaded most

I would tell you first that we dreaded wrong. 
All our fears were about trusting the other too much, 
when that is the wind that filled our sails.

 

Eight Ball 
        (Poem Starting with a Line by Lee Upton)

we would be portable by now,
yes, pocketable too,
like chalkblocks or love,
something palmable, proud—
the sawbuck on the siderail.

we should be hard orbs
and see ourselves
as well-rounded perfection—
ah!—the corner pocket of desire,
I want to bank hard and disappear
in its green velvet and juke box lullabies.
I want to roll, spin, orbit the runners
tunnel-of-love down and clack-clack
in the underworld. an Orphic eight ball
singing, try again later, turn around
and meet my scratched lover,
yellow-white and blue chalk pocks,
she and I could live in a pocket
of answer only
I can provide.

 

I, I Was 
        (Poem Starting with a Line by Meghan O’Rourke)

I, I was the snow that fell too soon,

the wedding streamers in an empty room,
the anagrammed heart, spelling out one guilt
then pumping out doom. I was the sweet-tooth

tooth’s halo, the top memory of the weirdest
worm in the killing jar. I was the whiner-adept
bleating a streak down the gunmetal blue

highway looking for a pickup hand of poker.
High stakes because the ground is for snakes
and scorpions—no place to plot a victory party.

I was counting the hangman’s rosary beads—
the skip and the tarnished link looking like
what I had always believed mercy would embody—

a small filament of God. O glorious string theory
that binds one particle to my eye, be the light!
And I, I was the shadow flickering on the wall,

the one that grew too large and fell too soon.

 

I, Michigan

Work whistle:  limbs rising but tingle half asleep.
Tornado warnings in the breezes, sparrows quiet,
the work-damned shuffle onto rumble buses
with busted mufflers—they dart traffic like grotesque
ambulances on our way to somewhere tragic, somewhere
automatic, without any witnesses.  We mull 
around other bodies like crows, picking almost pneumatically,
pretending our boundaries, the false hope of space,
sonambulant, this lever up, pull and push away, next
dreary widget. Is this what Hell is?  Could it be this easy?
As mundane a haze, still as fog, systematic as robots?
Free coffee and doughnuts in the breakroom—15 minutes
then back. Back down to the clean concrete floors. 
Someone etched I Love You on a part—best report it to Quality Control.

 

Urge Evolution

First it’s some guy with hair everywhere,
out pounding the sticks and stones
for a meal.  He finds like minds, he feels
a stirring in those hairier places.
Next there’s a stadium full of people
chanting, BEL-LY, BEL-LY, BEL-LY!
And it doesn’t matter what inning
it is when Hunger comes to the plate.
They are all here to watch the table set,
they want to feast and drink and see
with their reptilian pocket drive.
The big celebration, the after party,
the drunken glow, the homo erectus jet set,
rub the elbows and the gums—
satiated on quickly, before urge sparks again.

At Mom’s House

I left a note on your face Dad.

 

First, Burritos

first, burritos
out in one huge pile
it’s a great start
shit out a shit with a tortilla still wrapped around it
the exact burrito mass
nothing is lost or kept
the way things should be
hard and dark

 

I’ve Got Two Sleeping Women in a Smallish House

I’ve got two sleeping women in a smallish house
think of a big ship turning around in a harbor
ok goodnight
 

Mostly Rather She Wanted Me

mostly rather she wanted me
to sleep in the same bed as her

a hotbox
layered and beautiful

 

Not Sleeping

I’m not sleeping 
in my old bedroom
while everyone sleeps
in everyone else’s old bedroom

bats all up under my eyelids
and now a pond
sogging up my sweatshirt

 

Voiceless in a Well

I am voiceless in a well
you don’t have to breathe
when you have no voice

 

We Say We’re Cities

we say we’re cities
that live
leg inside leg:
but do not move

be moved around by you

when I do things alone:
pin my back to your old twin bed


Japanese Scientists

Japanese scientists unveiled a robot that plays the violin.
I read this sentence to you as we are in bed. 
I wonder, does it play Bach’s Partita in G minor so beautifully, 
butterflies on migration plunge into the sea
and the moon takes a drink of sadness mixed with gin?
You’re too sleepy to answer. Our dog lies down between us. 
Now I’m reading another but I think you can’t hear me. 
Japanese scientists unveiled a robot that solves Rubik’s cube.
I look over at you.  No reaction.  Our dog.  No reaction. 
Japanese scientists unveiled a robot the can dance the blue Danube. 
I’m on the edge of the bed, my feet are cold. I nudge our dog.
He growls at me in his sleep.  Just then, Japanese scientists
unveil a robot snowplow that eats snow and excretes ice logs.
I put on my special sleep mask, also made by Japanese scientists.
Cold air shoots into my nose, a hand of cold air presses against
my tongue and holds my throat open. I turn off the light
and descend into an abandoned tunnel; scent of ozone
and creosote, crunch of gravel, concrete and railroad tracks.
I have wasted the day; now I wander the night alone. 
Meanwhile Japanese scientists unveil a robot exoskeleton
that can be worn by elderly farmers. Japanese scientists 
unveil a robot that walks on the command of a monkey
that’s running on a treadmill in North Carolina.  Japanese scientists.

 

No Respect

When I was old enough to notice 
I realized my parents were little old people. 
Often my mother said she missed the chance
to strangle me after the nurse left the room. 
This story got condensed over the years.
Eventually it became a gesture, as she might 
look at me across a crowded table, hold her hands up 
and squeeze in a gesture of baby strangling.
I was an ugly child.  When my dog humped my leg 
he would close his eyes. But now I’m OK
except my shadow seems to have abandoned me. 
My wife gives leftover steak to our dog.  
She thinks the broom is folk art. 
I bought a dinner jacket at Good Will.
It must have come from a funeral home. 
Every time I put it on my arms cross automatically
across my chest. Like this. And people say
I look good, as if I were still alive. Better even.

 

Onomatophobia

How much does one word weigh?  
Cup, for instance.  
If the word cup is full does it weigh more?
What if a word is full of God, 
like the word enthusiasm?
Does enthusiasm weigh more than cup, 
or the words shoe or spitball? 
In Haifa, I saw all 300,000
words of the Torah etched
on the head of a pin.
Did the pin weigh more
than other pins?
When I sleep my hand slides 
up and down my chest and belly, 
or so I have been told.  
Sometimes I dream that I have a zipper
running down the front of me. 
Then I unzip myself and step out of my body.
If you could see me that naked
you’d see me as I really am. 
According to Dr. Duncan MacDougall
of Haverhill, Massachusetts,
the me that steps out me is my soul
and it weighs three fourths of an ounce.
Just don’t mention a certain word. 
It is the word that weighs more than 
all other words combined. 
No, I won’t tell you what it is. 
And I have a note from my doctor
to back me up:  I don’t have to tell.
I also belong to an Onomatophobics
of America support group.
A certain word created the universe.
A certain word can destroy the universe. 
If that word were a hole it would weigh 
nothing, and everything would fall into it. 
Stop! Listen! This is important.
This much I can tell you:
The word I fear most contains
the memory of hard candy. 
Orange hard candy, sweet and bitter
as adolescence.  Orange,
the word nothing rhymes with,
international safety orange,
orange vest, orange safety hat—
that’s the color of the sky’s weight 
when the earth is on fire.

Cicada

Your name  ::  august nearly empty

Your song  ::  a viola playing its bow

Your cycle  ::  bury a child’s body underground

Your distance  ::  by earth or sky

Your body  ::  a searching throat

Your memory  ::  veined translucent wings 

 

[ cover ]

He wanted to sing it the way the radio sang it: invisible, tenuous, static snowing between stations. He wanted to sing it how the distant towers on the hill disappeared each night, only two sad red beacons left signaling the empty dark. Not how someone in love would sing it. Not how someone wanting love would. Maybe he’d sing it from inside a tern or gull. Maybe he’d turn his lungs to glass. Maybe he’d sing it solo in a windowless room.

 

Kodachrome Slides of My Father in Vietnam

19, svelte, sun burnt, shy, 
fire-headed bean pole,
M-14 marksman cross
stabbed into his lapel.

                      ~

Birthday Lottery, televised
draft. Strip naked. Pull
the pin. Take this mezuzah
with you. Bring it home.

                      ~

Drunk, lying face up
on the floodlit runway
at night, cargo planes
climbing, dropping flares.

                      ~

Leaning at the base gate
against a sign in three 
languages — Thai, English,
French: You are a guest here.

                      ~

Here is your letter from home.
Here is your newborn son.
Here is your security clearance.
Here is the scissored hole where his name 

                      ~

My father is drowning
in a rice paddy, swallowing
duckweed and mud.
The bullet hole in his windshield

resembles a glass spider,
jeep overturned, one wheel
spinning smoke. A crosshair
searches for survivors.

 

[ recipe ]

Muddle your plans in a mortar. Marinade your house in balsamic vinegar, dijon, szechuan pepper & salt. Smash your leased vehicle with the flat side of your knife to release its essential oils. Now pick a wine: only cook with what you’d sip. Let the invitations rise on the countertop before baking them off G.B.D. Deglaze your marriage to a delicate simmer. A bay leaf helps. Thyme. Reduce your life by half until it coats the back of a spoon.


The First Prominent Symbol Intones Suggestions for Further Reading

There’s nothing like the present, like the president, like a precedent leaking 
in analog its continuous signal. Life on Capitol Hill is ruinous! cries the paper. 
Torn to pieces, tossed into the Nile, voted mostly likely to forget music, all news 
like a blind dervish in the doorway tuning one’s attention. Neon light littering

our film noir in white music behind a blue naturalist’s gray voiceover. Too many 
ideas destroy the image as always, & sickly from birth Hildegard von Bingen 
calls you a cross within the world or the world is your careless happy cross.

 

Obliterating History in the Pleasure of Holding Forth

A first line is reason enough for a second, for a segment, unisexual & solitary 
as an organ. Our doctor operates a mechanism & calls it anatomy. Our dancer 
operates in music, which is the same. Whorled, lance-shaped leaves smear 
the window. Windy instrument. Windy agency. Active principles everywhere

charging inertia. The syntactic proposition rests a harmonious unified totality on a 
reupholstered couch. Smash the shell to bits so you can hear the ocean in this lime.

 

Hold Together with a Stitch the Whole of Causality

I could have been a contender, or, tender as a helicopter, I could have set 
afloat adrift this bed and its contortive aspirations, moving all afternoon 
between black and white music. You turn to the dictionary of literary terms 
by mistake. Relative bodies, resting bodies, entire arms erased. A metronome

calls out colorless death to any future metaphysicians in our digital world.

He rules his own house

— Would you do anything against your nature just to please me?
— But I have a basically pleasant nature

                                    he rules his own house

— to love is to shorten the distance between what you have 
  and what you don’t — and don’t want to

— he rules his own house

go weigh yourself your destination the temperatures failing 
a first someone’s baffle in the describe oh what’s the use 
the camera’s on her now you don’t understand 
she had a future with him didn’t she?
a perfect hairdo I watch

the decade slip covered and stamped icon 
icon click for the processional double

double click and love is there 
so is hunter/warrior so silent 
braids of I chica chica 
boom chica boom

a bridge follows across your replacement 
the trees unequal to half your patterns 
the rest — bird — halved again for the additional  
lurking to be registered

love is fruit
stylized and wasted 
still hoping

it is day 2
you = female I 
the last head

the gummy swings the pain on her side still liquored over him so
much closer to the bitterness paling her two minutes’ worth 
philosophy of woe

a few yards away Seraphina ready for some more 
unwelcome wake up calls looking composed
the hooting pleases her

I stitch you stitch you a lie 11 times each way 
a wagering of heels pronouncing the road to hostage 
most thinking banished
 
hear Lord have mercy Lord the clock ticks the icons burst for encounter 
let’s not download all of the material too much snickering too many 
oops and ughs retail for less than the proposed eventual 
and Seraphina still at the window 
conditioning her sutures

suture my mind Lord and tell me a story

            the little boy saw a rose/saw a rose in the fields
            he neared the red rose/to pluck to take it home
            the rose was full of thorns/it plucked the little boy
            go home to mother boy/go home boy to mother

home — boy — little — plucked — saw mother and yeah! 
every creature of god is good and not to be refused but 
refuse old wives’ tales (bodily exercise) till He comes
attend to exhortation doctrine read read read only 
to ward God your buckler your hightower

                                    He delights in you

I leap over the wall and cross the troop lines 
I praise Him for I am of dam di di di di 
di di dam di di dam known to him 
ever since I was made in secret 
in the pink (neck) of my enemies

this is the day I’ve prayed for this unfamiliar  
softly sucking green to the red in the fields 
softly stitched to my inner plates 
and when they hear me —

            lay your life on a deck or lay tile

            or lay deck tile then dance
            dance the deck!

like divers’ weights I balance a palmful of ashes over my chest
my sins a scrim before me Asmahan (Oum Kulthoum) 
Fareed singing "smoke/ you should be smoked" 
searching the animal the ransom
not a novice lest lifted it falls
with a candle the animal

one luminary excuse 
crossing borders 
the ransom
                        one luminary crossing
  crossing

 

So as not to boil over

the front end of a virus wheels me in
like a pair of hue enabled jaws 
this town is fractured
thinking feel the proc
joints asinine

never lesser so as to there
under the covers 
differentiate
traces of a night I wore green 
manicured toes

so I hit hit a wooden machine
hit close the chance to heart
mouth closed till I find some
fabric frantic pink
column bowing

frantic as I did not need the machine
did not have to hit hit
my joints discounted keys
patterned after the electric
pumping so

I dump all columns and rows pumping
bowing to the plate passing me by
above green on yellow four
scratched corners up
jutted

            this is how the green of the town sets

a first grader gives me her lunch pail in which her mother has so carefully prepared a sandwich with the edges of bread cut off so it feels soft and pure like a piece of love I take to the classroom and swallow while the children are still playing in the yard well yeah this was hers but it was after lunch so a left-over and I do eat left-overs I also eat what I find like what I found the other day by the door of the sixth grade classroom at another school I subbed at sure it was on the ground but wrapped still so was mostly ok I grabbed it after looking both ways down the hallway so no one would see me then inside the classroom I swiftly lapped it all up (another time I ate something like ten pieces of candy from a huge bag of candies this one teacher had in his classroom now that was not left-over it was for the kids surely but the bag so full no one would notice I thought) I have been invisible that way many times after the fact —

 

There’s no such thing as seamstress

There’s no such thing as seamstress

fearing grain will not (to) cereal
plucked chicken landscape imposes

if you dressed better you’d be approached by quality people 
if you only dressed better

why does everyone leave a stain behind?

blue milestones need potting
to speak is sand gathering

everyone needs a stain for later

sister will soon stop mother 
watching wedding pictures 
reading the captions

there’s a burn behind every stain
there’s a verb behind the killer palm

she sniffs podiums
her lotioned waist flattened
flower is substitution

Amy at the top of the hill 
irresponsible in the ear

I too burn photos except for the eyes

hangman follows hangman
how does one approach a turtle?

there is a verb in front of every child’s dream

angel of death is silence 
is a girl just born

can you be site-specific?

drinking hot water may cause cancer 
fertility dances taper the throat

technology is milk

werde zu Hause davon zu berichten wissen is all my fault 
is my fault

do murderers look like murderers?

plucked chicken landscape imposes 
Amy’s hair causes the attic

you get it right away as seamstress
you get it right away

short overweight older female 
California waiting

hanging is needed somehow

who is that couple planted to the right  
who is the kid gloved master?

they can judge that

if you leave the premises you’re out
yoga tai-chi business mother background

the cicadas — how does one hear them?

mountain laurel — mock orange — dogwood
after the rain the trees dripping

to aim is a rumor

cicadas on the highway in liquid carbonic trucks
in retrospect

why does everyone leave a stain behind?
ask any thus person

she trekked shadows then twirled her baton

let’s break fruit
but I don’t want to derive
until the water futures itself

stay on sweetie don’t blink
the piano sips the opaque
sing me a member song

hug the trees for three days and that’s it

 

Use the river

you know how sake provides?
forget about it
use the river to think beyond
memory meanwhile will arrogate 
some faceted six feet under
interest

life soaked in time after death
still calls you laboratory animal
tell someone you were instead
chances bitten into
voiled lashes for sake
sinew behind

you know how to define lack
without silence telling more?
forget about it
prepare sake for Adam
chopped tree hatches bark
memory follows
what’s never been new
honking

as you know how to count yourself in
three simple leads widen
the shield remains
scruple they say 
when how why
stop the proc of sake without
mara is of Adam
Darva avrad
birthing

one mendicant town arrogated to 
I feed your sake 
dire space peeled
sake hype
attempting to escape you
know how that disperses rank
the stipple hopes for?
forget about it

lap lap the river bend brew
list your teeth as meanwhile
truth is missing itself
lapping for rank
I hear you
slovenly

Human Resources

Finally the printer just jig-sawed & Swiss-cheesed & otherwise minced & shredded 
each memo, resume, & refusal-of-credit letter to a stubble-mulch lettuce 
a hamster would love.

Something had to be done.

Debbie distracted the printer with fresh reams of paper. I dialed the company’s 
emergency hot line & whispered the secret code word.

Jesus.

When I hung up the phone the SWAT Team was there rappelling in a shadowy 
flux from the roof.

The printer sensed something was up. Ink & toner drooled from its face. 
Its digital readout was reading in tongues, flashing a seizure 
of stop & go.

“Debbie,” I said. “Take my hand.”

The SWAT Team swung through the windows like axes swift through the haze 
with their laser scopes trained. 

They outflanked it quick.

When they had the printer blindfolded & unplugged, the CO from IT 
lit a cigar. Two boys in the back went to work on the printer, 
one with some pliers, one with a pipe.

The CO shook his head grimly. “We’ve seen this type of printer before.”

 

Presidential Debates
            after Mike Huckabee

i decided
one way or the other
this hunt was about to be over

i could not stand any more 
the cold

and somehow
by the grace of God 
when i squeezed the trigger
my weatherby .300 mag

(the greatest gun I think 
ever made) 

did its work

somehow the angels 
took that bullet 
and took it right to the antelope

my hunt was over 
in a wonderful way

thanks to those angels 
that elk was dead

 

Reading Wallace Stevens in the Mall

Thrown into a ball of light I nearly was 
then some teenybopper jailbait 
pornographically sipping an electric green slurpee 
was wearing yoga pants that said 
bling-bling across the ass.  I couldn’t look 
without feeling a pervert uncle’s shame 
and I couldn’t not look, like that time in the country 
karaoke bar where Marty sang “A Day in the Life” 
so wickedly out of tune, winking at the big-haired ladies in front 
while their jug-eared cowboys shooting pool 
shot us dirty looks.  And because a thing 
need not have meaning, the point of vision and desire, 
yadda yadda yadda, 
I daydreamed of the teenybopper’s pants just falling off.   
And because the mind can never be satisfied, 
I rounded up a posse in my head—
Marty and the cowboys and their mentholated queens; 
the horny-sounding stupid-seeming teenyboppers in the mall 
who looked like Swedish Gangster Rappers.  
All of us together.  Ignorance 
our chief asset.  A democracy of the mind 
whistling through buckshot 
like an unthinking blackbird, flying off in the American night 
singing country songs like “Bubba Shot the Jukebox” 
and “Get Off the Stove Grandma 
You’re Too Old to Ride the Range.” Everything is complicated 
and depending on something else, like kidnapping 
The President and strapping him to a chair 
in a closet full of sensible ideas for once.  The mind is a crowd 
walking on mirrors.  The President’s dirty diapers 
say bling-bling across the ass.  The First Lady 
is a mentholated drag-queen.  
In the malls the slurpees are glowing.  Like plutonium.  
Weapons grade.

 

Uniliateralism

Say the President wants to make a complete thought. 
First he has to make ½ the thought.  
But before he can make ½ the thought he has to make a ¼ of the thought first. 
But before he can make a ¼ of the thought he has to make ⅛ of the thought and so on.  Every attempt he makes toward a complete thought shrinks the President’s thoughts

closer to no beginning or end.

A devastation of unknown magnitude

To the small star inside, we set up a makeshift rotation that gives us each a momentary relief. Watching is a rudimentary course of action, and we detail each thought as it appears. This is a gentle activity, despite the aggressiveness of the surround. A thought is the beginning of an opening, and we work diligently to trace its aperture, the outline of its extent. When he tells us he simply doesn’t know and is unable to track any origins, we recognize the rotation has failed. The small star inside is an obvious integer, but to this he has become blind.

Our job is simple but can lead to a devastation of unknown magnitude. The inconclusiveness of feelings that arise move with a heat and dynamism analogous to the surface of the sun. In the end, our documents amount to the need for a primary mother. One member of our party becomes obsolete.

 

At heart an altruist, ever

I think that it is much more likely we are evident because the climate requires that we be. But then this altitude was not meant for us. We seem to be in the business of siphoning abandoned furnaces of language for the service of breath. It may be more interesting from our point of view to observe the enigma as it appears in fully developed stop-motion photography. Experience shows that habeas corpus, altruistic statement that it seemed, would often turn its literal syntax into allegories with the intention of producing more strongly a sense of hesitation in its subjects. The journey of a macadamia nut, a quest by a cashew, a peanut’s progress. Being an American has again made something new, something that may not be true of temporary justice but is a basic commonplace in evolutionary theory.

 

Cheju Cyclo

a waterfall in brightness, or a negative funnel—
how you loved without reckoning.

a torn black flag flutters across your breast, 
mingles with the ashes blown back in a breeze. 
oh torrent, the ravenous waters below.

blue fade. 
still of a white sash, lifting.

and light traveled faster when we were young. 
and the future was a cloud formation in the sky. 
death is a red songbird hovering over that gorge—
it flies abruptly into the fall’s knowing spray.

the road reaches up to meet us. 
oh quickly, quickly, carry me home! 

 

the distant sun is not so distant at all

the place inside, bright thing star 
a common citizen in such tense array 
insight—the things we read that aren’t 
addressed to us at all

 

Red Tiger, Blue Sea

A figurative armament. 
Their shadows stretch along the Manchurian border. 
A dusty promenade. 
Disclose the missile casings staggered in the train. 
Disclose her foxy ways.

Bronze cast her outline 
on the factory floor. 
He left to get food and 
never returned.

Cut to her bright teeth  
set against the furnace glow. 
Dissolve.  
The casts, now a penury.

A series of waves wash across the Dalian shore.  
A broken soda bottle, half filled with sand. 
Sound of trucks rolling slowly in the dark.

End credits.  
The embassy.

 

what is intuitive

at your base, am I a homeless man 
the world is a practical container 
why do anything  
the reason is studied and intuitive 
oh poetry 
simple sting, this corruption 
oh body within the principle 
this intuitive principle 
arise in this demonstration,  
something like the FBI should go to jail


What Makes the Body Universal

Who does not bear the mark of the moment of birth?

The first burst of oxygen burning the lungs.
The first furling of fingers, a desperate grasp
            to stop the mad rush into loudness and light.
The nurse’s gloved and careful hands.

Weren’t we all originally oceanic?

The lukewarm bath a chance to relapse.
Cotton-wrapped sleep in sheets
            still blessed with the dryer’s heat.
The first steps braiding the mother tether.

Weren’t our feet meant for fertile ground?

Breathing, something the body does
            in self defense.
The same for holding close and letting go.
The craving of salt and the wide horizon.


ptomaine dance with Jumbo Bear

there was no other way to do it debouch become invisible :: I left a key under the toad’s frightful jaw was announced with zeal from the megaphone :: today’s lesson :: never begin the conversation by saying I’m hard :: I know what a kiss means sing karaoke at the ossuary you’ve not eaten you’ll be punished kiss me hard :: lurching attractant I wore a wool cap in the rain my hair increased the odds of filling your tag :: a password was given me by a man who died waiting for a limo I should never have left him I was forced to swallow oh little petri dish

 

Jumbo Bear inside the bob

free range 8 burners 2 ovens a variety of entry points :: you wanted his head both eyes X X Wundertone grease worked into fur :: listen the child king in the ground :: I rolled you like biscuits across Swan Front ear pressed to snow listen god damn you his slow heart under :: I was ashamed :: fire sprang from my heels hair threaded in the vireo’s nest I tore your lottery tag :: where did you go to spot and stalk boil my bite hide a spoon a stiff bristled brush a small knife :: how transcendent and loose I became later by the fire

 

A corn-fed beefswelling tempts Jumbo Bear

I wrote my name more than fifteen times which meant at least one person cropped up like fur in a plate of buttered beets :: I wanted to shave it nothing more than a device to get you into my mouth :: write amen at the end of your sentence please do not pronounce sentence sennence :: I patched the hole in my embouchure moist came through my warm machine :: at it again in the sink red carbolic Lifebuoy :: seriously if a woman is going to wash this often she should have her own scalpel

 

Jumbo Bear divines peril in a bucket of goat entrails

I welcomed the dryness your absence brought :: removed a Montana sized splinter from my squat bulk :: an owl flew past holding the limp body of a snowshoe hare :: your wife dangled polyps in her cup and I was on my belly again in the bed with the eyelet sheets :: there is dread in telling these stories little maps no control skin crashing against oozey clamor :: I wanted you to rise in the owl’s talons I wanted to hurt you :: the animal takes the animal knows how to secure food :: do you see now :: I could not fit any more in :: there is an arm that curls there is a spine but there is no mouth :: this is what you forgot in your hurry :: there is no mouth 


Gates to the Sky, but They Are Narrow

I.
I will not defile my face feigning optimism.
I will spread the board of my chest for the birds
coming from sea or desert and I will exhale
a bundle of living smoke. Then I will stop speaking.


II.
The heart was stubborn,
a boy with reckless hair
stumbling through night’s dilapidated branches.
The city had not yet become
a losing bet.
They usually shot hot lead between the eyes of
the horse that lost. My cramped fingers
did not obey me,
but reached for a net of emptiness
or a grave without a corpse.
I touched a hand made of pliable steel.
I did not fire.
The city was drowning 
in the sound of neighing.


III.
Where does sadness go, where do cigarettes
if the cafés disappear?
The small poets,
their foam,
and their impartial criticism,
and the stories suitable only for diaries of wretchedness…
Where will you establish you fabled kingdom, dear dream?
...............................
...............................
Cafés are more rooted here
than fingernails are in fingers.
So what is the harm in this?


IV.
The heart is a morsel of rare sponge.
It cannot shield itself from tremors 
coming at it from all directions.
The city had not yet become a raised sword
and despair is the widest of the sky’s narrow gates.


V.
I will not defile my face feigning optimism
to please the wife and the seven neighbors.
Sadness, the horse most likely to win,
met me on the road
and reached out his dark, veined hand to me.
I reached out my hand too
and we laughed together:
The city’s night is long
without those celestial bodies
made of phosphate and human flesh.
And the cafés, though they are pavilions
of bad poetry and impartial criticism
and the ever smoked cigarettes,
are low stones, rest places
for the birds coming from the dessert
or from the sea.


VI.
Amman smells of horses
and of the lone shirt hung in the widow’s wardrobe.
Amman smells like tired bodies.
I recall:
         Was the Arab Bank
         close to where the river shrank,
         close to dawn’s first spark?
         Was it far from my heart?
They begin to tremble those fingers pointing to the sky.
No . . . It was a summer whose fires would not be put out,
a time of collapse.


VII.
In a moment the scene takes shape:
leather bags, different sizes
and contents,
faces that go long
and cloud up,
features that take the shape of cramped muscles.
The train heads north or south,
no difference.
The long whistles
become a thin, agitated
thread.
And the scene folds upon itself.

Cities more distant than this dream,
this whistling will never reach you.

 

A Song and Three Questions

I.
Talk is silver,
poetry is gold,
and women are the ringing of both metals.
Poems
will be our songs from now on.
Let’s start then without borrowings or embellishments
and look at the living things between us
with an eye for praise.
Let the song
celebrate our contentedness
and those joys only shepherds know,
whose song and the smell of their armpits
have spread
among goat paths and scrub grass 
and who have disappeared never to return.


II.
Shall we blow into a silver trumpet?
But how can shepherds live without songs
and sheep
and desires?
No, we’ll sing,
How could there be shepherds without horses and violins
and wounds that never heal?


III.
Talk is silver,
poetry is gold,
and women are the ringing of both metals.
Poetry will be our songs from now on.
Let’s dedicate them
to those who will never return,
to the shepherds of freckled dawns,
to the chants dressed in wedding clothes,
to the women who loved the fiercest stags
and who preferred the Eros of copper,
spring grasses and buried wells,
falcons and night predators and the tiger of Arabia,
cymbals, bayonets, skiffs and saddles,
studded with the blood of the tribes,
the shouts of young lads yet to learn how to
tame their mares,
and the flight of whole tribes from open country
pulling hard at iron bits.

And even further than that—
broken flutes
and hollow bones 
will surprise us with three questions:
How much time has passed?
Have the old wounds healed?
What names are still in use?
How do we answer?
Will it be enough to say,
Talk is silver, poetry is gold
and women are the ringing of both metals
and poetry will be our language from now on?


Fellow shepherds, let’s dig into our bowls filled to the brim.
Let us begin our chants. 

the eighth remove

call me colony. 
my other littorals waiting to be. 
handle, bruise. 
and limbs into new kinds of clothes. 
back to back, belly to belly. 
a little romance of misery. 
it was their usual manner to remove in brutal 
           relief admissible narratives. 
and limns into what’s closed.

you are not an exception.

 

the ninth remove

sometimes the only weapon carried is the shape of our bodies and is invisible—indivisible. in detonation annihilates the body of its bearer. who carries with it the bodies of others. and sweat: the red pearl, the black pearl, the yellow pearl. who does not know their own ballistic desire? the body does not simply conceal a weapon; it is execution and mourning. as the body dies it becomes the mark to weep on. we go dangerously, hand in hand.

 

the tenth remove

to effect a first dying. to effect a second dying. to effect a third dying. to effect a fourth dying. to effect a fifth dying. to effect a sixth dying. to effect a seventh dying. to effect an eighth dying. to effect a ninth dying. to effect a tenth dying. no longer has an effect.

my heart was so full that I could not speak to them. so little do we prize common mercies when we have them to the full.

 

the eleventh remove

if i speak from my mouth only, it doesn’t mean my heart is silent. if i release its figures from this housed cage, who will set the discarded words on fire? not even you can remove my heart from its ancestral house. once, it touched the sand and became an island. it breathes out as i breathe in so that now its breathing is my breathing.

Apology for the Muse

They mean no harm.

Birds rummaging
branches become

shadows, your home.

 

Sunday Morning at the Virginia Zoo

I place all small tragedies inside 
the mouth of the cow.  Just behind
a row of flat teeth.  I peer at the tongue,
the poor sentinel of its four stomachs.
Emma swipes at the glazed muzzle.
I hold her back so, & we both giggle,
until she tries again, this time touching
the moist, pink nose.  She lets out a squeal.
I must be thankful to have what I have
before us, the animal shifting from its
bulk of muscled fur to an ambassador
of sadness, then joy again, reminding
how we have been marked for survival.

 

There Is an Edge to Each Image
                                                for Joseph Legaspi

Years after they were first set loose in Central Park,
the starlings disappear into silhouettes of gray hulls 
culled together by cranes in the sleepless shipyard.

If there is an edge to each image, the light will find it,
as it finds a woman gathering her things on a bench,
overlooking this bend in the Elizabeth.  Across

the river, an evening sun fills the façade of the naval 
hospital in Portsmouth with broad strokes of ochre. 
The building’s vacant windows seem to her a signal

of something lost, almost futile now, a memory tugging 
at her hand as if a small child.  When she remembers 
the moment, it is of her son, years ago, lifted onto

a gurney so that a young coreman could sew together 
a gash in the child’s foot.  It was the coreman’s first 
time.  His hands shook slightly as he threaded the eye

of the bright needle with coarse, black string.  Her son 
had been out roaming the neighboring woods when 
a glass shard angled just so in soft mud had chosen him. 

It would be this way forever.  Oblivious, the boy lay quietly 
& stared into one of the walls, gray surrounding them all,
while his mother, sitting close to him, forced herself

to become lost within the mending, within this wound.

From Weather Inventions

A broke-down cart for the field 
          to contain, a leave-it-be-ness,

                    a “gone back to nature” kind of song.

I’ll be all goose-
          feather-plucked if experience is

                    not this, but this

in sounding.  Slosh-work
          of rain: oxidation honeycombs

                    the surface. Strangeness in

moderation. Yes, please, 
          strangeness in some form. Overhead,

                    cloud interval, widening gap:

an abundance (not unless
          you’re in the thick of it).

                    I’m for the Tradition of Wonder.

“Extraordinary facts 
          teach us nothing.”

                    ~

I’m sorry to report     
pass

ropelike, conditions     
amazingly throughout

fit for/of      
microburst,

scud cloud      
incorrectly filler

flanking line of      
swell

completion 
(standard moves, reflections)

squall turned gust turned mesocyclonic

a link     
willing

                    ~

Condition Notes (2)

Open air, morning.

Lungfuls, gulps and the cold

precise meaning of nothing new.

I’ll be a pick to the string, a stake

to the pole. The leaves metallic

under the sun. A stripped-downness

that looks horrible, looks inadequate.

All resin earth-dry, slowed and kept

ambered in the vein. Clotted’s

not the word—stilted.

The going-ons elsewhere.  

                    ~

Dear Little Stormcloud,

An onward push, that’s the message I’m to send. The diamondback have their outcrop three days from you and you’re to wind along the riverbluffs with an eye east. There’ll be redstone and terror. Trees with scabby-white bark. Groundfox burrow near the rooted out fell. I’m not one to powder my words, so know this: the plains take on innocence, that’s their way of having you. Sun’s got wide arc, an expanse beyond thought. The grass-flats have been known to swirl, to switch names, and even there all animals look the same.  I’ll make my report, keep you on the books. You’re for the rough, know this. I give you up. You make do.
 
Yours—without the bitterly ushering—
Broken Feather

Higher Math

Take any number divided 
by the inverse square of pi 
to arrive at the GPA
you could have had in college

if you hadn’t spent every Thursday
buttoned to a keg of Leinenkugel

and trying to talk the pants off
Allison Umminger, or
visualize a parabola such that
each point on it corresponds

to the number of umbrellas 
on Old Orchard as the 4th of July 
 
approaches, the twittering 
waves, sand kicked into your face 
by that fat bully, the wind.  
(The algorithm for the sand’s

coarse, jittery glory stands 
elegantly outside this problem.) 

However, if x is any imaginary 
number and y is the sound 
of the orchestra tuning up then 
x + y finds Mozart stunned

in the birches listening to the blunt 
sadness of birdsong outside of Salzburg,

but given that possibility is the square 
of experience, if y is your dog, 
then x2 – y is the number of days 
it will take hunger to overcome

his devotion after you have torn apart
your heart and lie dead on the floor.

 

In the Town Called Cliché

The baker makes thirteen of everything
and the candlestick maker can’t

keep his double-wicked candles in stock
but the butcher is reduced to selling

the horse he rode in on.  The kids 
fall from the apple trees and roll

over the hill.  The laundress 
hangs three sheets from the roof

of the local pub as the village idiot 
pushes daisies down the street

in his cart.  His horse, of course, 
follows.  When the Pope came

to town and had to shit, he went
into the woods and was promptly

eaten by a bear, but, today, dogs 
and cats lie together in puddles of sun

after all the hard rains of spring,
and many hands work lightly

pitting bowls of cherries, devilishly 
diligent people, industrious as owls.

The only road out of town is paved 
with good intensions and the mayor

throws stones from the balcony of his house 
made of glass but dresses in the basement.

 

Night Herons

They come in the night, they do, to peck
out the eyes of bad children.  So be good,
my child, or you’ll wake up blind.

They come in the night while children are sleeping, 
they come in the night, they do, with a feathering 
of wings and their short, sharp beaks. 
The orange trees the vineyard the house.

In the small of the dark they come, they do, 
to step out of the truck with a blossom of guns 
into orange orchards and the faint hush, Oh, 
the Tigris running away to the south.  A father

and his son, they come in the night, they do, 
they step out of the truck, the headlights left
on.  The small cinder block house, orange trees 
whirled full of moths in the headlights left on.

They come in the night, they do, nosing for fish 
at the deep river’s edge, stabbing the water they see 
themselves in.  In the small of the dark he was told 
what to do.  In the small of the dark he listened. 

The orange trees the vineyard the house.  They come 
in the night, they do, to shoot the informers.  In the small 
of the night, in the headlights left on, a father steps from 
the truck, stands before his son and puts a bullet in his eye. 

They come in the night, they do, to peck
out the eyes of bad children.  So be good,
my child, or you’ll wake up blind.

 

This is a test of the emergency broadcast system:

Had this been a true emergency
there would have been the sound of elephants

in the falling rubble and bowing girders.
There would have been blare and clash,

ruckus and mortuary work. 
There would have been symphonic want and

multi-syllabic heartbreak, banner headlines 
and bandwagons.  There would have been smoke

and the lingering fires of all the speeches 
that reference this day.  Men weeping and women

who abandon their children.  Soldiers sent 
and garrisons, oil and tents, rifles black as

old grout.  There would have been roughing up.  
And electrodes.  And hoods. 

There would have been a man 
thrown from a helicopter, I am sure of it.

There would have been genuflecting and orchestras, 
counter-movements, petitions and roundups,

yes, and hoodlums rumbling through
the streets in vast, gassed-up militias

of the night.  There would have been
the illusion of control.  Fear of suitcases.

A ban on ball bearings.   A new architecture 
based on Kevlar and concrete and

the absence of windows that will not
be missed.  There would have been a boy

born this day who became the leader
of the resistance and he would have been

taken into a filling station bathroom and
shot in the head. There would have been

sniggering and something about a zoo.
Razor wire and tent camps.  Comparisons

that get shouted down.  Sealed roads 
that lead into tumbleweeds, the small clutch

at the roots as the wind takes them. 
There would have been loneliness and wicked

nostalgia.  In the mountains where 
no one will be allowed there would have been

an accumulation of snow like an unending 
series of predictions. There would have been caskets

and no witnesses.  A run on flags.   Marketing 
campaigns and PR.  There would have been

slogans and product placements, but there would
have been no warning.  Have a nice day.

Every Possible Blue
                        —Pierre Bonnard

That he would go back
after hours to retouch 
the ones hanging in the gallery—
he must have had an in 
with the guards—to get it righter
if never right, you’ve heard
before. How he’d revisit 
the light—bring it up 
or turn it down—just as I have 
returned to this morning 
all afternoon. They make me 
hungry, these two pears 
he must have hurried to paint
so she could eat. A few green ideas
about grapes. The apple 
shows off its high bald head. 
To be fascinated by fruit.
Not fruit, but light. Imperfect mirrors,
imitation mirrors. His broken
pinks and reds, green and 
yellow mottle, this dash of white—
no, light—no, canvas
showing through. I almost catch
my face there, looking back. 
I know this fruit. I’ve eaten it
all my life, though this basket’s 
new to me—a few brown twists 
of vine, uncertain transport,
but I’m moved. I’ll say that. 
Made to speak. Such 
tenderness, his abiding 
affection for anything touched
by light. And he needed
so little. A few pieces of fruit. 
A window. The sky
trying on every possible blue.

 

Facts about Islands 

1. The Glass Maker 
               —Heimaey

Ash fell all night on the houses like snow,
I wrote, but with too fine a brush—like a cook
who turns away from the stove to wipe

his hands and catches some passing fancy
(hmm, paprika) drifting across his clear mind.
Not ash, but tephra—soot, cinders and grit,

gravelly scum and grapefruit-sized chunks
of dull-red rock stuttered and plunked
across roofs as Mount Edfell erupted

and erupted. And not all night, but fifty-six nights
and days, tephra banged down.
Fifteen feet of it. The islanders nailed steel plates

over windows. Days when the wind
shifted to sea, they shoveled
off roofs. At night, they shoveled away

steaming drifts to reach front doors, uncover cars.
Then the lava spilled out. Shopkeepers
and farmers packed suitcases, loaded

wheelbarrows and rushed down to the boats
chugging off to the mainland.
Many never came back. Lava is like liquid

glass. As it moves it cools and forms, breaks
and reforms a skin that tinks
and crinkles. A jagged, razory glitter.

Seventy houses folded over, whooshed
into flame. Telephone poles toppled. Chimneys
exploded. China melted. “But the harbor

is everything. This is a fishing village.”
So a man aimed a hose at a ribbon of lava.
It hissed, crusted up glassy. Turned

left. People thought he was crazy
but they had maybe always thought that.
So they rigged up fire engines,

pumper ships, a zigzag of iron pipes
and hoses to blast icy seawater at the lava
for the next hundred and three days.

Their beards grew shaggy and white
with ice. But the lava flow darkened.
It slowed and turned, snaked

wide of the docks. Tell me, Magnus,
who was that man? “A physicist, actually.
Local, but trained in Copenhagen—a student

of Niels Bohr turned volcanologist.
That happens here. Twenty-five years later
and you know what? You can dig in that ash

and pull out hot stones. My wife bakes
steam bread in there. You can still see him around
town some afternoons. His name’s Thorbjorn.”


2. Deep in the In-Between 
               —Pingvellur

All this happened off the coast
of Iceland, which is itself
only an above-the-waves blip,
a knob on the Mid-Atlantic Ridge—
the spine between
two tectonic plates, which even now
are drifting away

from one another.
The island’s coming apart
at the seam. We walked along
the bottom of this crumbly,
scree-filled rift, deep in
the in-between. It grows
one centimeter wider each year.


3. The Cook’s Story 
               —Surtsey

This islet wasn’t here
until a vent in the ocean floor coughed up
lava, which exploded in cold

water, then cooled into a volcano
that broke sea-level: a pile of black
and brownish red magma, plus scocia—

that’s volcanic glass—once barren,
now colonized by fulmars
and guillemots, gulls looking for a layover

between their here and there,
and insects blown over (you can see
the other islands, if you look

hard, over there) and seeds left
by birds, or green bits of who-knows-what
that washed ashore

so that a few tough plants—
lichens, moss—got a toe-hold on whatever
specks of dirt the wind dropped in.

What sounds like a million years ago
happened in 1963. Equipment in Keflavik
picked up the first faint signs—

a green flash on a black screen, an uptick
on a seismograph out there.
But it was the cook aboard a trawler

wending its way around the Vestmann
Archipelago—wiping his hands,
glancing out a porthole, lost

in some now lost thought—who spotted
dark smoke out over the Atlantic.
What he and the captain thought

might be a boat on fire
was the ash plume from those underwater blasts,
which is to say it’s a work in progress—

all of this, everything—
Surtsey is shrinking,
the wind and waves are wearing

it away, it’s about half the size it once was
and our being here is just a blip
on some other, larger, mostly dark screen.

 

One Tradition

Mount Misen, when we made it, was fogged in 
up top. Rain would start and stop—
a storm on the way? The promised view

lost to us, the snack stand shuttered, locked. 
The wooden lookout was worn 
soft and gray on one side. We’d seen no one

hiking up, and no one when we got there. 
Not even the semi-wild monkeys 
we’d been warned not to feed

or they’d grow fat and lazy like us. 
No, a hundred feet below, a monk swept up 
outside a shrine. Even the dust

has its right place. But he was old and didn’t see us. 
Are we even here? Lily bought green tea 
in a tall plastic bottle from his self-serve cooler.

He kept sweeping. We kept climbing. 
Small stones and coins 
atop grave markers were reminders

the living can come and go. It was time 
to hurry. Time to look 
and leave. I almost forgot to set my stone

on the pile. Then Lily set hers on top. 
In one tradition, this might be 
the way to heaven. You climb a path that circles

and circles, then disappears 
into the fog. You could keep walking 
to see if that was right.

The Big Dry, Montana, 1985

Afternoon
Dust roostertails over the county road, blossoms like a dirt flower above the cottonwoods, rains down on our hands and faces as we splash through what’s left of the river.

Wind
Pours down the far hills and across the prairie.  Snaps the bunchgrass, fills the air with dust, the soap smell of sage.

Thunderstorm
Grandma’s hiding under the bed again.  Small fists of hail beat against the gravel and the wheat slowly folds on itself.

Heat
In the dark I kick the sheets from the bed, splay my sweating arms and legs.  Somewhere, a dog  raises his snout to the moon and howls.  
                                                                                    
Coyote
There’s another kill in the north pasture.  My brother and I study the gnawed haunches, the empty cave of gut.  But the head and shoulders are untouched and I kneel, take the lamb’s face in my hands.

Wind
Takes dew from the grass before anyone wakes.

Evening
I find an old length of 2x4 and step over the snare-caught rabbit.  I steady, aim, and swing the board hard across its skull.  It jumps and screams.  I never knew rabbits could scream.  I hit it again and again and through my tears don’t notice when it goes limp. 

Neighbor
They pull up a camper and move the oldest girl out there when the bedrooms fill up.  Her face is a wide, white moon.  Her hair straw.  She’s never been to school.  I walk the county road to the river, and she watches me.

River
In the shallow, stagnant pools that are left, carp flap and suck for air.  We wait until they’re dead, then wing rocks at them.  A spray of dry, shining scales.

Church
I set the rabbit in an old cage out back to keep it from the dog.  I wipe at my eyes and decide that if I can wash the blood out, I’ll skin it tomorrow and make a gift of the hide to the dark-haired girl who sits in the pew in front of us.

Wind
Father comes in from a day on the tractor, his neck and face blown raw.  Mother lays him down on the couch and rubs wool-wax into his skin.  My brother and I watch from the across the room.  She sings softly.  She is so tender with him.  He smiles up at her.  For a moment, they have forgotten us and everything else.

Night
Bright clot of stars in the bowl of sky.

Heat
Grandma hands me an ice cube to run over my forehead, my lips.  She says she’s never seen it like this before.  She pauses, says it again.

Coyote
Father brings three of them home in the bed of the truck.  My brother and I climb the wheel wells and dare each other to touch the fur, those claws, their blood and eyes.

Wind
The mountain’s on fire, the sun just a bright stone in a river of rippling smoke.  I breathe ash.

Thunderstorm
I wing my shirt over my head and run naked circles in the gravel.  Now I open my bird’s mouth wide to the sky.  It’s not much, but rain enough to cool the evening and wet the dust.

Neighbor
She slaps him hard on the head.  She yells some more and grabs him and turns him around and kicks him in the butt.  He falls down the porch steps, and I flinch.  She looks at me, asks if I want some too.  I say, No. 

Church
We’re always the last to leave.  We always have everything to pray for.

River
It’s just not there anymore.

Morning
I spit on the whetstone like my father taught me and sharpen a slender blade.  But when I go out back, the rabbit’s alive, hopping slowly around the cage, matted with dirt and blood.

 

The Stone Eater

She does not understand how the time just after 
her husband died, when she’d walk
crying for hours along the creek bank, 
was so good.  
                    It’s true she is alone and the fields
are fallow still, the blown dust of them 
in her eyes most of the time. But this spring 
the creek ran deep in its rocky bed,
and a cool wind licked the whole length of her 
and the valley. Now, in the evenings, as one 
the antelope rise on willow-thin limbs 
and delicately lip the tall grass. And soon
the strong young man who is her neighbor 
will climb into his tractor for the harvest, 
and the sun will be where it should in the sky 
and the moon in the night and the mouths of stars 
opening and opening:  Her heart 
and the world have found this usual way 
to go on.  
               Yet to remember that good pain 
of her long ago walks, she pulls a cold,
broken stone from the bottom of the creek 
and sets it on her tongue.

Autobiography 2

“begin at the earliest hour
is there a self”

At the corner of San Anton and Duende I hardly know
the edge of the sidewalk to street only a bare consonant

of the city’s frank sentence
how can I say my actual name when all I can manage is counting change

a cup of coffee I will not buy
every night the clouds argue in the sky for the right to be

the one who parts to reveal
the new month blank and disappearing day by day a new

misunderstanding of gone
how can you already if you have never yet been

the twin inside me arriving after departure
the crime of history quivering vessel

my also bones a manic making
who am I a man inside a bell inside someone else’s face

fingers that hold a skull or a pen
of course a swan could be an elephant a man could be on fire

coffee I didn’t drink pouring through time
inside a city a thousand vowels pronouncing themselves through

on every street corner a map with a thousand arrows
saying “you are here”

who are you dark-eyed and empty at the corner of San Anton and Duende
no body knows you hardly arriving and already gone

The Arrival Memory

The soul inside the soul wants to talk.
It posts itself a letter.  Close your eyes.  You are a young man
riding a ferry over a frozen river
through a city that bears the soft intention of steel.  You
move among its cinder blocks and windows,
and you attempt to rise—then a glistening fills the channel.
Stone wilts under the current. Inland, suburbs spin
out of balance & sand plugs your throat.  A voice that won’t
drift keeps naming the water, a blue afternoon.
There is no resolve.  By spring, were you to ask
the June hyacinth of that windy note, the blossom’s
long nights would be your first mercy. And then 
the moment passes. Something like a nerve in the wind, 
the velocity of train.  I’m kneeling.  
Something I will never identify brushes upside my rib. 

 

Spring Tattoo

There is a Xeroxed orchid in the snow deep garden
that does not waver           even as worm-yellow birds, 
thick as chenille, tear at its stalk.  Your chest sunk

in the ochre glare as a mute tumble of afterthought 
spread outward into the thick 
grasses beyond the town’s cubicle.                    I listened to you
 
though you were already dead.    Bobby pins 
clipped a dragonfly to your hair.  Gentle to the self

in the way of speech, was I in my invulnerable 
suit of appearance, like a bearsuit—flameproof & grizzled 
with the stench of old sweat & other lovers—sun glint
as history.  I am what guards you now

by waking you inside my flat stretch 
of mind that will not pass.   And my gray-gravel
wall you will blow against. Constraint, seasons
 
I have asked you in

in the shade white & blind.

What circular lie have I loved, 
with full lips of commitment.  When no one said

they would ever have me.  Inmates 
beautify the I-95 roadway stepping twice 
to expose tread-prints on an illuminated sheaf.

 

Emberiza citrinella

When you left, the landscape 
divided into a hypothesis 
I could not prove.  All spring 
a rough greening sallied

the pear orchard & birch branches 
streaked the slow river 
with reflection as if to barricade

the current.  Over & over 
I heard the Yellowhammer’s song 
as it slipped the June gorse bush.   A path 
of blanched grain splintered 
in the sun. I & I 
tattooed your trackmarks

on my inner forearm; at my elbow: a pothole 
moment in which a burr 
in the fetlock of my carriage horse 
gnarled deep into ligament
                                           & was cut away 
by the driver’s ripe blade.  Over & over 
love lessened field into thorn, translated 
the taste of tar 
for the kiss you drew.

 

A tangerine side dish

ritually held the clink of her amethyst ring. A halo 
of opposites pool in the distorted light.
Companion wavelengths double her eye
with brilliant lesions of gold. She wouldn’t be fully
asleep without being fully drowned. Her swan neck

is a constellation of creases and moles, freckles
and a paling puncture scar. The visible
horizon fades into belief. Sheets
stretch over her body and a thick air
moves her lung. The Small Cloud of Magellan

dims. How long
will she lie awake
as the night drifts past. Wondering.
An eclipsed sun
shimmers the ocean floor.

 

The Diction of Moths

The devil tracks you by windstorm 
through the Holland tunnel where 
you were slammed green by the rain; a bird 
                     against glass sky—no outward 
shine from the streets halo of signals.  Now

your throat is strung 
with sweated beads & a tooth-shaped-scar. Lover,

while making you an argument 
with his hand in the mirror 
his finger slipped 
in sync with the musical bell of a passing

ice cream truck. Was it the voice of something
whole?  Or a faint 
treble of weakness?  The cage of your neighbor’s
Cockatiel flung 
                                tinsel & fluff
across the orange shag when he broke 
the doorframe. Stupor & accused still 
his dank whisper spreads

through your sleeplessness.

                      ~

Syntax is a village street’s staccato 
of crumb & seed, the twisting 
leaves of the pin oak, the wind

pulsing in ones & ones . . .

Your voice gone.  The sun not yet

risen.  Dear one                     listen,

a field mouse burrows a rusted glade
the length of your body;
 
blossoms inhabit blossoms. 

Eventually, orchards thaw. Eventually sparrow 
release a harmonious crick 
through thick grasses.

In shades his messengers speak.

                      ~

Perhaps you will come back
as I study the greening shadow & the center

of the stamen which draws 
downward into dusk, into blue.  O, fragment

what crocus dreams you?  Once
I was told

the gray sky was summer breath.  Everywhere
I heard the collapse         the sigh       the sternum

welling 
a sleep in which you are still alive.  Miracles

do not occur.  But by the light, this letter,
whole erasures of air repeat
at random & again    again

you begin.

Anecdote of a Goat

There is one with slackened tie.
Beside him an old paper and a black umbrella.

He is dreaming of his lost love:

A goat with no horns, hooves, and hide.
With the voice of a saddened woman 
Her head buried in the wet corners of her blouse.

She is dreaming of a man with horns, hooves, and hides.
Beside him an old paper and an umbrella.

His neck-tie slackened, he too is lost in a dream.

One he’ll soon forget: of a man dreaming himself
Loving a goat desperate for a woman dreaming the man.

 

Ballad of the Drunk

I fell in love with a tree once. Swaying she
Giggled as I touched her,
Pulled down her branches and
Wiped sweat from her brow.

My! She was bleached white
With purple ears and burgundy eyes.

A fantastic tree.
Always naked. Unvined.
Gloriously transparent 
In the wind’s white arm.

Oh! To hear her laugh . . .

See how she stands: 
Robeless among the grass:

. . . Just to be naked beside her.
To lay hold and dance beside her.

(No, I haven’t had too much to drink.
No man can ever have too much to drink.)
            
. . . Just to give her from this gourd
And lead her past the shadows at my door.

 

Listening to Stones 
With Michelangelo

It is the rock itself that calls. 
Its non-voice beckoning at first,

Then echoing so loudly 
Your soul, silenced from solitude

And restless for communion,
Reaches for its forehead

And traces its quiet fingers
Across the pimpled eye brows,

The misshapen, slightly raised, nose,
The strong, dented, jaw-line.

But your restless soul won’t stop there.
It’ll invite the stone into the high

Arching bones of your chest,
Where it resides alone, and excited

It will talk a long time about the Bible
And Greek Mythology:

How Apollo should still be hugging 
His beloved tree, Daphne.

How Homer got it wrong,
Polyphemus should be buds with sirens.

How David should also be crucified
And Moses stoned to death:

Only after the stone begins to yawn
Does it offer tea laced with gin.

But the stone falls asleep after the first sip,
Starts snoring, and dreaming itself 

As a one-eyed woman, humming 
And bathing nude beside a river.

 

Rilke’s Last Poem

I have become a mirror.

That outside of me is reflected 
Fully within. Then, rearranged.

Apples ripened by the sun’s light, 
Oranges asleep beside the moon, 
Guavas whitened among the clouds,

Are here, within my heart. 
But the reflections shift and dance.

Clouds seep out of guavas.

Drunk from the sun, apples
Fling their green and red
Dresses to the ground.

And, peeling an orange, 
I untie from the moon
A bright yellow scarf.

Paco’s Tacos

How I wanted to open up a taco shop in Motown,
my American dream slice (damn, haven’t had good
sweet potato pie since being poor in Milwaukee
where Laverne & Shirley lived but no people of
color colored in the blankness).  Smokey Robinson
was too falsetto, too soft for when I got hard up
as a freshman who wanted to be both fresh and
a man.  A taco shop with The Supremes blasting
and a clientele of ex-junkies and James Baldwin
boys and a clean place for the locos who would
show up with tamales in their trunks they didn’t
sell to Detroit car slaves and Cuba Libres in their
soul.  How I wanted to push the Happy Days tables
aside and reveal a secret dancefloor where we all
danced alone, together, while The Temptations
and Junior Walker kept stirring the saxophone
so we were alive.  Let the Holy Dove learn shake-
your-bones hallelujahs.  Be in the foreign country 
of Paco’s Tacos where you get sunshine on a cloudy 
day and where Motown teaches us the real English.

 

Learning About “I”

Jesse Jackson came into our elementary
school and made us chant: I am somebody.
I try to see myself sitting on the classroom
floor: I.  Am.  Some.  Body.  I had a body.
“Some” was a harder concept.  Am is soy.
Yo soy alguien.  But it wasn’t about who
I was, where I lived.  I chanted with the others
and applauded at the end.  Then he left, and
we returned to reading aloud.  More words.
But not one I.  I am.  I am somebody.  Me.
How amazing, and now I know our school
was one of many visits that day, year, era.
But when young, I thought all the messages
heard were for me: from Jesse, the winds in
backyard trees, the shy light in my bedroom
where I read in English aloud to the walls
and began my work to not be anonymous.

 

James Brown As Prophet

I’d pray for James Brown to dance on American
Bandstand.  He always offered me a new America:
someone not blond, blue-eyed, someone shaking 
the walls of Jericho with his confident gyrations.
My prayers were translated by some distant power 
who I needed to defy to gain muscle tone, earn 
respectful scars and fete as my dearest enemy who
would become addicted to me.  James was a sex 
machine who was the opposite of a martyr and I’d 
dance along with him in my living room—suddenly 
fluent in the body’s truths, the ones hidden in my 
bones.  Soul music took the house apart, nail by 
nail as I unlearned what school taught me about
the oversoul.  To be possessed is to be unowned.

Recovering (2)

I misstate the word frangible,
able to be broken,
as sea-sponge, contents under
pressure, gel spilling
from a vitamin capsule,
the goodness leaking out—a waste,
but also the inverse, the capacity
to be penetrated by what 
is other, the capacity
to shift, mutate. The sea sponge,
which swallows mouth after
mouthful of salt, even as stung
thirsts for more, the sponge wrung
dry, the brittle after, on sand
the honeycomb husk, almost weightless
in the hand, the wind of 
this, which forms in the throat,
the need to keep speaking
even when not heard, the fracture
of such music, a note held
without pause, the old opera singer
trick of bending molecules,
nothing but a simple aria and
the glass breaks.

 

Perdurable

Perdurable\pur-DUR-uh-bul; pur-DYUR-\,adjective:
Very durable; lasting; continuing long.  From the Fr. Perdre: To lose.

I must love it for containing to 
lose so neatly, so completely, as if what
could be held was like the lily-pad
floating the surface—that lake of loss,
shimmer so limpid as it blindly reflects
frost-blue sky, shift of cloud.
Continuing long, which
means not forever, which means
your shoulder against my teeth—
ivory-gleam, crenellated country,
so dense and precariously inhabited.
A kind of cheat that the word speaks so
eloquently the loss it appears to forestall.
You are perdurable to me, cleft of
lip, fat tongue, desire which falls
and glosses like rain this dry land-
scape in which I learn daily what long
means, the flavor of it, the dust
of how and in what measure
you are lost. 

Kiss Fable

Yes, 
awash to know, 
coss, cuss, bury your word-German, that
                                 kisses bring again, bring again

full lilacs replied into the body, bring
cloud-in-billow, overture of single notes, flute’s deep inhale
and unleashed confetti to the whole body’s temperament.

And kiss to tell, 
you must differ yourself in the taste, ask light from breath-light.

This restoration of the O to the kingdom heart, Escher on his stairs,

afresh and fierce: have it of life, mouth-to-mouth novella
swelled in singing, — now 
open the wax seal of gate-paper dream
                      for the drop was let fall beside 
                      the seal, red as dominion-crown
                      atop a woman’s sex — this

 

double kiss, capable known, making it better, taking slow poison 
from wound, came as purse & liberty           

                      to make you oath again,
                      to make you vowel . . .

 

Umbrella Fable

                      Draw straws.

                      Once, breath held over our heads . . .

                      (Water-Fowl bones are buried under the house. Hear them breaking?)

To thine self, cast second stone while to song upon

us, set red & grey in the everyday past tense, while below last blue:

its shape opens, dead drunk mouth of a woman
      in grief, bow of light

upside-down. Yes: The black pirate ship ribs of angels are show for it, that
                               shelves-down around you, your parachute, will to believe,
fallen body. God of God

                        poppies the sky, free-divides, ghost or offense in roof-chatter.
                        Paraffin still burns mind-backwards,
                        a doubt of two, shadow and shade, lost syllable, giant squid-dome,

deity on its own, bat-minded in Babylon. A Time. Here, the universe

there, opens a celestial sound of water rushing into your

sleep room, lifting bed to ceiling, wood ladder’s top wrung of air,

                        the unfold-hour . . . Fuck you.

                        It will never stop raining.

 

Somnambulist Fable

Dear Kellianne:

Oarsmen, I mean, “with painted eye,” “ blue jay’s spade-tail”
toward undertow in dream, “bringer of that joy,” 
she had paramour of polar ice, first fresh ghost currency, 
clock rack yet anguish clinch

of language. Ye,
marry to smudge-smudge, “bloody blameful blade.”
                        Chance, roll out the carcass carpet cliffward, please . . .

of the fable place. Who’s forgotten who?

The almanac finds out its moonshine distance-cinch &
alliteration in the sleep, comes to doom
                                                every time, so you can’t ever
finish your damn sentence. So, so:

Skepticism’s Descartes slaves darkness,
and for nothing, flat-bodied bed bugs beneath the earth.
Little spider curtain catch.
Queen’s bench.

                        The walkabout began here, a history ago. Grabbing
                        at the air, your older brother ran down the stairs
                        to open the front door (would he see himself on the other side?)
                        in the oxide night, his eyes crushing the darkness, eyes
                        crushing blackberries as far back as childhood, 
                        looking & looking past you into his own etymology . . .

. . . Ice, oxygen.
How heroine overtones this story later, faltering face,
where she loses him. I mean sleigh-outcry, final guttural
all the sleepers in the house, even you, 
                                                (just a hair’s breath between )

would wake to.

 

Voyeur Hour: 10pm

                 Think too how one can imitate a man’s face without seeing one’s own in a mirror.                                                                                     —Wittgenstein

. . . this verb-intimate job of the tongue telling the mouth.

~

                        Language mimics, one name at a time. Looks
like someone you knew, wanted to know,
                                                     but couldn’t.

~

. . . where a view of others

will feel like . . . to throw the furniture down the stairs, cozy-up to parenthesis
                                              like . . . a deaf woman’s pause.

To keep your penny drop in the bucket-blue,
                                                     mirror shards under
your pillow so you can see your own escape, yes. Their escape.  For you are already

translation in another’s mouth.

~

Let them say you remember the rib cage was partially open,
twin birds like split wedding gowns falling sky-up.

Our desire, forever ringing the little bell attached to the tiny mirror
so it can catch a glimpse of its one wild eye,—

~

Yes,
too familiar to be strangers
we want to meet from the goodbye paragraph of sleep, too much
                                the ruling flesh caught in the act of itself, in motion, she
moved from behind the curtain,
                                prepositional, nearly perfect.

 

Voyeur Hour: 6pm

Today I followed a young couple in the street.
                                                I wanted them familiar, but not for long.

Gestures passed between us. Out of frame:
                                                their hands, their mouths, my loose hair.

There’s a soft vein at the ankle, one wrinkle above the lip like a Spanish accent over its vowel.


2: a prying observer who is usually seeking the sordid or the scandalous
                                                                         
~

Cross-over.
                        As if you already knew what I was doing. 
Sight taken. Image given. 
                        Story points to context, you know.

Just chance encounters
                                  I insist, because nothing happens otherwise.

In case I decide to become a smoker,

and the everlasting lack of sleep stares back like a new bruise . . .

~

Now she can be anything unrecognizable, a stopping place for feeling lost.

~

                        Dangerous to herself all summer.


Something that has already passed (password for fate) between them.

Prune Juice (a postscript)

Sucked the sticky pulp out of a plum.
Ended the succulent plum(p)ness.  Hacked the symbiosis code.
This dark purple deflated shape is your ineffectual rage.
Shriveled ovary.  Balloon animal
with its stomach pumped.  With its sputtering interface:
pppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppp

With its ravaged pucker,
a prune walks into a bar.
No a prune waddles on white-powdered legs,
fashioned from rubber tubing affixed to the bottom
of a glass specimen jar filled with an unidentified liquid.

So a prune waddles into a bar, asks,
“Is this preservation or exhibitionism?”
The bartender replies, “I guess that depends
on what you’re soaking in.”
The prune says, “Remember Hairy Buffalo?”

The prune has a speech impediment,
a celluloid lilt infecting its inflection.
The bartender hears, ‘Dismember Hairy Buffalo!’
The bartender hears a hybrid of “garnish” and “garish”.
The bartender pours another sipper shot to the pop cult
horror movie background noise of microwave popcorn popping: ppp

This is the glass-muffled plosion of withering
purple lips struggling to say something. 
This is the cockled witch-cackle
of balloon animals who unravel and shrink,
of breast implants who leak formaldehyde,
of little old ladies who have concave chests and taxidermied pets.

This is a hairy specimen jar diorama.
This is ovarian alcohol poisoning.
This is fruit corpse. Wattles into a jar.
This is ineffectual anti-wrinkle cream.
This is rubber witch pricked. White-powdered pop cult
dismemberment. A speech impediment walks into a breast implant. 

Oh I Don’t Know, Fit Me Already

We are seeking someone named Anthony. 
He should have good references, and be able

to distinguish. He should utilize brown eyes
and must not love cats, but the knowledge

that they’re evasive, somewhere always 
in the house, footing about and preying

upon each other in minor chords. Anthony’s 
cleanliness should be placed upon scales; however,

his patience for self-realization is no matter. 
He should understand that the oath is treason,

that he will be called upon to give up succinctness. 
Do you cook, Anthony? We cook.

We dabble in pulling up weeds and spending
nights without you. Once we went out late

and heard the girls say it was over, went back
inside, picked up our brooms and folded.

We can’t have that again, so we ask for you. 
We think about you and sit in silence some days

humming the tune. We say, he’s going the distance;
for it; to break our hearts; to complete puzzles.

Anthony, we hear you on the other end of the line,
like a throat cancer patient dying to make

a last batch of crank calls. We want to say relax, 
and stop the heaving. It’s not all that bad, really.

What’s so good about early? We should have a drink, get to 
know each other, what you’re looking for. Find out

that you’re drafting a recourse that reads, what, 
here’s my plan?

 

His Love Works the Dead Letter Office

When the letter is sent, he walks the length of the pacing room and waits for word. The night folds backward into the dimming house where the light is flicked on and the body accrues its memory. There is the laughing. The whole exaggerated wish of it going on and on, without end. The wiring of vessels under the skin. Later, the birds flutter in from the chimney. He finds their feathers have been gnarled by pirate birds who’ve intercepted and pillaged the words. All of their breath coming at his face in heaves, exalts. He doesn’t even know what she’s received.

 

A Stop at the Light Keepers’ Cemetery

You and I drove, lost for hours over
the purposefully unsmoothed 
dirt roads; I wasn’t angry
but your father’s car shook apart
in the heat and dust.

We read each name 
together, or I read them 
to you: sweating, staring 
at our ten dollar map. 
Their children beneath

our feet huddled deep
within the island clay. Ours
were still and unborn 
within me. Wives were there too;
and men who once showed others
how not to go.

Where Good Swimmers Drown

In small towns with one undertaker,
a grocer, six taverns,
and bottomless backwoods lakes,
where your five-and-dime locket sinks
down and down,
disappearing like a silver minnow,
and your red sandals too,
small as doll shoes,
smaller as you float farther out.

You don’t know what’s underneath
but you know how
fast, fast cars can fly, the souls
of farm boys getting trapped in bottles,
and god knows it feels good,
the wind picking up,
soft weeds braceleting your wrists,
the shoreline curved
into a smile you can remember, just.

 

How to Fall in Love

Start by leaving home. It’s not where the heart is,
but where the hard edge is. When ice begins
to ebb from shoreline
freeing mangy marsh grass,
leave.

And as you pick up speed, let your life arc out,
away from you.

Realize you don’t know where you’re going
and the weather changes often.
Steer between the stars
like songbirds coming back at night.
Listen to the whirring
of a thousand, thousand miles of dark.

Remember you are ancient,
that once you walked out of the sea
and in the trees became another thing.
Know you can again.

Become three kinds of lonely.

Light a torch.
Leave a trail of handprints on the walls.

Or start by staying put.
Be a whisper looking for a mouth: luna, luna, luna.
Sit underneath the porch light.
Eat walnuts and persimmons.
Spread your red-edged wings.
“Calling time” begins near midnight.

Be hungry. Want.

Women are locks. Men open them for doors.

 

Poem Without Us as We

That summer night I was an unturned field
you came to with your spade and hoe:

a bladed moon jigsawed the sky, bright pieces
falling through the trees:

your want, the maul that coppered me:

my wonder,
mercury that shivered in your hand:

each of us 100-proof,
all slurred and whiskeyed for the other:

oh, sweetie, you were blunt-force
trauma, hit-man, a pro:

it was all too brief:

my love went out like a light:

and you thought your tender bludgeoning
never left a scar.

 

Lunar

Wasn’t it lovely, under the New Flowers Opening Moon,
how I left the porch light on,
called you in, offered walnuts and persimmons?

And in the month of the Sunburn Moon, that lunatic
light tugging our tides, didn’t we try,
really try to cool our hot heels in the dazzling lake?

That was the two-fer month when a Blue Moon took us
by surprise and we went deep into
the pond of our dreams, too deep to come up for air.

I forget. Did resistance start under the Sturgeon Moon,
steeped in green and the frantic buzz 
of those who realize they won’t live forever?

Or was it in the Moon of Spider Webs on the Ground,
when a slow rot began in the trees,
and bruised clouds like the world leaned down on us?

No, it was in the Fall From Moon, that insane bowed sky,
the awful scrying stars. No dark side
but the one we imagined. Christ, all those bladed blues.

 

The End of Love

deep
among the flowers

back
to shadow

she tried, but 
weary

this night she flew away
and was left

In a room doubling as a hallway  
For Laura

I whisper to you a pillow away 
that the President is being taken care

of, and then our unscripted dreams 
struggling, black hungry

failures of hope, unbuttoned episodes
with the architecture of blindfolded men

where the wind is a wingless insect muscling a serenade 
through a nearby neighborhood; where the afternoons

spend themselves twice over and Love comes to a noisy boil; 
where children hold hands through changing seasons

and across borders before collapsing in one massive 
international seizure; where our old lovers marry,

breast-feed, and mow crooked lines behind white picket fences;
where your father rocks back and forth upon a Floridian wave,

the sun sleeping on his forehead; where both of us vote 
in full makeup, the crowd vanishing in mid-ovation.

My Rain

I vowed not to come back
until the world was clean
the day a mirror in which the coyote
could see the shortfalls
of his breath, the trees sucked
dry by desert mistletoe.

When they tried
to wake me I said no.
I meant, Leave me

snug in my own rain, I 
meant to say brain but liked
the way it came out or

didn’t because I only thought
and was too at home to make
a sound.  The greenest
butterfly was my best

hallucination.   It loved
bedtime, sports, and remorseful
children.  Yes, I’m afraid no one

will hear me.  Look for me.
Balance the budget or 
remember the last war. I swore
not to return, to look for heaven,
the whole, the state of enlightenment,

while the gray stems were lavender
and headless by January, the brittlebush,
the tub of garbage
javelina overturn at night,
full of eggs and grounds
and cans, the names
we give to time.

Home
                        —as hiking

1.
Though in theory night happens first to the sky, 
when you are idling worn boots

in a pond tucked just below the summit, 
when you are watching a beaver navigate

and chew, stroke and fell, when you 
are watching this still pool, this toothed creature,

these winded trees, then night is a thing that happens 
first behind your back. The sky thins

and sheens. Darkness rises 
into a valley scattered with stars,

                                 one of which you live in.


2. 
I get as far as the rise edging the yard; 
the trees behind whisper about jailbreaks, but
I sit and watch the bulk of dark

sliced by spill of yellow light, the window 
making of the night an architecture,  
his shadow patrolling the aquarium

the night creates. And overhead, the stars


3. 
have done what I have done, spent the day 
spinning and whirling beyond sight,
unhoused and absent—meaningless.

But now, the night complete, the stars and I 
assemble in our usual places, shining, as always, 
in a litany of fresh and ancient betrayals.

 

Huntley Meadows, May

Shadows angle 
across sunsilvered wood—
the quiet scratch

of sneakers on the curve 
of boardwalk, 
gray snake, arch

of gray log, the ice 
clear sky fallen—
tangled in pickerel rush

matting in a tepid breeze.
Salt filters upriver like 
the ache of distance

coming, and then 
already here. Our hands 
hold artifacts—our separate

instruments—his 
to bring them closer, 
mine to hold them still.

In shining marshgrass spikes, 
white bird—bentmetal 
rustlegs on slivered

stickwood—spreads 
inverse arch of rising 
wings, and in that thrust,

the words have lost 
their things. Referents 
dissolve in early air.

Egret he says, 
but that is not 
what I hear.

 

Winter

1.
It was winter; that much I remember.
The light—it came from everywhere
except maybe the sky.

What the sky spat down into the woods was
sharp—each piece of dust tucked,
enfolded in the crystal.

How the snow or rain requires
that desert heart, or nothing grows
nothing falls.


2.
It was not winter. If there had been
snow, I would have missed
the bones—they would have been

invisible in all that hard white light.


3.
It must have been winter or the opening—
low and on the wrist—would have bled. 
Cold like ether, like a cudgel

is one type of amputation.  I chose 
a long  splintered bone—head
like a fist, the entrywound prepared

the thrust, the way it fit—clean like crystal.
But its companions on the ground twitched
closer to order, closer to articulation,

closer to meaning.


4.
If it was not winter      
where did all the light arise?
Why does every single tree resemble bones?    

Why am I so cold?


5.
In this way I acquired a phantom limb—     No
Season?   —No   Beloved?   —No.   I merely 
reinforced the prison. Bone to bone I wed   

myself and when I wake alone, lost
in the trees, the tangled sky, lost       
in the fall of fractal edged flakes

I give the bones permission to ache      
for the ones separated, the ones
I left.  My hands splay and twitch

for remembered, absent flesh. In my chest
the message grows confused and I cannot tell 
what hurts: the cage I left,

the one I carry, or my idle bat-hung heart.

 

Maps

I buy by the dozen, stack next
to tea bags, dogfood, next to

nights of no sleep when,
unfurling a new one, I mark

the places I’ve lived and draw—
a westward, erratic line

like a live heart stuttering
into fibrillation; the line

from most north—ragged
Ws that doppler away

from winter, season of 
my belonging; the random

lines that almost assemble
into image, carnage:

the one that draws the witch,
the one like hands broken

from a body, the great fish,
worn hills, stalled flock

of birds at scatter, water
in a riffle, a rifle, a gun—

I’m leaving again.


father of no country. I can lie.

               New York, 1970

A small fire kindled in winter,

My mother held me,
A flame cradling pine.

Nurses wrapped me in cotton.
My father pointed the Mustang forward
Like a gun.

No one told my parents the sky knew
Next to nothing—
The first of many lies.

We drove toward a one-story house 
Near a frozen lake.

Below the ice, waves
Kept repeating themselves, like code.

The hills, tightening shawls,
Leaned in.

 

Pilgrim for rain

Songbirds in a bamboo garden, spring:
their return as much a resurrection as you could hope for.

In the Northwest, the bamboo is like everyone else:
transplanted.

Unlike most of us, it remembers to bow before wind.

In my sleep, I read in a book:
The literature of the proletariat has one theme: survival.

Rain in the grove, wet knives—

A voice said, looking at sparks of light on the leaves:
there is wisdom in that, if you know what to do with it.

How much per world. Is everything included.

The truth is we often settle for copies 
and you got the one in the picture.

In the upper provinces 
night will pull in soon and so begin undressing.

Just tell me you never posed for anyone or heard that question.

I cede reflections which are a stretch over time.
Did I forget myself and leave the sprinklers on.

The dolls and fields in which you leave them are always underneath.

We have all lost a continent or two 
and here bodies tend to pool.

I cannot accept flowers 
but will open this morning.

Poised, everything is looking up.

Now I see those impressions
and where they come from.

I worry about reaching other bodies and feeling
like that moment’s back. 
So many formalities.

Many scientists believe humans 
resent an interesting transition in time

and the explosion might leave a star.

O those above,
please don’t cloud this peak.

Pineapples tell me 
the season has come.

These days in all parts
the sky grasses over

and tree hides.
There is a movement

to drop it.
The ground we find 

has a memory.
Night never arrives

or files the rocks. 
The face goes for miles.

In each makeup is running.
The world over

many approach vanities 
with water glasses.

I like others
noticed.

He doesn’t believe in fate

He doesn’t believe in fate
I don’t either
I believe in a kiss between me and his
Moustache
The serpentine dance all night in the inky blackness
I am an absolutist, because I came to be in Bush’s time
Which is a time of good and evil, not fate

 

It happened when we were young

It happened when we were young
But we were never young
It happened before we fell in love
But we never fell in love
You turned your back to me
And there was a haze
No, it was a glow surrounding you
That I pierced through with my cape
Before you were young
You were an old man I cared for
While the sickness enveloped your brain
We couldn’t remember each other’s names
But it was so fun when we were surrounding each other
You were so fun when you got old

 

Who did you kiss?

Who did you kiss
What did you do
I had a dream
That you loved her better better
Than me
You always 
Love them better than me
You have never loved me
Since the day you met me
Outside the barn
You said you were happy
I wasn’t happy!
I wasn’t happy!
I was dreaming of things
We never were
Dark-haired man in South Carolina
In a hot tub
We never were that
I still see the person
I thought you were
And want him
For one night
I wanted him
Who are you
Who did you kiss
Why did you kiss me
Why did I kiss anything
Kissing
Is over
Blackness is
Done
Darkness is dread
Is Done
Darkness is gone forever
Love, no you are no love
Love, no you are no love
You are nothing
Blackness to dread
Horrible thing
That is ugly
Ugly at every angle
Ugly in every light of day

 

You are beautiful
(with Thom Donovan for Deadpan)

You are beautiful
But you are also heartbreak
Locked forever frozen in time
A cry I cannot get out
No matter how much I grease myself
With honey
Pink palette of grapefruit, the book on the shoulder
Of the room, the rose gardens
But I do not want you to be so
I want to be spilling forth with the acid yellow honey of the bees
O love, take me thusforth
Into your secret places
I will never travel
I will never wake
You are more than heartbreak, you know
In your fanciful suits and closing sighs
You are more than the shining blue room 
On the afternoon of the date, the cold bite
You are the hot breath too I take myself into
The hot red fruit I take myself into
The living breathing thing I take in, I want to
Be a watery nymph in a wooded grove
With you
I want to be a cloud so full of honey
That there is nothing left of me
Until I throw myself into the fire
And am contained forever
I will be contained forever, a thing of beauty
Forever
I will be that thing forever
I don’t want to be beautiful with you
I want to be an ugly, wretched, bleeding thing
Poring out on the windmills
I want to be the locked tiger they can’t lock up
Until it murders and then rages through the fields
Of wild grasses
I want to be so wild they can’t lock me up
Put fences around me to pen me in
I will be so full of fire that they won’t be able to extinguish me
Before the beauty comes I want to be so full of fire
That they can’t tell me from you, my wretched angel
Sweet animal, they locked us in this life
But I think we still have time before we have to get out of it

 

None of it matters

None of it matters, lost one
In the world
None of it matters
I went from water to waterfall
Green world to red world
I went from a world full of deer
To a world full of bears
The tissued world 
To a world that was off set
I set the curtains
They said, Set the curtains
So I set the curtains
I spent August in bed
In the same clothes
I kept on the same clothes
For ten weeks
I changed my outfits 
Five times a day
And no one listened
I got lost, I got found again
I was always lost
I will always be lost
I will never win at this game
I will never
Be the speaking thing they made me to be
I am not pronouns
Nor am I all of them
I am no I 
I wander
And it doesn’t matter
I stay the course
I am a star-filled night
Among the unforgivable
I live within a grey world
Within a pretty one
Within one they made for me
I help you find your books
I made the books
I made them, world I held within me
It was no help
I looked at the world with dark eyes
In front of a grey house
I was always lost
In that house
I was always lost, a zero
Am I lost for good?
Shoot I don’t know
Mathematical laundress
Of the forgotten egret
I am 
Glue me to ten sheets of paper
So that my skin sticks upon them
Write six blue letters upon my skin
I am all object
Throw me around the sky
And I will glisten, a red ball
Floating over buildings and boats
And the sun itself
Hang me on the moon
I am funny-shaped so far away
Stick me where the bunnies go
Let me lay there with them
And those awful ears upon me
Who knows within them
The secrets I will tell

Mick Jagger (World Tour, 2008)

He stands on stage
after spot-lit stage, yowling
with his rubber mouth.  If you
turn off the sound he’s
a ruminating bovine,
a baby’s face tasting his first 
sour orange or spitting
spooned oatmeal out.
Rugose cheeks and beef
jerky jowls, shrubby hair 
waxed, roughed up, arms 
slung dome-ward, twisted 
branches of a tough tree, knees 
stomped high as his sunken chest.  
Oddities aside, he’s a hybrid 
of stamina and slouch, 
tummy pooch, pouches under
his famous invasive rolling eyes.
He flutters like the pages
of a dirty book, doing 
the sombrero dance, rocking 
around the microphone’s
round black foot , one hand 
gripping the skinny metal rod, 
the other pumping its victory fist 
like he’s flushing a chain toilet.  
Old as the moon and sleek
as a puma circling the herd,
a slim redwood on one shaggy leg,
head in the clouds, arms full
of skinks, tree rats, black-capped
birds. The vein on his forehead
pops.  His hands drop into fists.
He bows like a beggar then rises
like a monarch.  Sir Mick,
our bony ruler. Jagger, slumping
off stage shining with sweat.
Oh please don’t die, not now,
not ever, not yet. 

 

On the Beach

I watched my friend rip his draft notice in half, then sprawl 
on the sand, the bottoms of his feet facing the waves, 
his head aimed at the seawall, his muscled arms flung 
north and south. 
                               The scribbled halves turned 
summersaults in the breeze. I watched them fly, 
torn wings flapping past an old woman’s sunflower hat, 
yellow linen petals draped around her wrinkled face,
between the wet legs of a thirsty dog 
lapping water from a spigot, past the bronzed lifeguard 
in his metal tower, downing a gritty ham sandwich, 
tearing off the crust, spitting out the fat, seagulls 
dive-bombing his perch.

                               I was a girl in a blue bikini 
who didn’t know my swimsuit was named 
after an atoll, how close the California coast was 
to Pearl Harbor, how far from the country 
he called Viet Nam.  I didn’t know then 
how hard a boy’s heart beats 
when he looks down at his hands. 

                               I searched his face like Braille, 
looking for some sign, a twitch of regret or relief.  
No mark, no scar or crease, flawed his perfect skin.
I didn’t know what was right.  Eyes closed lightly 
he seemed to sleep, his bleached hair splayed out, 
salt-rimmed and stiff, a ragged crown 
snagging the sun’s fierce light.

In Uniform

January is a communal myth of improvement undercut by the fine print of personal resolutions. And in this city of heavy boots and mittens drying fireside, any operation in distant sands seems to run smoothly compared to the severe complications of domestic demands. Just mark the affront of those shrapnel-edged snow banks outside of the bay window as predatory birds force their lurid limericks on the townsfolk tied with Odysseus to the mast of a television tower. Just count out the hours of aching dedication to the mission of distraction, the blue haze of crystal vases with wax flowers held in the embassies of waiting rooms where scarves choke the oak coat tree in the name of theology. Just imagine in it all the astounded ghosts of fashion’s ten-thousand abandoned jackets singing marching songs in this terrible territory, unaware of the seductive siren red dialogue of the cop drama in the living room that caused the whole town to look askance at the purpose of their shovels and decide that burial is nearly the same as clearing their pavement. Just know that through it all the winter hardens its clutch and there’s no room for improvement but though the goddess of a Caribbean cruise’s luxury and that this is the moment, deep in the sludge of rutted streets that we call psychology, where heroics from the armchair must break a leg on stage to prove that life at home can get dicey, especially when those suitors come calling for the bride that remains an ageless Penelope. January is a journey to betterment that remains tethered to the tatters of the preceding year’s stories of hardships. But by February the townsfolk will make a quilt of this travesty and feel guiltless as they disguise their lies in designer sheep’s wool and revise their desires with patriotic pedigrees that will fool the Cyclops of self long enough to lead to his demise, at least in theory.

 

Ghost Town

A jumble of haggard Victorian structures staggered down the jags of Cleopatra Hill since their inception in the 1880s, drawn back to the dead mines where labor organizing anarchists once cut deals with the earth and sympathetic officials before the copper they revealed turned into a series of treacherous heads and tails, a serpentine figure eating itself in the shadow of a little known civil war in the high desert of Arizona. Unsavory as they were to the saner folks standing peripheral to Jerome—once called “the wickedest town in the west”—they built the town into map-worthy dimensions with the suffocating canaries and self-made demolitions that are the trade of all in that dark business. But earning, earnestness and mad political convictions cannot exist altogether for long, so they were deported by a mob of usurping shopkeepers with shiny boot heels and an eye towards making the horizon a nicely gilded affair where there’s nothing to appeal.

Burned from the bowels outward, stripped into near nothingness and sold out inch by inch, the town sunk into itself, nearly abandoned over the years, until the 1960s drove distant grandchildren from California into fits of radical consciousness that rivaled the glossolalia of snake-wielding ministers in the heat of soul-altering tents. These children, breaking with authority for their cliff-hung utopia where freedom required the cheapest of rents, retook the town, bracing up old haunts with swirling pastels and sold far out art like blessed relics surrounded by haloed women with beads on their breasts and cacti in their hair. Now, years gone from hair grown long and songs grown longer on the radio that sunned the dial into darkness, this generation dons the finery of eccentric gentry and sells sepia tone postcards with intimations of saloon shootouts, riotous whorehouses and the Rolling Stones before Altamont with tax laws and copyrights intact to protect their commercial interests and karmic convictions lest a citizen gets too rowdy and tries to upset their good sense. Let it never be said that the steep, twisted streets of Jerome have ever questioned their identity in all of these years. Let it never be said that we’ve failed to detect the impression of its fingerprints on the stones hurled into the shadows of our valley as we seek to decipher the clouds overhead.

 

Runoff

1.
The dead standstill, stone-deaf;
they’re echo bound
on the bank where lanterns rust
while the old curses course below 
the cleft of rows 
left by Puget Sound’s smoking fish houses.

Yet summer persists in the topsoil 
squared and packed in shipping yards,
but rain-bowed further on
where regiments of roiling clouds
loose energy beyond our powers.


2.
Words flare and disappear,
obscured by the weather
to settle like soot behind bay windows 
where coffee pots clatter
and the smell of oil
lulls each interlocutor into dreams of outriggers.

And Georgia Bight’s ground frazzles
while Cape Fear Arch
armors the sharp notes of brass bells
for those who would listen
for hidden patterns
in the acidic deluge and brutal gale.


3.
Barrel fires, skree piles; matter moves
ice aged and dry eyed through time,
coalescing for a moment
and dwelling on the water shelf
like a hymnal of pale regret between worlds,
but we are bound to the teething mouth, 
milking the spine of night while miracles
levitate on hammocks of nails
behind our white houses
perpetually for sale.


4.
Shadows of storefronts handle the wind,
unwavering, hard witnesses
to the slough of human use
on the courthouse steps
where the crowd consumes larvae
in utter awe of the absence
of taste that would indicate carnage
has taken over the carnival tents
of their distractedness.


5.
Though breaking with custom is really the issue
to pursue at all costs,
we must attend to our laced regalia
among the desolate statuary of consolation
keeping the flood waters
from the foundations and fountain bases,
the manicured route
of knowledge within the forbidden oasis.

And the cotton-headed children might light 
candles in the round, 
calling for an old fashioned purging,
but epochs of pushing urgency into dim memory
have eaten the ground empty of the greenery
which indicates effected cause.


6.
Bided and then surely bygone,
slipped into the leaden runoff that links progress
to loss, we trudge around our monuments
rubbing beads of grainstone and marl raw,
breeding in our sediments of distress
as the tide curls back into blackness.

But this tract of rock is omnivorous 
in its monotones
and jumping off may not always fly
in the face of uncertain rain and windfall,
so we are stuck in the mud 
of our gaping wherewithal.


7.
Sublunary stone layers fill with fish bones
and the nets of generational recourse cough
into the curtains drawn like dust jackets
over treasured tomes of vespers.

And the circuits of our desires,
ever exploited and wayward,
cannot be measured or weighed by scales; 
the toiling fingers of the plotting and tipping hand,
the sleek pop of a hook out of a hungry mouth
where the waves of air and water
only exhume the land’s body
to study its collapsed arteries
in bits of blackened shale.

What Is Summoned

Or say you are fifteen and sitting on stone steps
beneath a denuded sky. 

What is the possible outcome? you ask, 
the crickets in the soybean fields a susurration, 
the hawks pinned beneath the clouds 
slowing each molecule.

Or you are standing at the edge of an abandoned factory
or before the reservoir with its truncated moonlit waves.

Or sitting on a bus or at a school desk 
or in Margaret Conkle’s basement
or in the high school bleachers or on a porch,

and your hands are unmoving in your lap.  You shift
inside yourself even while everything is still.

But something’s coming.  You sense a vague stuttering— 
even though the lights in the houses off North Street
are spent embers, even though the smoke 
from the refinery drifts weighty and alluvial
above the grain elevators, the churches, the bars—

and then there is a roiling quicksilver.  Listen: 
a radio stammers and squawks 
from an open window beyond the railroad tracks—

and something moves.  A brown river creeps into a basin. 
Snow falls.  Wind ripples as an inland prairie sea.
You pull back from the body as though to disappear
inside a fog, as though it is possible
for mist to seep inside your lungs and so become them.

And even the deer standing with drooped heads
beyond the cistern sense something in the air and look up.

 

Clemency

What I am trying to say, trying to say 
is that the wet clarinet reed and ligature,
the locked chain tethered to the bicycle wheel,
the Bach cantata, the gray wool sweater,
the green goose droppings on the fourth fairway,
the picture on the seventh page of the coffee table book
of the flightless kiwi bird with its long slender bill.
Or imagine the milky white fluid of cataracts,
or the moon glowing yellow above the sidewalk
where you first met.  Or then the walk along the river
that no longer recommends itself to old feet 
when the sky is wet and black and the trees 
are leaning toward you in the night.  It is the stutter 
of words, the wrong words, the old words,
the words that won’t fit against your tongue.
It is the wag and portent of each new hall of bones.
What I am trying to say is that the Mississippi hurricane
that flattened your aunt’s house, that tipped the cyclone fence,
that slung the straw so that the strands arrowed into the barn 
walls then stuck.  What I am trying to say is that the gamboling  
of young girls in yellow bonnets outside the church
on Elm Street on Easter.  Or then again another marriage 
sleeping like an old dog beneath the porch.  I can’t believe
that each new word won’t slip into another, like Chinese boxes,
each sudden syllable revealing another insubstantial truth.
And then again there are the crabapples that fall to the ground 
and then ferment.  What I am trying to say
is that it is not enough—not nearly—to know 
what you are knowing, or to lie down
in the grass and to roll the word bodice on your tongue.
What I am trying to say is that the old-fashioned grocery
paper bags that break open in the rain, the dizzying dots
dividing like amoebas in the Seurat painting,
the iridescent blue green of the mackerel, the smell
of cinnamon, the smoke stacks spewing white like a 
Stygian fog, the planetarium ceiling as the lights go out,
or the sound of the word chicory.  What I am trying
to say, trying to say is that someone needs to hold the lilacs
toward you in forgiveness, hold them toward, saying
                                                                                here.

 

Retirement

As if it were the year of the persiflageous 
dinner party—the Sebolts and the Kayles
and Fran and Danny—and not the summer 
of hurricanes, which swept along our coast 
to clean the wounds. And sometimes as I gazed 
at the foreshortened curvature of sand disappearing
beyond the pier, great clouds pillared (pilloried)
the sky like a naturalistic augury or occultation—
so I bought biscuits from the bakery and recalled
the momentous clouds in Le Bassin d'Argenteuil. 
Real clouds, of course, pale beside the memory 
of the coffee table book from Musée d'Orsay
we held in our laps. As a biscuit-colored sky
fell through the tired window and engulfed us.

 

Visiting the Graves of Strangers

Finally, after many years, we compared notes:

Once I watched a brown bat fly out of the empty
socket of the moon.

Once you climbed a sweetgum tree 
to be closer to the moon’s grave stillness.

I wish I could say we railed against 
the earth’s dead weight: after all, don’t we beseech
the heavens from the grave, shovelful by shovelful?

But in the end there was only the briefest history
of our lives: we were born, we suffered small indignities,
we walked amid the graves of strangers.

And each prayer we spoke turned out to be the same:

Let us carry the figs in our arms away from the withered tree.
Let us dissolve the sweetness of the flesh against our tongues.

Annealing

1.  Like a Blown Fuse

Cold so cold you feel like a crime scene—flashbulbed open into a tremulous lesion policed by bright yellow tape.

Reckless pinball and ricochet between a cracked, awful radiance and some stale, ash-stubbed sorrow—smoky as the remorse that skulks on the curb outside the bar around closing time while you flirt inside with disquietude.

Your friend calls to tell you she feels like blown fuse.  The two of you laugh and laugh.

Drifting in the limbo of a spent winter break, you go to a New Year’s Eve Do-Over Party two weeks into the new year: champagne at midnight, and ABBA at 3:00 a.m., singing “Take a Chance on Me.”  Everyone still standing dances—swivel of women's hips and knees, swaying hair, flushed laughter.

(This cracked radiance. Like a blown fuse.)

What would you do over if you could? What would you (or wouldn’t you) take back?


2.  Crackpot

Such an old school word, isn’t it?

How does it signify:         sprung a leak; 
                                     half-baked; 
                                     imperfected;
                                     (in a Juliet Binoche-y accent) damaged people are dangerous.

Emily Dickinson was called “half-crack’d.”

Anne Sexton’s stars were cracked when not rats.

Crackpoet.

That whip-like wallop of a word, crackpot, with its blistering sting of dismissive contempt. Everyone knows pots crack, but did they crack on their own, and if not, why didn’t someone use bubble wrap?  Why weren’t there Styrofoam peanuts?

Hairline fracture.  Stress fracture.  Greenstick fracture. Paint paddle fractured into splinters from striking your flesh in the basement.  Years later, a young woman away from home waits in the emergency room: concussion, black eye, ruptured eardrum.  Greenstick fracture.  The body resilient, but even the smallest hairline fracture crazes and crackles outward like a struck windshield until you are right back at the scene of the crime and the angry villagers are chasing you again with their sticks and flame.

Is it wrong, you want to know, for a cracked pot to thirst for water it can never hold?


3.  Handle With Care

Cold so cold it makes you feel see-through.  Breakable and delicate.  Harbor your crockery of bones in a packing crate full of old socks.

Sun’s cold high beam glaring everywhere—ricocheting off snow, stretching sky’s dome like a taut blue balloon, sluicing in through every window. You want to drink it in deep thirsty gulps, the cold of it numbing the back of your throat and throbbing your temples, the cold of it an erasing tide against the hot ache in your chest, the cold of it easing the tight muscular lump of things better left unsaid.

You promise yourself to stop worrying so much about feeling like a mollusk without its shell. Like an unpeeled grape.  Marred by unexpected grit.  That ungainliness of having been tuned too tightly, like the E-string on a violin pitched sharp.

Yesterday, slipperiness and flakes sifting anxiously through air.  Something of worth relentlessly ground down in a lapidary shop.  But then a soft plush of snow. Cool goose down comforter drawn up over everything to cover the trees’ dishabille.

All this clean cold light.  You’d like to dive right into its blindingly icy flashpoint.


4.  Raku

Ornament the bisqued vessel in stains and engobes, then lacquer it in a frit of silica and flux.  Thrust it to flame again to melt the glaze in the kiln’s crucible.  Let it smoke slowly in a reduction chamber—fiery surface scored by a nest of burning straw, leaves, paper.  Or douse it in cold water to capture the molten blazing and freeze the glaze.  Will it shatter?  Or will it craze up to, but not quite past, the point of fracture?

Very important is the potter’s attitude and involvement in the firing cycle. The intimacy and immediacy are never more deeply felt in any other ceramic process.

Each day, your lips touch the earthen rim again and again and over time, leave their faint imprint on that stopped flame, stilled hiss of ash and smoke—as day by day you drink the memory of that blaze, that near-rupture, that fall and bloom to icy water.

 

Chasing the Dragon
(Open letter in reply to pristinely blank SPAM mails I receive 
from nowhere¾without sender, subject line, or text).

Dear No One:

It is, of course, your absence that shapes your meaning, gives you compelling form . . . the very lack of you that calls forth this stream of slippery signifiers like treacherous winter sleet.

It is, of course, the pre-verbal tundra of you that makes you exactly who I want you to be.

On any given day, whose image do I project onto your white screen?

(Her shoulder, his hipbone, my __________; her navel, his eyebrow, my __________.)

How shall I cast you?  What roles do I assign?  Let me mask your facelessness and disguise you in simile, rehearse the choreography of gerunds, participles, infinitives with you.  Let me conjoin you in the lustrous, drumbeat tattoo of verbiage like plumage; garnish and modify you with the gleaming, silvered piercings of adjectives.

Of course, you’re not real.  But are you a ghost in my machine?

Does it even matter, since I’m so often accused of loving the characters I make up in my head more than the flesh-and-blood people who soon become impatient with my needful daydreaming?

( . . . the beloveds, the antagonists, the incessantly gossiping Greek chorus and extras clustered off to the side smoking Marlboro Lights and drinking their ubiquitous coffee . . . all of them so lovely and fucked up and strange . . .)

Just so you know, you are both everything and nothing to me.

           
Just so you know, perhaps I will wrap myself in the idea of you like a nebulous scarf made of fog when I stalk you again and again and again through these mist-filled streets at night.

 

Hegemony, Anemone, Chalcedony, Persephone

All last week, trees simultaneously released
entire branchfuls of leaves with exasperated sighs.
They came clattering down like breakfast cereal.
How does it feel, I wonder, to relinquish oneself
to winter in this way?  And is it the trees who cast off
their leaves, or do the leaves simply decide to let go?

Now, the first snowfall of the year.  Dry, crisp flakes 
seasoning down from the sky like many salt shakers
rhythmically shaken over the Missouri River Valley.
There’s a sound like a rustling of taffeta skirts, 
a shivery dusting of white coating sidewalks and lawns, 
the hoods and roofs of cars.  Like confectioner’s sugar, 
except for the blue undertone of sparkle thumbtacked 
in steely points underneath the haloes of streetlamps,
showering flinty sparks in the headlights of passing cars.

I discover a remnant of summer, a Dog Day Cicada,
in the mop bucket:  army-tank greens and blacks
immaculately preserved, glittering fretwork of wings,
two hind legs raised akimbo, frozen mid-stride.
Was it one of the same cicadas who came in August
to dementedly orbit my porch light like the metal cars
in a Tilt-A-Whirl ride from a small-town parking lot
carnival?  (Stung rain of clear metallic plinks ringing 
against my windows.)  Some landed on their backs 
and couldn’t right themselves, violently scraping 
and buzzing, a rattling clamor of wings, like berserk 
mechanical toys.  I’d find ribbed husks shucked
in the foliage, neat slits down the back like discarded
peel-and-eat shrimp shells—exact cast likenesses down
to the slender pincer feet and bulging, wide-set eyes.

It’s the time of year I’m drawn to pomegranates
at the grocery store:  so private, so mysteriously
self-contained, with their lovely flowered crowns,  
glittering garnet-colored seeds hidden inside
fleshy smiling dimples of pulp.  I wish I had
an entire basket.  I would stand on the sidewalk
in the snow, press them into the open palms
of beautiful women, saying remember . . . ?

It’s a good night to drink large steaming mugs
of pungent ginger tea, to eat hot and sour soup
and black pepper chicken.  A good night to wear
a Laplandish type of hat, with flappy ear flaps,
dangling pom-poms, and a soft fleece lining.
It’s a good night to daydream over the dictionary,
turning over the deliciously thin pages one by one— 
soft rustle of turning paper not unlike the sound
of snow outside—turning over the gently falling
sounds of the words in one’s mouth like cold, round
sweet grapes:  hegemony, anemone, chalcedony,
Persephone.  And later, in the dark, it will be a good
night to dream one’s lover has returned: to pull her
into the spooned curve of one’s body, finger
the delicate ridge of her navel, smell the wispy hairs
at the nape of her neck, whisper secrets in her ear:
Did you know . . . ?  I wish . . .  And then . . .

 

Hiroshima, Mon Amour

Spasmed jerk and gutter of Hiroshima newsreels unwinding inside a movie set in Hiroshima, where the actress in the movie plays an actress making a movie about Hiroshima and peace. A movie about (re)membering the (dis)membered.  A movie about the horror of forgetfulness.

It is here, inside this movie, where I will walk tonight, along black and white streets of borrowed time, framed within the movie set of a movie set; where brazen neon flickers numinous promises, fictional lovers first illuminated, then dowsed, like a candle pinched between thumb and forefinger.  Can you see me?  Will you follow?

(You’re destroying me / You’re good for me.)

Late-night cafe. Crisp pale beer. Shadows of moths small black hearts charred by the sudden flash and immolation of rice-paper lanterns. Insatiable koi mouthing the surface of the garden’s pond: like an agitation of insects against a lit window; like your face, illuminated by the quiet electric glow of your computer screen as you read; like my face, lit by my words as I write them to you.

Here, on the other side of your screen, inside the movie taking place within a movie about Hiroshima, about the illusion of love, about the illusion of not forgetting, I will fabricate this story rising like wild iris from a cancerous gourd of ash. I will tell you I love you.  I will promise never to forget. Here, at ground zero, it will all be true.

(She: Hiroshima was blanketed with flowers. There were cornflowers and gladiolas everywhere, and morning glories and day lilies that rose again from the ashes with an extraordinary vigor, quite unheard of for flowers till then. I didn’t make anything up.

He: You made it all up.)

Here, on the other side of your screen, by the River called Ota, which runs by the city of my Japanese ancestors, near the American occupation camp where my Japanese mother met my American father while typing like the sound of rain dropping, where clouds are slung low and dark like bruised sulky pansies, and glimpses of the sky behind are a surreal, too-bright Dali blue I will walk deeper, and deeper still, into the black-and-white interior of the narrative’s narrative.

 

Things That Are Filled with Grace

A centipede, waddling across one’s floor,
striped like fruit-stripe gum
with elegant tail wisps trailing behind—

perfected fluid 
marching of leg after regimented 
leg like the rippling

synchronicity of a pianist 
practicing Czerny 
exercises up and down the keyboard.

The giant holly- 
hocks that begin the day like round, café- 
au-lait bowls, with hand-

drawn lipstick-pink petals on the bottom 
and warm, sticky-sweet 
honeyed centers. They open themselves up

into dinner plates 
by noon with a precisely engineered 
choreography

of unfolding, the way collapsible 
metal vegetable 
steamers unfold themselves. A grasshopper

that flings itself up 
out of a patch of clover in measured 
cadences, with bright

flashes of marigold-yellow under- 
wing, and a shower 
of castanet-like clicking raining into

the air. A giant 
hulk of a beetle, clinging to the string 
of my porch light

like an overweight P. E. student 
hanging on gym ropes, who then, 
improbably, begins to maneuver

itself with clever 
dexterous footwork upside down and right- 
side up, then upside

down again—deftly plying the twirling 
string with the practiced 
muscular grace of a Cirque du Soleil

gymnast. The tiny 
pale green nymphs that mistake my bedside lamp 
for the moon, swirling

in clusters within the warm gold halo 
of light, then pausing 
to rest for a moment on the opened

pages of my book 
like uneasily shifting hieroglyphs 
that cast strange shadows,

causing me to misread things. And after all,
isn’t it really 
just such a delicate smidgin of life

that separates love 
from leave, fear from feat, spectacular 
from testicular,

and grace from grief? How is it that starfish 
are each perfected 
in their architectural proportions

to form the ratio 
of the Golden Section? Why do the leaves 
of the artichoke

map the same, mathematical sequence 
as pinecones, daisies, 
seed heads, and cauliflower; and who tells

snails or the chambered 
nautilus to initiate the in- 
finite, spiraling

logarithms of the Fibonacci 
series? How do bees 
know which egg to select for their new queen,

nurse bees ladling 
royal jelly over the larva once 
she hatches, sealing

shut the royal chamber with wafers spun 
from wax and silk? They 
let her slumber for seven days before

she’s reawakened: 
a lambent, ambered, incandescent bride 
and queen, obsessed

by a hard-wired and fearless desire to throw 
herself at the sun— 
fierce and elusive in her skyward flight.

Cai Guo-Qaing

I riveted light, prismed it through
the roofs and windows
of the white cars hung from the ceiling. 
I dreamed of munitions. I lived
my dreams out on paper, a paper
as big as science, and as heavy. I did
some work with perspective reversal,
thought how would this look
from ______. Then one day I said, No, 
no more tiger hunt, no more pontoon of red stars.
           But if there was a button 
I pushed it for I was an adept, and hoped
to be always. Instead I became this master.

The shaking was ecstatic, as all 
shaking is; the windows burst inward 
when the dragon smiled and blinked. In time 
it came to pass I had seen everything fire 
could show me and began to dream of darkness
and filled the white sky with darkness
and penned a gunpowder proposal
for inverted pyramids
on the surface of the holy moon. My specs
were genius but the backers balked, called
me dreamer. I said, Call me seeker, call me
penitent whose heart projects bursts and contrails
on the eggshell of the gallery wall. 
                                            All I wanted 
was darkness impenetrable by light or by fire, 
any intensity, but I knew I must 
myself be the author of that darkness. Only I, 
I believed (I suspected) could 
create what I could not surmount.

On the day I remembered that the fundamental,
irresolvable nature of paradox is in fact its truth
and purpose (at that not merely paradox’s but the whole 
world’s) 
I drew a deep breath and held it. I turned my back 
on explosions,
as well smoke and spirals of all kinds. 
                                                       At the helm
of a wrecked ship I was a neophyte again, 
a starter-out. I was happy
navigating the sunken boat
over a broken ocean of dishes and saints.

 

don’t torment

a sort of glorying

                         fingers in ecstasies
could hardly hold the wreck

got her tongue again               Well,
conscience reproached her loving; this
would be construed

she kept her heart on her knees
and was a yearning film 
                        the proudest
world gone casual

He worshipped till he saw grotesque wending
grieving, and hoping
on the threshold

face lit she disappeared the flower 
began to straw and balance nearer
nearer toward his pliant treasure
next his heart—or, possibly,

He hung till nightfall, as before

spirits were high

 

The Hunt of the Unicorn as Lover

Have yourself a volley of hard-traveled
love songs. Ill-use is pervasive, our special
wrath makes a climate. A book,
there’s just one, that I can read 
without finishing. The name of my ghost 
is the size of a planet. Conflux, buoyance, 
the moon over
and over. Trading kingdoms for coffee,
yours I guess, since I don’t have any. A bastion
of radiance as proof of the limit. The power
of names is supreme, is totemic. Be vast,
you damn dreamers, you failed fixers crumbling 
apart into sad dust on the oceanic lawn. A bridge 
draws its tenants like light does a candle. 
And because this cobalt life is scored 
by violence and trust, I swing freely
as if from a jungle gym rung and cherish 
days which are collages, cobble-jobs, nests 
of things forgotten, caught in the act 
of resurfacing—a portrait of the spirit 
half unearthed, mid-dredge.
Animals are magnetized to their reflections
like witch light unstrung from 
your wedding gown. The gift 
of lightning is always already a re-gift, 
period. In the pantheistic dream 
my name is fledgling.

 

Drowning Death of the Synaesthetic
for Amy McDaniel

It smelled like cinnamon
in something warm and sounded 
like the mail: 
bills 
being opened
                    in a rush.

 

Participant
for Jules Cohen

Paradise looks upon this charmed heart quarried 
to gratify the sweet convenience of desire: 
the living rock, the golden window, some girl.
Reverence was in vogue the year I chose my fortune.
Pictures ever fading into pictures ever fresh. 
The mirage is so deep and inclusive. Pure 
want turns to prayers in empty air. 
Pass between two worlds, participant. 
Weariness and wakefulness together.
One is often reminded of the sea on fire.


What Is an Antiphon

Ceiled in seven voices like a Scottish mass.  Prolation of the inevitable.  A small girl on a city square with a piece of chalk in her hand.  Either she makes a mark with it or not.

Ceiled by train, ceiled by city, ceiled by square.  A small girl in seven Scottish masses.

Egress by the train a small girl makes.  The chalk is a cliff used for writing, a sort of balloon in which the souls of drowned boys wander.  That drift, that illimitable wafting.  The cliffs close around the landscape like a wound.

Either she makes a mark with it or not:  chalk on skin, chalk on silk or gingham, chalk on flagstone.  Chalk on bark, chalk on grass.  Chalk on hair.  Chalk perhaps on chalk.

Ceiled with egress, the inevitable glistening of the eyes.  Clastic pinwheel sutra.  From her bed in the round wound of the abbey a small girl dreams of her life in the balloon.  She does not see the boys, who crowd toward and away from her, fearful, curious.

Each boy is a square city made of chalk.  To sing in such a city is to pray to a distance.

She thinks this is a kind of freedom, ceiled with the most excellent train the balloon makes in the great cut-glass oracle of the sky.  The inevitable intoxicant, mixed with bark & gall.

The train closes around the girl like a wound, like a high Scottish mass, like a bone bell.  The skin of it a velvet chain across the pastures.  The velvet is spun from the soft stomachs of bees.  The bees drink from the cliffs inside of which boys keep drowning.

Thus:  a belaying.  No space through which laughter may exclude.  There is a physical analogue to the absence of legend in landscape.  Either the train makes a mark with her or not.

 

What Is an Overtone

Skein of white wheat.  A bright treat.  No longer any need for windows in the palace.  No longer any palace in the noonday sun.

 

What Is Serialism

I’m afraid this is the film with the burning sheep in it.  Again.

 

What Is a Mordent

In the photos only the eyes of the horses were visible.  Haymote in the dustmow:  silk scavenger.  Bladed gnomon of each Greek night.

 

What Is an Oratorio

Throne.  Foil.  Joist.  Timbrel.  Indent.  Vine.  Advection.  Hook.  Reply.

 

What Is a Tenor

If astonishment then replica.  If porcelain than mourning.  If hero then metamorphosis.  If abstinence then flight.

Very well thank you.  If yucca then savvy then delight.

 

What Is Belcanto

Chiefly, a semiotic proposition.  As opposed to declamatory.  Any plowed field yields its treasure to a peasant concern.

 

What Is a Hemiola

I send you this Ingram, this tangram, this dancegram—O fortunate swashbuckler!  In the afterglow of midhusbandry indelible fractions hover.

Three Lotus Ponds

A boy had three lotus ponds: 
sky blue bloomed in one, sunrise pink in another, 
ivory white in the third.

He had three palaces: one for the cold
season, another for the hot season, another
for the rainy months. Leaning on carved 
sandalwood panels, he listened to musicians
starry-eyed women plucking strings.
Their slender white fingers shone in the mist.

One day, he left the palace for a walk.
He saw a wailing crowd by the Ganges,
a corpse on a funeral pyre.
As it burned he felt the change within him.

Years later
a bowl of water became the ocean.
He became the Buddha.

 

Evolution

A greedy merchant in China substituted powdered sugar
for baby formula. Thirty thousand infants 
died of malnutrition.

In the jungle each mother breast-feeds her young
to avoid predators tracking them 
through the smell of tiny feces.

The air’s minute vibrations awaken her:
the baby crying three rooms away.
Her breasts become fountains of milk.

She became a vegetarian after reading
a Harvard professor’s review of cannibalism 
in literature. It elaborated on a novel 
by a man about auctioning off a mother 
and her child, with the crowd
debating their qualities as meat.
 
Three miscarriages followed in two years.
At the first sign of this baby she resumed eating
chicken, lit incense in a Buddhist temple.
 
She dreams of humans evolving into
pure energy, having no need to eat living things.
The future beings absorb nutrients 
from the air, leaving behind the receding music
of their luminous wings.

Imaginary Letter: South Richmond, 1972

Dear Sister: A mean place here—cramped,
decrepit houses blacken under a snow

of factory soot. Where I work: The ex-enlisted men
double-dip pensions and civil service pay, compiling
pointless directives no one will read. My section’s lodged

in a warehouse from World War Two; 
for ceilings, surplus parachutes slung from the beams, 
and no one wants to think what’s breeding

in those grim silk clouds. Everyone sniffles, hawks.
God knows what I’m taking into this germ
of generation I’ve started—I dream two heads,

a missing foot. Imaginary sister, more invisible
than the baby to come—at least I watch my belly grow,

can see the sturdy thump on my flesh (maybe two feet
after all). But you are my younger who, my where I want to be.

(Grandmother’s dark hallway, where gardenia scent
can always take me: summer stillness thick as the petals

of the bloom in her cut-glass bowl, fragrance mixed
with odor of old wood. Let me be there, beginning.) Not here.

Not here. Even my morning drive hurts—gas stations
and cheap apartments sprouting in pastureland. I pass
An abandoned greenhouse in a field: broken glass,

spilled pots—though yesterday a vine had climbed
up through the roof and was tumbling orange
flowers over the side. No, not orange—vermilion.

So brilliant I must have daydreamed the color, the vine, 
while waiting for our two crossing gates (train track, 
then guardhouse) to lift and let me get on with the day.

 

Miriam beside the River

What I can see between the reeds:
eternity in narrow pillars of water and sun—
or the stillness between birth and the shout,

before rage fills and shatters
the air.  The little coracle, pitch-sealed,
barely rocks, a murmur of movement

that could go on through infinity,
like the steady small flares of pain up my cramped
thighs, like heartbeat and muffled breath—

before voices fill the river room, laughter
of women, splashing and song
and the husky cry begun inside the swaddling,

a woman’s bangled arms reaching
into the rushes—and I mustn’t weep
to witness history spanked and yowling into life.

Sebaceous a Poetics

little currency here,
edge of a surface ‘pataphysics once called

calculated fictions

lichen holds

to coffee

crows feet
witness rails twisting from monongha

(candles remain in drawers tonight)

baffled the
undertow, such places

epithelial, epiself the
whorl, self-regulation 

places, places

such as where 
the pigeons vanish

6.

bird flies straight

laces open tone open

fifth sentence a stroll through

central park then fifth

avenue curl of an empty february sycamore

wrote zhang er journalogging

correspond sentencing to now

hear tracing evident

steps back “home” echo chamber

music schubert’s trio steels a sill in february

desk at window a d a minor thought

flew off leaving this letter sharp feather


3.

alabaster sent

ence essence lessens

catastrophe apostrophe

missing remissing re

scind s/he said re wrote went

moved dyed re covered re

moved from premises

premise important later

capital letters arrive later

after ours waiting

end full stop period reseal

begin again seed inert

 

Noteology Liminal Behaviors 
to Thalia Field

the woman might be         mad
formula this trapeze

(A)          a clacking
               a clanking

obedient not is,


(B)          behind blinds zebra finches 
(C)          collect on a pain

(D) DIFF FUNCTION  reads (E) epitaph
(F) FUNCTION OF THE SIGN (enthrallment with le t t e r s)

(G)          grave is not a place
(H)           hands (I) igniting batons & glass circus orbs

               for                           get a        n
               alphabet——————————————-

obedient is:

               obsessions paddling
               spurious rivers

the woman might be         mad
contropasto when stoned

contra-  position

                ing

combinatorics

                O the raving
                O the ravens

STEALING VIRTUOUS seeds o the F
VIRTOUS IS STEALING friend,

her tight skin
wrapping bone
her best clothes
waiting a notice
her tightrope pulling
no farce

                no satire
                battalion of          [telephone] voices—NO

choir

 

If my hand an island and what

            idle chitchat does not pertain to the edge, the rail, the lip of crater.  Idle chitchat goes in one ear and sticks in that ear, stays there balled up with the wax and lint and cilia and water and incubating dangerous cells, the other ear does this as well, the two never meet when it comes to idle chitchat, the two never connect to the BRAIN either, yours, his, ours, oars, his, your stain reserved for

                                                            answerable

 

                                                                        questions

                                                                                    music

—Why is that so?  Is not this idle chitchat?
—This is idle chitchat; and yet it is not.  It would be but we are running out of, we

            are approaching the    [            ]       end of one and beginning of another, the end of one, the beginning of another.  So there are exemptions.  You can see if you were six hundred feet or taller the end of this ISLAND, that place where earth gives way to a parabolic aluminum structure, this structure to the bay, the bay to structure.  The bay.  The

                                                                        bay

 

                                                                            of

 

                                                                               exemptions

 

—Are you music?
—I am not music
—But if you were music, would you sound like            this?
—I would sound different; I could be music, I could close my eyes and become music, but

            your ears would bleed you would become deaf.  Here the ears are favored over all things they burn with intensity, their powers infinitely more acute.  Have you not recognized that burning with each crackle of things?

—I have
—Please tell me, as the eyes will grow dim and the question will soon be lost, what is it what, in this case, please, what is in your hand?

Petition

What god will catch me
when I’m down, when I’ve taken 
sufficient drink to reveal myself,
my weaknesses, when
my words are little
more than a blurring
of consonant and vowel?

I’m drunk on spring: 
branches of waxy leaves that
greet me at my driveway
like a family clutching
trays of sweets.
How can I sing of this?

If I cannot sing, then
make me mute.  Or lend me 
words, send me
the taste of another’s prayer,
cool as a coin
newly-minted on the tongue. 

 

Picasso’s Self Portrait in Blue Period, 1901

At twenty, already a haggard man, 
lean as a stray, someone 
I cross the street to avoid at night 
even as I notice         pink lips, his blue 
hollowed cheeks.  By this age, we’ve both lost 
friends we won’t recover.  He’s huddled 
in his navy coat, watching from 
room to room.  His grief, mine—
eyes two sunken tombs.

 

When I Garden

I’m quick to pick the bud
along with the weed, the night
my excuse

for my blunders.
In daylight, I face
accusatory veins and

uprooted hyacinth 
shoots.  The blameless 
talc of lavender

dusts the ivy leaves.  
Spring is ripped 
from tulips. 

I don’t mean to destroy 
both what I pluck by mistake
and what we reap.  I’ve no excuse

but that I dig in search of 
earth so deep it holds 
no bloom. 

I blindly divine 
the loam from which we’re made.  
I hope to quarry the clay

or, at least, to discover 
the dirt that holds my imprint
when I shape it with my hands.

 

Villanelle

I wanted to hear what the messengers heard.
Chest tight, breath in abeyance,  
I wasted my days as a slave to the word.

Flare or flag, no signal could distract me—the third
of three generations of women—seers, clairvoyants.
I wanted to hear what the messengers heard.

Tellers read the lines cutting my hand, absurd-
ly claimed, you’re too ambitious—evidence
I’d wasted my days as a slave to the word.

I waited:  patient, unperturbed—
disregarding static, the dark’s interference.
I wanted to hear what the messengers heard.

My backbone buckled, my speech slurred
while with paper and ink I remained convinced
I’d wasted my days as a slave to the word.

I heard not a sound, friend.  I returned to the world
empty-handed, drained of perseverance.
Wanting to hear what the messengers heard
I’d wasted my days as a slave to the word.

 

Pantoum

Fresh grief, when I find another poet
has died.  In my ignorance, I grieve
as though each loss is new, and I, a friend
at the graveside.  As we leave, they too leave.

Who has died?  In my ignorance, I grieve
for the old poets, who left me too soon
at the graveside.  As we leave, they too leave.
Weather-worn, world-weary.  Weakened, I croon

for the old poets, who left me too soon.
Between hardbacks, at libraries, I weep.
Weather-worn, world-weary, weakened:  I croon.
It’s as though I’ve woken from some great sleep

at libraries, between hardbacks, and I weep,
dusted by the dust of the everyday.
It’s as though I’ve woken from some great sleep
and long to return to it, betrayed—

dusted by the dust of the everyday, 
by what I learn, by those who raise me.
I long to return to them, betrayed
as I am:  I need their eyes to see.

By what I’ve learned, by those who raised me
I hope to do right—hardened, imperfect
as I am.  I need their eyes to see
clearly from this world into the next.

I hope to do right—hardened, imperfect—
I hear echoes in every sun-baked urn,
clearly, from this world into the next.
I let the words bear down and burn.

I hear echoes in every sun-baked urn
of fresh grief, when I find another poet.
I let their words bear down and burn
as though each loss is new, and I, a friend.

What Next

Speaking of oxygen, it’s everywhere, and thank heavens
all solids are visible, otherwise, abundant concussions.

Abracadabra, here to ________, the walloping sunlight
over debris fields and detention centers, bordellos

and burglar bars as x-d jet streams quadrangle wide, any-
color sky, below which x-number things drift on what

invisible hinges: newsprint unfurling in wind and car
crash imminent (birds in some flowering thicket do flicker),

each driver about to say ______ or _____ on cell phone
at the intersection of ________ and Complete This Sentence.

 

Flames on a Vessel

“Turns out Uruguay produces a fantastic blueberry.”
         —George W. Bush

Secreted in hollowed-out hardbacks,
mulch of their pages, letters confettied,

packed in space the shape of an “a,”
followed by a “b” and a “c,” etc.,

26 upright repeatedly sequentially
throughout many libraries, ransacked absences dammed,

as in detective novels, each book emptied
but not in the outline of gun or bottle.

Absurd, even obscene, this non-sequitur epigraph
and one-ended metaphor of shredded text

following a title a fiery signal of distress.
With what is a tortured body synonymous

I wonder, warm, reader whose attention drifts, watching
details of a landscape vanish under anonymizing snow. 

Blue Passport

In the top drawer, plastic wings. In the fruit bowl, an apple. On the kitchen table, grocery list, map.


I can’t help who I love or how, but one day you’ll lose interest and that will be the wing flaps folding, courtesy of Boeing. Let’s practice going through doors one body at a time.


In Singapore, my blue passport was my ticket out the doors. I had to leave you and your red passport behind for the day.


When we came home, it was not what anyone was expecting. That is to say, our moving through landscapes cleaned the spaces between us.


::           ::


The weather coupled with airplanes makes me nervous. An alphabetical list of cities I have landed in but never entered

Greensville
Guam
Hong Kong
Houston
Las Vegas
London	twice-baked potatoes
ice cream
color-coded taxis
bookstore owned by Fox News
yes, slot machines
rooms filled with smoke and paste
The carpets have me confused. Perhaps Cincinnati, Kansas City, Missoula or Lincoln. I can turn thirty in Narita, standing in line with my baggage.


It is easy to say I never stopped doing what I was doing in the time we were doing what we were doing together. But, I have lost the red thread once tied to my wrist, and you dropped it somewhere between Bombay VT and Grand Central. I say banana and I mean a fruit shipped for thousands of miles then gassed into ripeness.


I say woman and I mean the flesh I am bending for this duration of breath and re-breath.

 

March

I love her but I forget to turn the lights off.
The flies arrive and sometimes leave through the open window.
Spring has not yet come but previews play in the air. We are remembering allergies.
The cats perpetually leave silver hairs across the floor.
She never shuts the cupboard door and once I turned a flame on under an empty pot.

We rarely cook fish, but when they sweat in their bags, we put them on ice. “Fish hate
       plastic like ladies hate nylons,” says the woman who caught and sold us
       the snapper. The sun’s glare off the ocean waves lining the skin around her eyes.
I love her like the way we arch. Differently. Skills and gills.

Our third wheel: backlit screen, lit as molecule, as feather duster and mote—all the cyber
       at our fingers and tips.
When her guitar strings curl like ladybug wings, my sneakers hum along, neat as whiskey.
She forgets to push in her chair though the lamp’s not yet hung and the bathroom needs
       caulking.
“I have caulk” she says and I laugh at the homophone.
We laugh forward unless we recall filial piety—then we brush our tangled hair.

Before, or, after.
And her mother says, “Do you have the fathering instinct?”
The mobile spins ten times clockwise and ten times counterclockwise.

Some ladies do love nylons and I love her fishnet stockings and the floor will want to be
       swept again tomorrow.

 

Ode to My Desk
                             After John Yau

I was waiting nonchalant
for the old-school stars to shout
my name and in the meantime
Tila Tequila developed a rash.

What to do when your name’s ghost
appears between bits of da-
ta? A mouse click and hover—
I hover in the crystallized spaces

between avuncular and 
zeitgeist. My very merry 
toes, my very berry ears. 
The words on the calendar keep the num-

bers company. We all want 
company. The candles shout
Easy sophistication!
she said and we all agreed, in theory.

Who am I kidding? These are 
the days for masturbation
and organic cotton sheets.
Yes, who can fist? Rebuild if you want, O-

K for the floods and earth-
quakes and the birds who scrabble
in the newly laid sod. We
have forgotten our manners: which pronoun

to use, which fork to covet.
A truism, a tourist     
a journalist. And if the 
press warmed to us, we would bake them a cake

or maybe a loaf of whole 
wheat bread in all its terri-
fying goodness. Oil and salt
make the great American conundrum.

I ride the subway every 
day of my life and I have 
no idea how it runs. 
The men’s voices like the singing of earth-
worms, the lights glowing in-
candescent underground. If
I told this story backwards,
it would begin with the Rio Grande and

end with a girl who became 
famous for having the most 
friends on MySpace. But this po-
em does not look back—no regrets, yo. So—

they come, the Continental 
ladies with large square fur hats 
atop heads, and leather
gloves, and leather wallets full of Euros.

They leave clutching galaxies 
of shopping bags. Feverishly,
I salute the weak dollar—
an old doorway falling in on itself.

Oh, crackling windows, hear sleigh
bells, the horses on Fifth Ave.
centuries ago. I google 
nostalgia, distrust Wikipedia.

It is a sad story to 
keep telling. And the girl found 
her grandmother but the grand-
mother was a wolf, or a coyote.

Cross the desert, freeze frame, boul-
ders to water barely there
and when she finally emerged
she was as wrinkled as all the women

who have lost faith in rivers.
And what are they but borrowed
waters? Want it all, ladies 
and gents? Go find your own san serif truth.

 

Report

A room just departed. The corners of a conversation. Struck.

The soldier knew what would become of it; she had been in long enough.

A stone thrown into the sky. An apostrophe. Left out not done not done not acted on but abandoned not read aloud not at all read

but missing. Said-altered.

                                                                                            some things

                                                                                            were done

                                                                                            to a boy—


The first report marked well with the boy’s gore. This one gone. Into no file no drawer no military seal no stamp no stamp no paper stack.

She signed her name stamp stamped the second report thin and dry. Her still tongue as real as the blister burned boy skin as real as.

Red welt rest. Easy not easy. Carry silence thick with the welt of it.


                                                                                            —burn cigarettes burn palm                                                                                             ear shatter collarbone kick                                                                                             slash face burn matches                                                                                             burn stomach crack ribs                                                                                             kick puncture face burn                                                                                             cigarettes burn forearm                                                                                             thigh crack skull kick                                                                                             puncture stomach burn                                                                                             cigarettes burn palm ear                                                                                             shatter collarbone kick                                                                                             slash face burn matches                                                                                             burn stomach crack ribs                                                                                             kick puncture face burn                                                                                             cigarettes burn forearm                                                                                             thigh crack skull kick                                                                                             puncture stomach burn                                                                                             cigarettes burn palm slash                                                                                             ear face skull burn palm

There Was No Funeral

because death doesn’t stagger, it walks
on arched toes, hangs sheets
over mirrors,

because soon the house will fill with no one 
who saw you lift your skirt, wade 
into ether, 

because I will undress the bed, thread 
by thread,

because I still have business 
in this world. 

            Shirl Brunell (1934—2006)

 

Laudanum
            —after the Journal of Daniel Pilkins,  Blacksmith Apprentice, 1889

Sweet devil of my mouth, you strike me like slow lightning, 
drag ravaged twilight behind my eyes.  Sugar cube,

crepuscular angel, O my filthy licorice:  uncorked,
you’re the fiddle music of my youth, the cure

I took for broken bones when, dared, I scaled 
the church steeple and fell.  Laudanum,

the doctor said, lowering the spoon.   After that, 
my thumb was always under my hammer’s aim.  Cuts, bruises—

everything craved your tinctured kiss:  Mother’s long finger 
dipped in the yoke of the bottle, touched to my expectant tongue. 

Plastic Man

Walking home from the post office,
looking at the books of superhero stamps
I bought, I can’t help but think that there are 
people who know how to write off such expenses,
or at least have accountants who can,
people more capable than I am, people 
for whom life is an ever-expanding pleasure 
full of good returns on wise investments,
not the sort of blundering through debt 
and depression that even a friend of mine, 
mired in each and with no sign of escape, 
thinks ignoble and undeserving of relief. 
That’s life; it comes with the territory, 
he said last night, summing up the love 
that went rotten on him after just six years,
the bankruptcy he endured just to be alone,
then cursed the little phrase he’d turned.
We talked about these awful platitudes, 
how each year we come up with more 
though we don’t mean to say them  
and dislike being the sources of such 
banal, uninvestigative choruses.
It’s why we decided to write each other,
weekly, and on paper, to force a recon-
sideration of the words we let fill our lives. 
The talk then turned toward pleasure, 
to those we each still have. He went on about 
the comics of his youth, his boxes of them, 
and the hours he now spends rereading each.
It’s why I’m coming home with these stamps,
thinking my friend will appreciate 
the cheap fancy of the characters, their colors 
and ridiculous powers, indicated in bolts
and flashes around their hands and heads,
and all their good intentions. I think
I might hold back one book of stamps, 
for an investment of my own,
then think which hero I’d most want 
to keep me safe. Last night my friend
said something about Silver Surfer 
being the most existential of superheroes, 
comparing his own bargained-for solitude
to whatever deal the Surfer struck,
kept alive to herald the ends of other worlds,
so he’s out. Superman too much a cliché
in a world of clichés. Batman too willfully 
grim. Plastic Man I’ve never heard of, 
but I like the way the backs of his stamps 
describe him: reformed gangster 
turned elastic and relatively good, 
taking on a slapstick hero’s view of life, 
goofing down to reroute fires, bullets, 
the falling body of his doofus buddy,
Woozy Winks. Does he do relationships? 
What about taxes? Because it’s in these 
things that my friend and I need him most. 
It’s how his metaphor best serves, 
the red taffy of his body taking everything in, 
engaged beyond the breach of our capacities, 
able to expand, to hold and make right.

 

What to Call a Gathering of Flies

A corpse, my first thought, or a funeral,
for their tendency to hang around the dead.

Manslaughter, I thought next, like crows
bargaining a lesser charge, watching as

they shrouded a stretch of sidewalk along 18th, 
rerouting the pedestrians. A Baudelaire,

I thought. Or else an epidemic. A harbinger, 
I thought, because there seemed a message

in them and the contents of it bleak. 
Given the way people gathered to watch

the grainy cloud, some with jaws paused out, 
I thought Eucharist, sanctifying my first

impression. Or else an awe. Others kept 
back, as though to share the air with flies

was to put a hand in Acheron. And they 
did seem like something from the afterlife

or what would send you there. Black lung, 
then, for their vague, charcoaled heaving.

Though more something come down 
from heaven. A black hole, then. Perhaps

a void. Another person got it right 
when he said plague. A plague of flies.

The phrase spread from tongue to tongue, 
almost joyfully, almost sung, as though

there were something the flies could 
spare us from for calling out their name.

Utopia or/ memory = recall + oblivescene + reminescene

food does not necessarily follow 
willing to leave and stay away
above or below dreams
the eyes burn there
seam erasing itself
an alpha night 
a pipeline
for tribe

                     skirting maybe
                   disinherited

I have always been a card carrying member
when I got married I made my wife a card carrying member
when I had my boys I made them card carrying members
I don’t know what happened to you when you were fed
who holds power dictates
I am willing to receive

complex and fluid nationalities dictate
moors of lingering and you
bared vortex in it
morning and squirrels without
history (verbatim) love 
does not necessarily follow 
tous les savoirs du monde
I knew (peace) then had
to know in other ways
other and other
                               pipeline

never having had the actual virtual or ontic
one would not necessarily suppress 
repress amnesia

try the limen for size
retro or pro inhibi-
tion of what? 
but what?

who is producer of the work?
my habits of digression are set 
opacity embraces less ness
I have no time for rhyme
I am willing to receive 
margin & center warp
theory/poetry 
foreign to me
a door

how good is that which 
tongue political?

war does not necessarily follow a pipeline
forgetting what’s remembered 
theory/ self/ private
recall/ review 
the institutional sublime 
wave returning itself
prayer galaxy 
ground away
vacant
                      revised

to explain obviously and personally the crooked access to gill
transparency unearthed like the sun at midday
opaque to penetration because of discourse

          I am

a place of limitations 
remembering recovery 
the similarity of the new
questioning itself

            stimuli interfere

are they available or accessible
whose text is that at the doorway
taken away before given out
flower? passer-by? chain??

doodle-dee-doo-dum river
entrusted with a story

 

Astarte, Astarte

here to be sealed into flat filed cylinders 
a set of love numbers offers loss to
someone more powerless more the questioned
the other always a Goliath loss still contains
some thousand churches or dug up baths 
bulleted where they breathe from still
sinking deeper into superlatives

less powerless more the questioned  
as for the historical

the boulevard is lined up with golden wives of Loh

do they matter or is that just historical
making easier on him someone said
built against (for) the ages
in which time is a place
is space

Aya hides without
 
the emperor's horse to the tether
coitus medicini causae
coitus miseri cordiae

lost arts

then surfaces decaying a has been
as the body self substrates
coitus mortis

what time is it?

the body without self shining the night
body as object sated centuries of owners 
sad in the eyes where all things are sealed
matter of sunlight
survival

the weight and care of an arrow
sung light

the fate of sunlight one cannot share
or will or discuss

to let it be justified as it justifies
resurrected behind an altar 
burning the dwelling
the end is context

craving itself

where it hits
sanctified
need

appropriation kills otherwise 
all yet to be atom and photon 
still I germinate to Canaan
ancillary to auxiliary 
for lack there of
Aya turned 
Lakshmi

all those who came and went
what could they have been?
the down down I am wired to
tending to love against light 
a push past strike 
past war

and in doing so a mother tongue unveils
deferring

the sun goes down again 
the sacred as now for spring
anterior to anterior burning 
flat pools on colorless inclines

another alley turned diversion 
a wall for the sound corridor

 

Luminosity hit

the moon was so bright with the multitudinous say 
I could not unscramble the uber alles 
matter here is your puzzle
gravity gives
                    excuses

          monuments to other such

afterthought in love in peace
                   graced and willed

Amorzel’s Oroiel’s Daveithai’s Eeleth’s

only fiction wills away 
motherboard based mass 
luminosity pastoral 
outer layers meaning lesser
fainter as in longer
much longer

                   Cassandra needs

          lighter light
            longer hours

stories that do not apply
            truth before else

40% of children qualify for medical assistance but most don’t know it 
unless parents pursue this benefit the next generation will drive down
the nation's productivity

                                    mass then particle or wave
                                                     insurance abject

                                                will fly 
                                                                 fly

 

About the familial

you’re mine
wires on behalf of me
formations 
sinew free 
all about

song-like waves 
about tribes 
feeling the turf
I have always been
unsealed

message
techno fresh inside
outside blooms
bloomlets
here is one
 
market size crowd
less ritual
blooming 
careful the wire
no the wood

 

Somehow still

love technoes one way silly
image on all levels
yeahso matter
I’ll deny

Persephone spaces then
yours and mine 
for pomegranate
clusters

how germ evitable 
I will you then again
never a site between us
language

still a train sexy as ever
against our exhaustible tricks
resulting resulting
incidental

wish or sign for country
we must love not
willingly shifting 
protect

sanctions aside
the virtual % 
imagined 
real silly

There Is a Room Reserved for the Hopeless

The bright yellow pain
t is chipping

The inmates do not share the time of day
or even the most casual of glances.

We’ve less to say than you can imagine.

the clock is the book most often referred to
The Reader’s Digest books

may well be rigged.  We swallow pills
and eight cups of water
three square meals
from clock shaped plates
with hour and minute hands for fork and knife
to clatter a little too loudly

We observe the trolley enter at nine, twelve and five.
Turns are taken at bemoaning the chill
the food caught on the journey from a kitchen we’ve never seen.

Within the reserved room is the room to which our smoking 
is reserved.  Weeping is welcome everywhere.

I was told he was working on a book called E=9
the hopelessness of its completion
was grounds for his admission.

They’re hoping I’ll vacate soon.

 

Prayer

Wall-less, windowless, blind and confined.
This reminder of where we get off
is necessary.  Tonite, let me be the knife
not the knifed.  All the times I wanted to destroy
and had only sarcasm, I pay for in terror, little frankensteins,
I cannot control.  Dreams are carved into
our DNA, wait to arrest us like disease.

 

Sidewalk

Anger does not expire.
He looked at me like a receipt
for something rotting at the back of his fridge
or a map given to him as a menu.
As if I were a stain on his pants. 

I wanted the ocean to expand and swallow us.
I do not expand I do not swallow
like the stain on his pants
I’m excuse enough for replacement.
like the receipt I prove investment.
I’m a real keeper.

 

The Quick And Slow Lists

I made the painting quickly
I smoked the reward slowly.

I broke my heart quickly
I chewed my shadow slowly.

I ran slowly away 
from my sick room.

Where I mourned you quickly
for five years and counting.

I composed thank yous slowly
and typed them quickly

my stiff little fingers
complied, complied.

I walked to your house quickly
prayed for my very own

genius to pounce on me
ravage and confuse me,

make me impatient and wiry
enough to keep you.


Clothespins

                                                My mother is doing

laundry—snap of the bleached blue shirts
                            against her 
          breasts and thighs so when she is done she is

wet, evaporating, the legs pushed down so hard
                            on braided cotton
          (her teeth-marks visible,

runic), my father’s shirts, despite the iron,
                            clouds of steam,
                    keep the shape of their pinning.  The ones

I loved best squealed like jays or sparrows I had
                            harmed
          so I could pinch the nubs of callus

coming out of my hands and form
                            a second monstrous
          touching until she’d push the cage of laundry

another bed-length, and holler, “Quit!”
                            For her,
          the pins were solo dancers, leggy Juliet

Prowses, mad Shirley MacLaines,
                            she’d marvel at on Sunday nights,
          shushing us if we laughed too hard

against the gracefulness, or gnawed our pillows.
                            Snap 
          of the pedal pushers under

the wind-blown sun, the dangling stirrups.  Snap
                            of the elegant
          cotton blends.

                            Now they might as well
have held her with their torque,
                    the cut made and the spreader

widened, so her body was like the earth
                            coming apart
          to expose its under-dermis,

all those colored wires packed tight,
                            strapped and coiled.
          Except it was her heart.

A valve had failed. And so to keep her open,
                            the doctors used knives and clamps
          (their bag of clothespins),

a replacement animal valve on a tray beside them.
                            Blood leaking
          in spurts and jots, in increments of

medicine—the very spoonfuls my father aspirated
                            through a tiny 
          engine before he died to save his life.

The washer/dryer chugging the other side
                            of the wall, his
          shirts clean, pajamas clean.

Wife’s hands smelling of Tide or Cheer.
                                                        So when I look
          up (to where she is going, where

her husband has gone, scent
                            of apples and 
          lilac, if I believe such things), I don’t see

God but an unfinished basement
                            with the wires exposed so they 
          spark when she walks—

when I talk with her, listening for the shocks—
                            balancing the pumping out, her 
          arms purple, her

                                      remaining breast purple, 
where the clothespins bit her burning red in the night.

 

Choke-Hold, 1956

It must have been a
diamond in her
throat she kept

coughing—
as if her marriage
vows had trapped

some undigested
pocket of
air—some grit

a shoe had tracked
in, or sneaker,
ash from

a cigarette
carelessly flicked
(what she tells herself)—

so when the soup
is cold or
served too late, it is

this jewel that
catches, its strands
of carbon turning

to raw facet
in her breath.  Not
him, not  him.

 

Calla Lily

Only later did I realize the pressure thumb and fingers could bring to bear upon the muscular stem of breathing, so huge, like a column of steel in the wrestlers I loved, so when my own throat caved in I knew I was un-forged, green, like the stalk of a lily, my breath spilling in moist folds, spittle like pollen from a wind-shaken stamen, head in a vice.  God’s  voice  howling  in  the  honeyed  light.

 

My Knife

I keep a little Lear in my back

jeans pocket, a little sorrow

like a doll or jackknife

to slice away at storms

the tumbling skulls of hail

those bitter dice

or at those little winds that keep coming

out of the grass

with their seeds of silver

and nothingness

like faith being sucked out

of the earth, slipped back in

so I have to dig there to gnaw it out

I have to curse my left hand

the nub of thumb

I have to say my fingers

are the spirit scarves of grief

leashed to a hurt dog

its Cordelia heart softening

to whimper and yip

its Cordelia heart fountaining

in its chest like the moon

how cold the world is

on the blade of my knife

its tip snapped white

toothed, sharking the air

how cruel this little Lear

it wants the curved bite of blood

bubble and smear, the run

it wants the blood biting back

the knife taped to my last good hand

like a jailhouse shiv

which is not the world, but its skin

which is not the world, but its glove and dress

 

Twice this has happened:  I’m driving west into the evening’s monochromes when out of the marshes a blue heron struggles across the highway’s five lanes, so low it nearly hits me, makes me swerve.  The semi hauling ass behind me slamming its brakes, the cab dipping, all that forward-driven mass of the trailer buffaloing up and nearly smacking the bird from the sky.  And then the daylight streaming.  Emptiness streaming.  The leveling out of speed.  On my windshield:  five or six blisters of marsh.  How velocity touched what remained of the droplets’ glycerin, made them bleed.  Kinked strings picking up road grit.  Husks of heron.  Resurrection seeds.

Ardentia Verba

the ocean laps toward shore, but land puts nearly its whole 
body underwater as if to live there, where touch decides

we know nothing

each medusa an organ disguised as debris
the autocracy of the photon disperses, the diluted

light of the moon returns to the surface, gently tosses
tulle over a language of living tissue, the distinction

between animal and location all but illegible, organized sea 
water amasses at the edge of breath to feed—mass

ascension—radiant inkling of asterisms—in hydrostatic 
spirals deep below where the ocean hears the heart

of the earth churning, urchins spill their sperm & eggs 
while jellyfish light up the sensory bath—instruments

in the submersible bleached blue—mate & prey in sheer
incandescence, luminosity a lure, lines of stinging cells

billowing

 

Ode to Tupperware

Subtle courier of cabinets, refuge
for things with a penchant for decline,
how careful you are with the cut-open,
clapping for the whole echelon
of the kitchen, how you dip for eggs,
spread more open for casserole.
What sheer clarity of purpose, thin
grace, taking up no space, stacked
one inside the other like matryoshka,
revealing only diminishing
versions of one’s self.

Sure, you could kill us with 
hypersyntheticlean, but we study
your clarity closely, how your clear bark 
is a fawning palimpsest, ready to alter 
at the drop of a snack, unflinching 
under the backsides of leftovers—
prune purple, Spaghetti-O orange, dark 
chocolate, beet red you blush.

You have the awol allure of gel
icing, Craftmatics, so we drive 
suburban distances to arrive
at a party of you sprawled out
like toothsome ornaments on a fold-
out table in the living room. With deluxe 
crackers and waxed-paper cups of diet 
soda sucked under the skin, we finger 
your polymer backbones gently, pass 
them warm to one another. Sitting on plush
carpet, we each, in our own way, become
aroused, begin to want you,

the security you offer—
that our foodstuff may evermore be
safe from insects, small incapable
hands, an excess of air, each other.

Nature reveals itself in your geometry.
How you hold your breath, nearly 
implode with chilled sibilance.  You bring us 
vaguely together, radiate politesse. The sky 
churns.  The coleslaw quiets. You snap 
like all four car doors simultaneously, oath
the leftovers down.


Conceal the Heart, Dusted with Stains

Oh, hatred in the heart, oh ungenerous—that you did not love me enough . . . why did it take thirty years to find you here surrendered with your cruelty beside you: long limbs, soft hands, falsehood and such malice until metaphors, round and succulent in the mouth, decorative textures expressing concealment, response of the body, escape hatch to be folded into and what lives inside you now: delicate filigree along the doorpost where I cannot enter.

 

intoxicated with forgiveness/win pity, escape disgrace/now is the only darkness

i was left as part of the dying generation now: tattered in my mortal dress 
i left no monument to my insignificance 
save three books written in the small hours of my self 
pinned against the artifice of eternity 
 i moved toward my imaginary future a poison of deformities 
not trusting anyone 
cluttered with waste was the life i lived 

Skin

So you dropped my ass at the clinic, but still 
deny you’re involved in this mess?  I picked
at my fingers, bit the inside of my cheek
to get at the blood, to remember we’re all

just meat. Especially you. You fled our little
accident.  Well, fine.  Happy motoring, but now
that I know now what tiger’s in your tank, don’t go
around blaming me for the death of our futile

marriage. You lied. The proof is in the vial
Armando—handsome nurse, by the way, 
so your type—labeled carefully that day,
chatting breezily and flirting all the while.

I should put you two in touch. He’ll
help you with your crummy condom technique.
Of course, I can’t vouch that he’d be discreet
about your—err, status. Relax, you said. I’ll

be careful, you said. I keep remembering all
those blue jellyfish on the beach, how creepy
they looked—surrounding us. Listen, baby:
Get a life. Grow a spine. But please, don’t call.

 

Mud Garden

Scissor River’s cutbank’s no safe place 
to dig in, take a stand. Each spring 
it falls: wet cascades of stones & mud. 
Caving tunnels spew keening swallows, 
panicked plosives stammering from dirt—

                        ~

When the first doll washed up headless 
in the weeds, I knew I’d found my calling. Green stink 
slimed her neckhole. I sloshed her hollow body 
empty on a rock. Named her Miriam the Fair. 
I grew adept at finding more. What some call theft, 
I call a knack for reeling in the orphaned of this world.

                        ~

One night in Houston I found a boy 
who superglued toy soldiers to his Plymouth Duster. 
I thought his kind of love might save me 
from the mess of sex. He said I was his G.I. Joe. We kissed 
like pans banged together. Our limbs akimbo. 
His mother dressed him as a girl till he was eight . . .
I longed to keep his chipped tooth in my pocket.

                        ~

All the king’s horses and all the king’s men 
clomp over the drawbridge to fight
for an idea of honor. Back in the castle, 
women flutter, sculpt turrets of curls and glitter 
their cleavage in gowns that shimmer like dragonflies. 
Heads up, girls—Spies in the trees turn out to be boys 
who want not to have but to be . . .

                        ~

I met a lesbian who hated men, 
declared they should be herded up and shot. Like what 
we do for meat. How’s that? she leered, and flashed
a handgun from her handbag. Her bumper 
sticker blared Thelma and Louise LIVE! Mother always said
we’d reap what we sow, but I thought she meant sew,
and bent harder to my craft.                                               

                        ~

Needles and pins, needles and pins,
you won’t get the chance to see Mother again.

                        ~

A boy saves plastic bodies without cocks. 
The notion of his own is blurred. A car’s a kind of body 
dressed in metal: encrusted with soldiers, a fortress  
to climb inside like a coat of arms 
and legs and heads and torsos locked in place. 
Dear Pilot,   tell me:  where
do you touch yourself?

                        ~

Bottles buried upside down: 
green and amber bottoms shine like dull boys’ eyes.  
Pennies flattened on the tracks 
then strung from trees tinkle you will marry poor.  
Mary, Mary, quite contrary, what’s that
in your reliquary? —My babes. My fruitless ones.
Little arms all in a row.

 

Tearoom Song

Anyone could pick him out in a crowd:
the visible faggot, the obvious queer,
he sashays, flirts, makes gestures rude and loud.
He never sneaks; he’ll step right up and sneer
at those who bolt.  He’s fit: his fists punch air, 
his gym-toned biceps bulge and strain his black
T-shirt.  The businessman, the janitor,
the copy boy, the clerk: all know he’ll suck 
them off.  The men’s room’s full of eager cock:
they want to shut him up. They want his mouth.
A few will feign disgust, but they’ll be back.
Most men can’t help themselves.  But truth cuts both
ways: some hungers never end. And so again
he kneels to serve them all his slick attention.

Ununoctium (Uuo)
118

May I disappear in order that those things that I see may become perfect in their beauty from the very fact that they are no longer things that I see. 
—Simone Weil, from Gravity & Grace

the tree, an incessent trembling bridge
—Eileen Myles

for K

let go and allow this almost disappearing act
here we were, at Applebees discussing half-life

once i always said, it is easier to leave than to miss
a life had passed silvery white or grey

though curves of the madrona’s landscape attract me
waitresses swarmed in microseconds

it was (finally) your body that fit
and just swept it all away

death, my best friend, is an unmarked corner
a spill

twilight always a comfortable place for a welcome home
or child’s experiment

how pleasant to have yarrow and fuscia bloom
a human life passed. In stuffed little booths

here between the chattering chairs like white caps on sea
some seventy or so people just kept eating

i am surprised for no reason to weep
how would ancient tribes respond?

follow the evergreen trailmarkers 
bridging this life between.

 

Nitrogen (N) 
7

1.

some remarkable organisms
during chemical activity
receive sugar from sources
absorb free nitrogen,
and add elements 
to form something new.

this is called fixation

her greatgrandfather planted
clover in a field & harvested his 
Louisiana soil from unlimited supplies of sky
raising also a crop of fixation.

3.*

a tornado begins as a supercell

wind drives into the storm and starts to swirl.

her dreams, like these swirls, form funnels
her father a tornado from which she backs
away.

the funnel spins faster and faster
low pressure sucks in the air
just like she gasps herself awake.

4.

the chemistry of tornadoes itself
is not racialized, she thinks,
nor is the story of storms.

5.

but if her name had been beverly 
hills rather than katrina
we would have seen the atmospheric
changes of 1000 planes going in, 
she thinks,

rolls over and climbs to the edge

*        2. the atmosphere is 79% nitrogen.

 

Radon (Rn)
86

from greek a privitive and ergon work, noble or inert
without electron affinities, they tend to be selfish
just chalk it up to low chemical reactivity

discovered during the investigation of radium
it can be toxic like other radioactive substances
from greek a privitive and ergon work, noble or inert
 
it has been found that rays given off by the radioactive
substances are effective in controlling cancer’s disease
just chalk it up to low chemical reactivity

radon is the second leading cause of lung cancer after
cigarettes radon is used in the treatment of cancer
from greek a privitive and ergon work, noble or inert

how easy it is for an atom to gain electrons
the noble gases tend not to gain electrons at all
just chalk it up to low chemical reactivity

noble gases are used in blimps, toy balloons, and advertising signs
and as inert atmospheres would be undesirable 
from greek a privitive and ergon work, noble or inert
just chalk it up to low chemical reactivity

Shall We Dance
            For MP

This is for you, asleep, right now, curled up 
in your big bed, alone, turned 
away from the window facing the river, 
the taste of Spanish wine maybe 
somewhere in your mouth, you, 
who might never dream of bluefish scales
or apricots knocked about in buckets 
or shiny pianos locked away 
in bright lit rooms.  Wait. 
Let me slow down, pause 
a moment before I wish
one good reckless kiss toward 
you who won’t wake for a few hours 
more, rise, dress, and ride the dark
headed to no work you love.

Knowing how much you can’t stand 
this city when it rains, 
let me send you this first: a small 
torrent by surprise one night 
as you stand in flip flops on some curb
in Chinatown, drenched, your favorite
outfit slightly ruined and you,
with your hands thrown up
in disgust, laughing your ass off. I say, 
tomorrow let’s drink no wine, but dance 
on one of those west side piers. 
And like that one summer night 
the dock swayed beneath us 
and you clapped so hard 
you busted your watch
and bruised your palms, 
let the beats be free and deep. 
Let the air be cold. Let me, finally,
deliver to you three syllables 
that sound like the name of someone 
you can’t bring yourself to love so easily,
three small stones that, together, will 
make no sense, but will linger 
in the world you dream, a place 
where similar things rarely converge,
where, rather, they whisper 
to each  other across entire seas.

Let there never be entire seas 
between you and me
for long. And if it must be
that way, if some god decides
to lay down between me and you
one hundred submerged
provinces, let me seek out the closest 
shore one cold morning, looking out
from my own nation toward
the nation you are sleeping in
and listen, above the blare of the surf
trashing its million chandeliers, 
for something slight, and not quite
lost, like the sound of your sleeves 
passing across your wrists.

 

Graveyard Shift in Master Control

Every night, fifty small black-and-white cathode ray tubes
mired the Master Control Room in a lunar blue.
I was already a Rutgers flunky two times over, hired
to crank a couple knobs and tweak the late-hour
cablecast vectorscope: color burst, saturation, hue.
My only companion was Fred, a middle-aged Italian
from Long Island with glasses and a comb-over
who made good enough on his childhood piano lessons
to earn out of high school a spot at Manhattan Conservatory.
Once, he even composed a high mass for the Bishop of Lima.
But a commission by the biggest cathedral in Peru
doesn’t pay as good as leaving your wife and two-year-old
behind at home for nine hours to gawk at a monitor
in a room buzzing with bad laugh-tracks and muted game shows.
At 19, I wanted to produce hit records, which meant I was on a quest 
to uncover all the mysteries of music, as if that knowledge might free
all the latent platinum and gold of my imagination, 
as if the imagination needed no more than to reach back into time
and seize some pure intention, some melody hidden 
in the soul of a baby boy before he’s ever wacked on the ass, 
before he takes into the small miracle of his lungs 
the first antiseptic whiff of air made human by his mother’s 
tears and shit and nine months of shared blood. 
Of course, the only mystery of music was that it begins and ends
in silence, and that its silence is so perfectly misunderstood. 
Because I believed silence was the source of all 
tension and resolution, was the purest thing in song, and because
I had yet to sit beside someone whom I loved with all my heart
and experience the absolute stillness of her body, I couldn’t 
comprehend how exact something could be in its disregard. 
Some might say all the sad magic to half-a-million
homes in Central Jersey burned in master control, for twenty-four 
hours, every talk-show re-run, post-game highlight, newscast
bombast, and final Casablanca kiss. We were hardly men enough
to ignore such magic, except for one night, when Fred
turned to me, breaking our usual small-talk formalities
(he knew as much about the Knicks’ first-round draft pick
as I did about second-species counterpoint). I’ve got something
to show you, Fred said. He pulled from his bag what looked like
a rolled-up canvas in that cramped, dim-lit boot-box of a room.
By the way he spread it out on the scratched-up, coffee-
stained console, it seemed a document just short of holy. An original 
Philip Glass manuscript, he explained, with no reverence or rapture. 
He ran his fingers along mad clusters of notes rising then falling, 
some long cadences yoked together for measures by a slender tie 
then disappearing. The machinery of the room 
clunked and chugged along, and though I was a snot-nose suburban 
bumpkin with ambitions of platinum and top-forty, 
Fred tried to explain to me some of those musical passages, 
as a scientist in a lab might lower his voice and simplify his speech, 
recounting what it’s like to watch a rare cereus bloom 
or hear some dying species of mostly mute bird cry. 
I probably asked some dumb question about accidentals 
or diminished fifths, but he just smiled, the slim timbre 
and spare rhythm in his voice trailing off in its matter-of-fact
delight. And soon we became so utterly calm.
If someone walked in, they might have thought 
we’d just finished some long argument or prayer. 
The cassettes jogged to their cue points. The columns of decks 
chirped on. We barely heard the capstans’ whine. By shift’s end, 
Fred and I parted, having shared a music we could carry home
in our bodies, astounded and soundless and free.

 

Shrike

1.
Fact: the shrike is a small bird
that impales its prey
on thorns and steel barbs. 
There are no shrikes 
in the streets of New Jersey. 
My friend Hector, 
dodging the cops one night,  
took a running start
to scale a ten-foot fence
in the pitch-black 
of an alley in Newark, 
a city of murdered lords. 
He skewered his hand 
onto the fence’s 
longest iron picket
just as the flashlights
pivoted toward him.
If you’re going to be 
a good thief, he once told me, 
you have to learn to make 
perfect sense. Fact: a spark
is pure light, plasmic, 
lost in a flash amid an alley’s
howling light. You don’t have 
a lifetime, Hector said, 
to learn to disappear.

2.
The first time I watched 
my uncle disappear, 
he did so into a field 
of sugar cane. The tip of his bolo 
went first. The hilt followed, 
his dark arms, his hat. The last 
I saw of him were his heels. 
In barangay Santo Tomás,
my uncles don’t dream
of hell. They say, when you die, 
you’ll hear, if you’re lucky,
the chack of a few birds 
beside you weeping. In hell,
the shrikes lift what’s left 
of the smallest bones 
of your hand, carry them 
one by one to this low-wage 
hack who spends his infernal days 
assembling salamander tooth
and gecko spine. Remember: 
it was the god of steel who seized
the tongues of a hundred 
senators and pimps 
to fashion from his bright pink 
spoils the first slick 
sinews of the shrike, dumb
thug, songless passerine.

3. 
Fact: angels dream
of sulfur, the way thieves 
dream of birds. Jesus, 
on Calvary, refused
to disappear. He chuffed
a few last breaths from his 
scrawny rack of ribs, 
and the thieves beside him 
dreamt of shrikes 
by the thousands
plaguing the prefect’s 
mansion, nabbing 
all the small wall lizards 
in Pilate’s house
for six months until 
the house was overrun 
by gnats and horseflies. 
Fact: two thousand years ago,
a few shrikes, the first 
swift filchers, fled 
from a governor’s mansion 
to a hill just outside the city walls 
to sling from their beaks 
a few writhing lizards 
onto the makeshift crown 
of a bony, slaughtered king.

Caesar’s Last Breath
                                 —Enrico Fermi (1901-1954)

On the Ides of March, great Caesar stabbed to death
by friends, expelled his final breath
in exclamation, an accusation I’m forced to share
by Fermi’s calculation each time I respire in joy or despair 
an atom of the cry my Mother gave in giving me birth
or later, my Father’s shout at exchanging the earth    
beneath our feet, from blooded Old World to New.

What holds the star-winged atoms of our bones but the glue
of universal speech, the pneuma of life?
Each day exchanges the oxygen of kings with child and wife,
the lips of long gone fiends exclaim with those in doubt
or pray in unison with the most devout.

Less a calculus of breath than perverted fate
how often we exhale love and fill our lungs with hate.

Fibonacci Batman

Batman, you are bigger than a palm tree.

                           ~

Batman, you are bigger than a palm tree.
You are Egyptian with your ears

                           ~

Batman, you are bigger than a palm tree.
You are Egyptian with your ears 
and your pretty gold belt.

                           ~

Batman, you are bigger than a palm tree.
You are Egyptian with your ears 
and your pretty gold belt.
The sea laps your thighs, Batman.
Look how long your gloves are.

                           ~

Batman, you are bigger than a palm tree.
You are Egyptian with your ears 
and your pretty gold belt.
The sea laps your thighs, Batman.
Look how long your gloves are.
You could lick a cloud you’re so tall.
No one is scared of you, Batman.
Everyone cruises along in a pleasure boat beside you.

                           ~

Batman, you are bigger than a palm tree.
You are Egyptian with your ears 
and your pretty gold belt.
The sea laps your thighs, Batman.
Look how long your gloves are.
You could lick a cloud you’re so tall.
No one is scared of you, Batman.
Everyone cruises along in a pleasure boat beside you.
When you finish your story, they all laugh.
Ha ha, Batman, they say, ha ha.
Your hair curls beneath your bat hat, Batman.
Your toes prod little islands.
Your wings flap around like fruitlessness.

 

New Mexico

I am all about glass, said the glassblower to the woman who was all about self.

I am in ruins, said the woman, and everyone fears my teeth with their stars and planets.

We went to Bandolier and climbed into the fragile dwellings. The forest had burned down around us and we’d driven through crying.

“You may break a doll or an airplane a thousand feet high in the sky over a desert.”—Yoko Ono

It makes sense to be here in the orange porch with the ruby dog and the sun kicking up heat. Broad daylight. I have small and large problems and I’ve made large and small promises. Because I am alive I wear clothes. Because my head is round I sometimes wear a hat.

The women who sleep in the ground like marigold seeds don’t mind the mountain’s mumbling. They have embraced utility and settled down with it. Their bones shine with usefulness.

 

Leaving Rikers

In the time it takes to build a 12th generation fractal, I’ve broken the record for the most blood swallowed in a lifetime.

I can’t bring myself to pitch a number that might correspond to naught.

We spored and blues’d, bloodhounds of the Sierpinski Triangle.

                                                      ~

What will work will work in the end or it won’t, said the little black lamb to its little white partner. We are born to bleat. We are songs of Rip Van Winkle come home from prison, where he slept for fifteen years in solitary refinement.

I want mathematics! I want the grids and the exxes of quadratic equations.

I could build a whole mansion of fractals and still not know the meaning of self, I thought, as I watched the family enfold the prodigal. He was beautiful this way, alive, and everyone came rushing in to touch him, to scrape his skin with their fingernails.

                                                      ~

This, I thought, is a kind of measure of love, but what kind, and what measure?

When you’re gone I’ve got more books in bed than a child bride. They lounge around me with their pages fallen open. I respond in kind, always ready for a good chapter, always near the end of another.

Freedom, I said, and looked.

 

Triptych: Death Sentences

Before lizards grew so big I would look around at the way others fell like flies, and I’d evolve into anything lizards wouldn’t eat—kimchi or edamame.

I got the idea that I would stop by each cross and let something go, that sometimes it would be real and sometimes the dying thing would be me—or else my shoe.

I can’t promise your head will fit in my house or that your hat will fit in my pocket, or that the color of your dress will work in this green and weepy place.

 

Glinda

I’ve often picked web-footed partners or sibilant ones that required special hearing on my part. A clock in a Petri dish. A Dairy King.

Often, the cause of my attraction has been unpremeditated, like sodium, or magnified to many degrees of powerlessness, like Poncho Villa.

The replications I’ve squandered resemble my old high school almost sweetheart, John Meany. Before I turned so gay.

I was slinky with whores, a chanteuse of whores, borrowed from whores, the Jung of whores. I was blu blew blue with whores.

Often it was just someone playing with wigs or the idea of wigs, throwing a wig party or, later, being in the mood for wig-like silence.

Before that there were some I chose and others I thought looked too callous. I couldn’t wrestle them all, not in this getup.

The Mirror

This mirror no longer recognizes me
it laughs a laugh that’s not mine

Whenever my thirsty neck feels
the imperious necessity of a rope’s presence
another sunny day happens by
to put an end to the prospect
(each time deferred until some future day
with the smell of wet dog)
On days it drizzles softly
because I’m sadder
I sell myself more dearly
Slender and thinking like a reed
I write (for better or worse) a poem
beyond the age limit

This mirror laughs a laugh
that’s not mine

 

Crossing Reality

It’s Monday,
and from the kiosk on the corner
a croissant and a new poet under my arm
I start my Dublinesque odyssey

Today I leave imprints in the asphalt

This is the day when I take my face
for a walk past this city’s shop windows
(trembling they stare back at me)
The day when I and myself
go out together for a meal in town (standing)

I carry a poem with me (born in the metro)
Angels with haloes huffed from aurolac prayed for us
Careful as I usually am 
I cross the street the poem on my lips
A car puts the brakes on reality
at my dreaming feet

“Hey, you, monthly poet
rapt in an illusion with a part at the back
walking in heels is like walking on water”

The Mirror

This mirror no longer recognizes me
it laughs a laugh that’s not mine

Whenever my thirsty neck feels
the imperious necessity of a rope’s presence
another sunny day happens by
to put an end to the prospect
(each time deferred until some future day
with the smell of wet dog)
On days it drizzles softly
because I’m sadder
I sell myself more dearly
Slender and thinking like a reed
I write (for better or worse) a poem
beyond the age limit

This mirror laughs a laugh
that’s not mine

 

Crossing Reality

It’s Monday,
and from the kiosk on the corner
a croissant and a new poet under my arm
I start my Dublinesque odyssey

Today I leave imprints in the asphalt

This is the day when I take my face
for a walk past this city’s shop windows
(trembling they stare back at me)
The day when I and myself
go out together for a meal in town (standing)

I carry a poem with me (born in the metro)
Angels with haloes huffed from aurolac prayed for us
Careful as I usually am 
I cross the street the poem on my lips
A car puts the brakes on reality
at my dreaming feet

“Hey, you, monthly poet
rapt in an illusion with a part at the back
walking in heels is like walking on water” 

Building Castle out of Coop

Dawdling & hen-
pecked. Bits of feed 
caked to feet. Beak
like spur; waves of dust 
swirl around iron
wrought cage. 
I think
This is beautiful,
& now I never
have to leave.
Even if the barbs sting.
Even though the light
is electric.

 

Riding Red with the Wolf

Say I’m bad. That I’ll never change. That I’ve got a thousand cloaks
            to deceive you with. But this is my car & we’re in it, driving 
& fighting, driving & you’re saying look at your fingers from those cigarettes
            or these slippers are not fitting so you are not my prince.
Evidence is circumstantial. I am merely clutching the wheel
            because if I don’t drive we don’t get anywhere.
Look how I’m always right even when I’m beaten.

            But we’re in this car & there’s a bully in the backseat
telling me to release the clutch. Switch gears. 
            Now the car is red. Now we’ve got the top down
& our hair is wild. Our trash cascades behind us. 
            All stations are static & gospel, static
& praise.

Oh darling, sweet nothing, you loved me & I just drove.
            It’s all I knew how to do. & it’s true: 
I was the wolf in your bed. 
                                            I would have eaten you alive.

Love

The road and the house love me,
the living and the dead,
and a red clay jug at home
loved by water.
The neighbor loves me,
the field, the threshing floor, and fire.
Toiling arms love me
glad for the world, and gladdening.
And tatters of my brother scattered about,
torn from his wilted chest
hidden by wheat spikes and season,
a carnelian from which blood shies away.
He was the god of love as long as I lived.
What will love do, if I too am gone?

 

Home

The story of ghosts in our house,
a horizon that crosses our lips
hidden by plow and threshing floor.

In it
is our clay oven and our journeys,
our dream of the unknown.

From it 
we leap to one universe after another,
and fly one generation after the next.

 

To a Soothsayer

Her eyebrows are bells that ring
my unknown fate,
my now and my apprehension,
and all that I have been.

She looks and the signs
light up like lanterns
as if she’d clung
to time’s eyelashes.
In morning
or under cloud or wind,
in ease or in distress,
she carries the knot of every epoch.

She holds my fingers and stares
and ponders,
rummages through caves,
unearths alphabets.

Won’t you laugh, won’t your frown?
Won’t your whisper?
This is my hand, take it,
take my tomorrow.
Divine, improvise 
and whisper, and beware
not to speak out loud.

 

Tomorrow

When will I see
that I have an untamable east
that invents the sun, 
and I that have a west,
and wherever I look
the world is my field of play,
love and pride my very arms.
My heart stands taut with rebellion,
its pulse keeps time for time.

 

Song

Bells on our eyelashes
and the death throes of words,
and I among fields of speech
a knight on a horse made of dirt.
My lung is my poetry, my eyes a book,
and I under the skin of words
on the beaming banks of foam,
a poet who sang and died
leaving this singed elegy 
before the faces of poets,
for the birds, for the edges of sky.

Array

this dark finery of words, 
blackbird dress, woven labor of thought 

the legless man in the mechanical Turk 
the million monkeys at their machines 

what midnight lines we have strung together 
out of a strange script, overwritten with zeroes and ones 

numbered in our cubicles, in our spaces, countered 
our hands spread out like an arrangement of dimes 

the coincidence of faces, the discarded signs rising and falling, 
the slow working lungs of the binary sea 

the program is a careful cathedral, an intersection of lines 
the unknown body of the world, our communion, our heap 

formed of pattern, code, the burst of light— 
here is a history of failures, each no more than the shape of itself 

the logos we wear, the names we've forgotten 
the ash and maple growing a leaf at a time, ordered simplicity 

Paris filmed at night could be here, could be Alphaville, 
could be wherever night blooms from the bare-limbed trees 

someone wears a bright necklace of numbers, a ring of iron, 
a long starry dress, heels that might break the world

 

Pointer

          —a special type of variable that holds the address of another variable

Not the thing itself, but a hand gesturing to where it lies in memory, 
like when we say Hopper and mean any room viewed from without, 

any couple made distant by sulfur light and shadow, the angled turn 
of bodies which do not to come face to face, but lean awkwardly on tables, 

across keys, at the unopened window where night bends like a palm 
under the weight of all that is impossible to touch. A numbered stall 

out in the parking lot, in the lower levels of the tower by our building, 
between the lines at the side of the road—and what they imply, this insistence 

on fire and exhaust, how smoke rises to our lips. Even now, ash speaks to ash, 
to the names of my father and his father, to what remains in the wind 

and on the waves for days after an eruption, to the week we hid in our homes 
after the fall of New York, the trees which break the frosted earth 

awash in the color of salt, our hands caught in a motion between lapwing and sorrow, 
between iron vein and needle, between want and want.

Biopsy

It’s simple they said:
when you walk into a house,
you make sure it’s yours by turning on
the lights. It would be dangerous
otherwise. A fluorescent lamp
was shone into my eye, and they entered.
As promised, I felt nothing
the way an empty house has no awareness
of intruders or the violence done
to its walls with a paper cutter.

And now I can’t sleep.
I’ve been pushed into a room where
the cordon bleu looks like a bra padding
from my side of bed. The wound
under my right breast
is a door, unhinged. I probe it
as a blind would when disarming a bomb.
In this place, everyone
has been spirited away by some war.
Only the lights remain—
brightly working
to keep the moths awake.

 

Elderly Woman Found Dead in the Living Room

We enter
without learning her name:
she is the anonymous mailbox,
she is the neighbor’s index finger
indicating the third door
to our left. Her head is the first body part
to greet us from the couch.
In dying, she didn’t watch
where she placed her feet. There are egg shells
in her left slipper. And popcorn.
Her eyes are open
the way bowls are empty when they have
their bottoms smashed away.
At the corner of her lips, a small horn
of mayonnaise, dried
to transparency. How tiny she is
with the stretcher and black bag arranged
in front of the television.
In the meantime, a crowd
has gathered outside. That’s her, everyone says
as if they’ve sat with her every night
and had what she was eating.
Yes, that’s her.

 

A Kind of Monogamy

The well has long dried up;
the pail—pulled up and down by thirst—
lies severed from its rope.

                To keep animals out
and children, a table with three legs
up in the air seals the hole.

The coins at the bottom
still live their wishes after the wishers
have left, the village burnt down.

 

Poem That Has No Awareness of Being a Poem

Or how it gives itself away by going on
and on about the distance between two planets

when what it means is Wednesday
and the bruising effect that lipstick has

on a glass. A kind of Morse code,
it isn’t aware that it is changed by the person

who interprets it. Here, a cat is scratching
an earthquake on the intruder’s skin.

Here, we’re both drunk and married.
Here, loneliness as drizzle rewrites

the graffiti on the train. Word after word,
the reader falls into the poem and is disguised,

like a bogeyman checking on someone’s children,
a trapdoor with dead things to hide.

 

What These Elbows Say About the Afterlife

   1
A father’s afterlife easily becomes your life.

During the war, he skinned cats until his stomach stopped feeling like the hollow of an elbow. He lived among the shatter of streetlamps, the gutted buildings, shrapnel. He fed his younger brothers from the tip of his knife. The war grew on him, he said, and tasted feline.


   2
What is childhood or skinned elbows to a corpse?

The father’s dentures have been left out of the funeral, but still they leave bite marks when pressed against something that yields to touch—raw meat, felt paper, soil.


   3
When the wound is deep enough, you can see the bones on which the elbows were founded.

You find it harder to sleep. There’s a new hunger in the dreams—the way the barrel of a gun tunnels through a man’s mouth. You wake up the exact moment you know you should be dead.

When a father dies in front of his children, he is asking forgiveness.


   4
The father’s bed is small, with urine stains that map his departure from the body.

There’s no point now in walking away. You sit on his Antarctica. Your elbows press themselves against your knees. You hold your head in both hands.

You wait in your little-girl/boy clothes until someone comes to pick on you. Like a flower for the dead. Or a scab. 

Meteor

Oh to have been in Canada 
when the pieces fell 
to earth, the fireball late Thursday
over Saskatoon—billion-watt bulbs
                       bursting     
that shook the house
and sounded like dinosaurs walking, 
                                well . . . Only once 
in a thousand births
do mamas land their molten babes like that, 
most burn up, entering.  Dumb luck 
                       orbits 
                                around
and we line up—divine, bedeviled.
                                          In California, 
a woman in a gown 
the color of crude oil
is stranded on a road outside Palm Springs
and thinks emergency,
pointing her flare gun at the stars.

          Red flags rocket, smoke, fizzle,
          then disappear into the atmosphere’s wallet.

The gorilla suits 
will wait by the pool,
decked in bling, 
stiff cocktails and nuts.

          This is the desert
where a gimp engine groans
          and coyotes guffaw,
circling the shoulder.
                                Nailed to dust,
          the Christ cactus, dumb, 
stands paralyzed as ever.

Oh lady of perpetual gimme, 
desire your way out of this one.

 

Persimmon

Shiny, heart-shaped, orange-red orb.
Pride of Powhatan, the Algonquin
linked tribes, your name sifted down,
re-shaped in the great etymological
cookbook: putchanin, pessanine,
 persimmon.  Last night
I ate you sliced thin, mixed
with pomegranate seeds, a splash 
of olive oil, sherry vinegar, salt. 
Now I’m a fool for Fuyu. 
It was Thanksgiving
at my mother in-law’s. 
I cooked all afternoon, knowing 
disasters loomed ahead: burnt pie, 
rogue shards of glass in the gratin, 
a scabby remark 
about Uncle Bob’s heel. And look,
nothing but wine 
and snips of Whitman! The children 
shoeless, swapping songs, 
surfing the Net.  Persimmon,
I’m not afraid of you anymore. 
Let’s beat a drum and dance 
buck naked, hunt some deer, 
scale a stone cliff, 
look wide and far 
over a North American plain. 
Let’s fill our cups 
and come together over candles and puddings, 
let’s praise this life, mere life,
the feast my mouth cries over.  

Elegy for Roger Prynne

I recently fell overboard 
during a trip from the old world to the new world when a truly 
dear friend told me of his quicksand fetish and I, 
mistakenly thinking he was joking
and also drunk from many brandies and also feeling the effects
of the opium in which we had partaken 
and standing dangerously near 
the starboard edge of the ship, too, 
tossed my head back in hearty laughter 
and accidentally fell backward, 
head first, into the raging sea, where, due to turbulent waters 
and heavy winds 
and my friend being upset that I’d misinterpreted 
his truly personal secret, 
at which I’m sorrowfully regretful for having laughed, 
the ship continued forward 
without me 
and I swam for weeks with the dazzling creatures of the sea 
like the whale and the giant squid and the seahorse 
and the jellyfish, 
riding upon them sometimes, 
as well as clinging to large pieces of ambergris 
to conserve energy, 
and living off plankton, 
until finally one afternoon I washed up in Boston harbor, 
near the aquarium, 
which I didn’t visit because 
I’d spent so much time in the sea with all its dazzling creatures, 
so I visited the place where that sitcom bar is, 
which is real touristy, 
and ate fried potatoes near a breakdance troupe 
and cleaned myself up a little
because I’d been near death at sea for the past several weeks, 
and slept for a long time after that, 
waking up refreshed later which was good 
because there was so much to see and do in Boston!
I’m kidding, there wasn’t, 
but I was thrown out of Grolier’s after browsing 
for only a few minutes, which, 
apparently the mean woman 
who works at or owns this bookstore doesn’t like, 
that is, browsing or browsers or lovers of poetry, 
though she said she was quixotic, which makes no sense 
because she was black-hearted and angry
like the angry, black nights I spent at sea,
surrounded by its dazzling creatures, 
sometimes riding upon them 
but sometimes terrified of them as well, 
like when the moon is full and sharks are circling you, 
and you’d think that turbulent waters would be terrifying, 
and they are, but just as awful are those nights of the full moon, 
when creatures are circling you, 
and the sea is quiet, 
and those are the nights that you just close your eyes and cry, 
close your eyes and pray that it will all end soon.

 

Camaraderie 

I remember Ralph Williams quoting Brodsky before walking away
and you turning to ask
if I know who Brodsky is
as if Brodsky could be a first or last name, a pet
or an inanimate object
and I said no in the spirit of camaraderie
but really I knew
he’s the guy who wrote
How to Pick Up Strippers, How to Dominate Women
and How to Use Black Magic to Pick Up Women
which, years later, I purchased for you at an occult bookstore.
I’ll always remember that cold afternoon
not for Brodsky
but for an exchange I watched between two others
whom I disliked
because of their spirit of elitism
which they celebrated in the spirit of camaraderie,
an exchange which reminded me of a teaching assistantship I had
where my only duty was to grade the final exam,
where the teacher didn’t give any guidance
for how students should answer other than not to grade too hard
and grade all fifty in one day
because he’s going out of town on Tuesday
which I did
but was later admonished for not grading hard enough
while he praised himself for grading the final paper
hard enough that my exam grades didn’t matter anyway
so it was okay
but I could never say anything about this to anyone
because he was the director of the undergraduate program
and I knew someday
I might need him to not be my enemy
though I know now that it wouldn’t have mattered
and enemy isn’t the right word
but I can’t think of the right word.
I can’t believe that was almost ten years ago.
I can’t believe how young I was
or how even though I know I’m different now
I feel so much camaraderie with the me of ten years ago
even though I don’t agree
with most of my life choices at the time.
How I dreamt to be either loved or killed
and how each day became an opera
in which to perform that dream.
I wish I could remember what happened next.
I wish I could remember what happened next but I can’t.
No. All I can do is imagine you
riding home on your bicycle to wherever you were living at the time
and me walking home under the gray sky
to wherever I was living at the time, where I’d wash my face,
eat a sandwich and watch television, completely unaware
of what would happen in my life next.

All Hands & the Cook

                             for my brother

Alabastrine clouds were turning ashen.
They were always raining then.

All night long her muscles did twitch.
All night long her nerves did fidget.
All night long his ears did itch.

Always the things she said were said again:

You try singing in this hailstorm 
You try on this bag of bones like a fur coat
You try this having been a mother

Inside him, her shipwrecked ghost.
In its possession, the noise of crows.

It’s not the voice we praise the angels with.
It’s not the voice he bathes the babies with.

It is his mouth washed out with soap.

It is his hair lost.
It is his basin clogged.
It is his hope. No,

it had to come to this:
her thumbnail paring found him
& ripped him from the cliff.

It mattered little what was hers.
Little what footing remained.

Did I mention that the boat had sunk?
That the fish had swum off?
That all his wishes had been drunk up?

But there was one last turnoff, mate.
One last plank.

It was time to take the garbage out.
Time to bite the lemon rind.

Even if his heart were thrown in with the wash.
Even if it all turned out as red as a radish.

His hands didn’t starve.
His hands stood on deck at dawn,
though the broth was thin.

When the devils came to dine
they sliced carrots for his eyes

& he dreamed like a knife.


From Longing/Belonging

In some remote 
            pre-dawn eye slit 
                        the horizon largely 
the same

            the cinquefoils still

chirpy and obliging the ox-eyed

            daisies and the daisies

fleabane and the worts and weeds
            
            the thistles and yarrows
            still healing and exotic

                                    in their ways—

Weed bind.
            Tongue beard.
                        Thimble berries.
            Balm bee.
Flag blue.

~

Rain clarifies colors—
                        colors reveal the brief
ambition of these
                        provincial weeds. In gullies,

            mosses soft, mosses bright

as dyed suede
feel rich beneath young feet.

Rain—nature’s iteration—

light paradiddles 
on the surface

                                    of the creek. 

How free-making this word
                                    (penniless)

before 
a judge


[specimen]

The articles featured photographs of the top-secret aircraft that was at the root of UFO reports.  The policeman told me to recite the alphabet backwards from Q to D and I could, so I knew I was drunk.  We need to tinker with the memory machine.  The first thing the patient remembered was that he didn’t know who he was.  She asked if I was frightened of uncertainty, and I was too scared to admit I never thought about it.  “Keep your face to the sunshine and you cannot see the shadow”—Helen Keller said that.

 

[specimen]

“Where did the spoon go?” he asked, so we knew his focus had changed at least twice.  If I start counting with my thumb as one, I often make it to six before I reach my little finger.  You don’t really understand the whole concept of April air getting cooler as we go up the mountain, do you:  I mean, oh, we’re going back in time?  Crossing South Georgia, Shackleton and his two crew members thought there were four in their group.  The portrait was so intimate, I didn’t recognize myself. 

 

[specimen]

The first thing I get from the bottle of vitamins is the coupon for the next bottle.  You know you’re in the country when you step outside and cast only one shadow.  I did some stretches first, because I was going to be sitting down for several hours.  Yes, Mark Rothko said, I am watching paint dry.  The sun is yellow and its light mostly white:  I’m not sure the cosmic egg has actually cracked yet.  She could be counted on to say, “That is so random.” 

 

[specimen]

I’d be surprised if someone named Bear hadn’t seen Gremlins at least five times.  “That it is able to be returned to makes something’s existence more probable.”  He said it wasn’t a hair; it was a special spice.  I had to agree with him.  It was the best tasting hair I ever ate.  My itchy ankles distracted me from my existential crisis.  I read about it in the super-secret lost book of lost super-secrets I bought at Barnes and Noble.

What No One Plans

is to inhale for sixty years the fumes
of burning nightshade, then with lungs 
stiff and pocked, between coughings-up
and sippings-in from a flammable tank 
you have to wheel or carry, to continue 
to light those leaves and try to breathe, 

to cast every hour or oftener from the bed 
the plastic tube out to your only other room, 
already fully sfumato, so you can have a “safe” smoke,
which the neighbors smell and try to evict 
before it explodes,
                            then afterward 
to reel your line back, to reinsert 
your cannula like jewelery, little reed-flute
only the dead can hear.

No one plans to make their nurse, 
paid a little by the state, love them
for selling their car to her for one dollar,
then hate you, to make everybody hate you,
for jerking your tubes out, dialing the police 
when we weren’t looking to charge us
with leaving you, you swore, in your piss and shit.

No one is born planning to swear that no one comes.
No one is born planning to order everyone to stop coming.

Therefore if there are creatures of fire and light
whose task it is when someone dies
to lift off the roof of the house, and carry 
to judgement everything hidden,

the person that did these things 
will be screened (may she be screened)

behind the heaven of what she did plan,
dancing as she does in a black-and-white,
snapped in Cuba, as far as I can tell, before the war, 
furniture pushed back, dress caught, flagrante,                                                   
in the act of swinging out to the tune, 
the mighty tune of black moiré caught tight
at her tiny, not-bloated waist, rhinestones 
at her throat, ear, and wrists, where no skin 
is as though burned or scarred or torn,
in the arms of a handsome man
not my father, not knowing all of us 
that she would come to know, 
not yet driven mad by too much love 
and nowhere near enough.

 

Not Pure

No matter now she was a burden to know,

to go to her or stay away, futile,

that she scared kids, handed them to strangers in restaurants, threw a glass of red
          wine in the boy’s face, took a hatchet to the door of a room where he hid 
          (the room where the father slept, before he fled).

No matter no one believed this version, she hiding her bedlam till she could not or

that no one who hadn’t listened to her put a needle in the groove of Jocasta’s aria
          again and again at 3 AM could understand or approve 
          the miles her son and daughter kept between.  

While she lived, the chance lived
paradise might sit
at her feet.

That died 
with her,

so for a while the man sat
at the foot of the idea of her ashes.

Before she was gone he thought her death
would project a reprieve complete and pure
onto the future. Now he understands

what mere relief can be,
a wide and lonesome way to move is clear.

Unlearning to Read

I don’t remember learning how. Only not knowing, then knowing. Before: lines chickens made in the dirt inside the coop; circles and triangles I drew in the garden mud with my fingers. The only meaning attributed these symbols, that of a child’s whimsy. After:

the day my mother drove us to Seattle to buy fresh trout at Pike Place Market. Looking out the car window at buildings, trees, and billboards zipping by. All along the highway, signs for beer I was not allowed to drink and cars I was not allowed to drive. I read one, then another, and then another—first with pleasure, then fear, as I began to realize this was not a television I could turn off . . .

LIFE INSURANCE HERE, BLACKBERRIES NEXT EXIT, HUGHES FOR MAYOR, DO YOU KNOW WHERE YOUR CHILDREN ARE?

The words howled at me, insistent, like my cat stuck on the windowsill outside my room in a night storm. I listened to his cries but was too afraid of the wind whipping the soggy hairs of the willow against my window to get out from under the covers and let him in. Afraid of him, too—all yellow eyes, melting fur, bones.

The billboards, more than I could count, rushed past. Still howling.

I said to my mother: I can’t stop reading. How do I?

She laughed. That’s what happens when you learn words—you can’t ever go back!

I shut my eyes, but still I could see the letters, black against the red of my eyelids. No longer would a sign with a picture of a woman holding a dog say: But cats are better!  No longer would a photo of an old man in a wheelchair promise: Soon he will be a child again. Never would a smiling family standing next to a house with a white picket fence reassure: There are goblins inside, but you can kill them with circles and triangles.

The words told me what the good and bad witches wanted them too. I listened to them all.

 

Captives

I.
Imaginary friends were for other kids. 
I tried; grew quickly bored. Instead, I invented 
my own TV show with unseen viewers.
Told them what I thought 
of everything and everyone—
how funny my mother looked wearing her mud mask in the mornings;
how much of a stranger she became when gossiping 
to her friends over the phone.
The way my father leaned forward in his seat to listen
to the preacher on Sunday mornings; 
how he would yell at us on the way home
that we weren’t taking Jesus (him) seriously 
because we were always fighting over 
who got the biggest bowl of ice cream.

II.
But what did he know—
I posed this question to my audience—
when he was hardly home?

Nothing, they assured. 
He cannot.

III.
My spectators loved my Orange County neighborhood 
in the sluggish melt of summer:
avocados thudding to earth,
bougainvillea petals browning the asphalt,
the old woman with Aqua-net hair
hosing her Bermuda grass.

It’s beautiful, they sighed. 
We wish we could.

IV.
They possessed emotions purer, 
more savage than my own.

Roaring when I pointed out 
the Chihuahua in the pet shop 
with the baby bonnet on its head;
wailing the day I was sent 
to my room for pinching my sister 
until she bled beneath her skin.

I tried to cajole them
that bruises eventually vanish,
that all banishments, in time, are lifted—

but they couldn’t stop weeping.

V.
Always in awe.
Always enthralled. 
Perpetuity at the spin of a dial.

VI.
Words glitter
at dusk, globes turning
in closed-off rooms. 
A book is read once, then tossed in the fire.
Childhood. Where all signs point
center, the stopped heart.

VII.
There they wait, still, my invisible ones—
a breath they’ll hold and hold

 

S & D

And if their love is true?

          True as a fine array of meats in a market stall.
          True as come-do-me-this-second, you-big-handsome-brute.

          True as a blind man.
          True as money.

What is love? 
          Realized in the instant, in the total dark.

Love: braiding a righteous man’s hair.
          Truth: a donkey’s jawbone to the back of the head.
Love: honey on a beautiful woman’s lips.
          Truth: a hive vibrating inside a lion’s carcass.


                                                                  His   mane      curls            to earth

                                                                                       like   birds
                                                                            fading 
                                                                                       mid
                                                                                                 air,     feathers           

                                                                                                 glinting

                                                                            brighter than         the spark

                                                                                       of her scis sors

                                                                                                 in the fallen

                                                                                       light.

                                                                                 This makes her

                                                                                                 weep . 

 

                                                                                       Still                  she

                                                                                          keeps

                                                                                                 cut
                                                                                                               ting        .

 

Brief Crossing

after Catherine Breillat’s film

He is only a boy of fifteen. He knows nothing
Of love, only desire

For the older woman leaning 
Against the railing of this swift ship.

She with the strong neck, pale eyes unyielding. 
He sees her naked even now:

Her full breasts, sea foam
In his virgin hands;

Her arched back, a wave’s swell
Returning to him over and over.

She sees him too.
Not his nakedness,

But his soul. 
It is a small

Dark thing
Pulsing with heat.

Across the vast deck their eyes lock.
He winks; she doesn’t smile.

Both know what is to come,
But only she the after.

This comforts her, even as she foresees
The dark desert that is to form

Under the liquid bright of his black eyes. 
One night. Then the dock and the dry world.

The Fall of the Fearful Biped

Things got complicated when we started to walk upright (you know, 
the constant threat of falling).   
           —Kate Greenstreet, “Where’s the Body?”

What separates us from the animals
is that we have farther to fall
and, having fallen, fear it. Fate
and all of her accomplices. Burden
of this brain case. We can’t just migrate
in a herd, thundering across the steppes
though I think that would be lovely,
a leader I could really get behind.
I dreamed I had a sodden pelt
and a mighty set of claws.
I dreamed I lost my language. 
It’s in the dresser drawer, you told
me, underneath the gun. Only
human to believe it, to retrieve
this story. In the crowded theater
you call out to the heroine, Behind you.
In every plot, a monster. Every
dream its hemisphere, the match
that flares in a darkened room.
Our bodies were not designed for this,
for bearing our own weight: that’s why
our backaches and our sagging
disbelief. It isn’t language that marks
us, but longing. Look in the back
of the book, you told me: the index,
the pattern of it. A taxonomy,
a migratory map.

 

Stitch

What is it binds the world?

The tremendous rorqual leaps into air, bursts 
through surface, then dives deep, deep
into blue.

Sleeping, drowning
in dreams, there is that split second of opening
my eyes, the animal breath, 
knowing nothing more
than that I am alive again.

The day we buried my father’s body in the earth,
as his casket was wheeled from the chapel
into the broken cold of that January day
and his old musician friends played on, 
I closed my eyes and gave myself
to music. The repeated phrase of it,
how my body swayed with pleasure though I didn’t mean to.

There’s a reason we love more than anything
that first nub of green breaking
through the spring-dark, fragrant ground.

Stitch by stitch we repair one another,

the very cells of all we’ve lost 
entering into our own bodies, 
interstitial, this suffusion.

 

The Animal in My Attic

There is an animal
in my attic, scrabbling
against the rafters, making the cats
inside my living room look
up at the ceiling, startled.
It is a heavy winter animal,
circling, warm beneath
the dubious shelter of my aging roof.

When I flew through Dallas
last week I looked
into faces, hundreds at the airport,
every one with a story and some-
place to go. Lost between terminals
I watched the sun rise over business
buildings, fat and orange
against those gleaming towers.
Chilled, I huddled deeper
into my sweater, made my way
to the departure gate. Flying
over Texas and New Mexico,
all those miles of brown
and red, I knew there were stories

nestled under every roof of every
house I could not see, 
thousands of people I flew over
in that crowded noisy machine,
every one with a story as vital
as the blood inside her body,
as detailed as the fingers
on his hand. The father
murdered, house swept away
in the flood, the child saved
from perishing or not—
every story as old as
love, as loss of love—
what does it matter if I tell
mine, or yours, or anyone’s?
Thousands and millions, and this one
no worse or better than the rest.

Some nights I wake and hear it
scratching. Some nights the silence
weighs down this house with its winter
coat, its stolen sleep. It must
leave sometimes, climb down the walnut
tree with its claws I know so well,
lumbering off to forage.
Or does it hibernate,
sleep the sleep of the dead up there,
dreaming mammalian dreams till winter
cracks and opens into spring?

I surround myself with treasures,
this crowded house, as if
they mattered. As if stories
had an ending. Let me 
be warm and dreaming in an attic,
turning and turning in the still
of winter night, believing
in nothing, surviving into spring.

In the Garden

There’s always a frisson
of sacrilege when the spade
first slices in, that dry sound,
rank smell, trespass, your blade
bisecting worms, ants, centipedes,
limestone, silt, the whole flecked earth full
of roots, nubs, corms, grains, spores, rhizomes 
all waiting their turn, programmed
to begin becoming.

You get to play God.
You decide who lives, who dies,
who goes where and when.
Who gets plenty to eat and drink.
Who is good, bad, beautiful.
Who gets uprooted, dumped.

On the seventh day, you stop,
survey your work, satisfied.
You get lazy again.  In time, 
you decide you don’t like 
the way this one turned out—
overweening, grabbing everything for itself,
crowding others out.
Or that one’s disappointing—
never amounted to much,
always moping for sun.

So much hope each spring, forking 
through white skeins of gout weed, 
wresting wiry black dandelion 
sinews out of the flinty clay.
So much earthwork.
And in the end, so much defeat.
They win in the end, the plants;
they bury your plans
and go their own way.

 

Hope

On Valentine’s, a buzz 
around the flower bins in the strip mall.
Outside, icy sidewalks, grubby snow.
Young men, mostly, on their lunch-break, hover
over the roses and gerberas.
A woman carries a helium balloon,
exclaiming to her friends, glad
she’s found the right thing.
Down the aisle, an old man
hesitates, gripping his cart
with its scant gleanings of bachelor food:
one-serving canned soups, Doritos,
sliced bread.  He is unshaven, 
graceless, dressed like someone
who’s never had much.
In his right hand, askew, a lone
red rose in a cellophane holder
like those ruffs they put around dogs
to keep them away
from their wounds.

 

North of April

the house smells of bought daffodils
grown somewhere south of here
           somewhere kinder

           I crack the bedroom window
for the first time in five months and forget
                                                                  to close it

at night           freezing           we drink
           the sweet wine of the day’s air

down the street a Muslim gives a Jew a Buddha
           from San Francisco as a medal for surviving influenza
                      and the winter            alone with two kids

tulips are thrusting up fistfuls of shoots
not green but red        like secret body parts
                      exposing themselves

a girl is rescued from death by her ponytail
           grabbed by her cousins             
after falling through thin ice               while playing

and today on the marsh a pair of sandhill cranes
with their scarlet caps and big bustles            stalking awkwardly
           stumbling when the ice gives under them
raise their heads and cuss the air
when I so much as move

it’s the first time I’ve seen wild cranes so close

I’ve only ever glimpsed them high up and far away
although I’ve always started when I’ve heard
them calling    a rusty hinge creaking 
in the wind      a door long shut
           inching open

I want to introduce myself, not quite human

Before any conclusion, he’s a boy 
up & down some private pier— 
to cluster & shock 
from the gas-shallows: 
up the leg of his shorts 
property & resort to 
I want to prevent— 
to keep bad words from coming into 
his possession? How to excise with a volt 
from his tremendous frame 
Act-O tongued precision 
I mean the cell words which will 
yoke every mote of him to revolt— 
this bleached body: his 
form caught deep	in bleached jean shorts, running
Before my girlhood’s even begun
I wave an eel’s embodied ‘hello’
from that shy, bilious space
I borrow every conceivable alchemical
medieval remedy. There is so much
What sort of entity must I inhabit
the terrible acumen of
these toxic suggestions
of reference? With an X
I clean him of ringleaders—
invisibly
spirit slaking from
damp shorts on a dock, my elver
in the gut of a roller
 

The thing in the middle which has no corner

and no handle 
a sick animal 
nose nudged 
of apple blossom
oil I couldn’t use
a sound dropped
a swarm of seeds 
a large grey moth 
a hash-marked door 
something moved 
an old rotary phone 
three stump-legged 
tumors got under 
mine to move then	a tall black something 
loitered in the median
against a low bower 
its eye ran over with 
my hands from above 
it was a lead blanket 
dragged beneath my shoe 
stuck inside my windpipe
flapped back there then
a heavy smell rang like 
full in the face and then 
sheepdogs covered in 
the house which wasn’t
by god they moved it
 

la parc darque but you can only magnify it

                                    
I just wandered up there
for a moment
a hide mitten sodden
in a high gate
a moment something
where it once
boiled egg lay peeled
it had a cake 
already salted there
in the frame  
and none could be
anyway you
its topside with 1
eye spotting
life more fully	            so many times
& it only fluoresced
            the canopy made
    stretched, half torn
            the leaves stilled
               moved in the fence
            was warm a hard
    under a beech tree
            of dirt its topside
      were no animals
            to snuffle it out
                superimposed
            could only spot
      eye closed, 1 
            itself in another
    exposed

Nocturne with Variation on a Landscape
After Joel Sternfeld’s McLean, Virginia, December, 1978

Former horror-film house in the background: to be saved, scrapped
or dumped in some nearby landfill. What was contained within windows
and boards, frames buckling, asbestos even withering in such heat?

To always see some hand turning black, pressed to window-glass for seconds
before its retreat, the dying trees masking firemen—yellowed and cracking
like mottled pumpkins—shooting water toward the flames, dousing the roof

with anything to stop the burning. And the market, positioned so close
to where he stands—the reaper’s silhouette looming above—one man
not with the others, choosing the best, wondering if he’ll later jam needles

into its orange skin before they pierce the boy’s who tries to grasp it, unable
to smash and run with his palms gushing blood. And some scythe sweeping 
the wheat nearby, onlooker spotting gray smoke, too far away to glimpse

the flames, the slowly mechanizing crane raising and lowering the hose 
as dusk turns its darker gray, hovering around the one pine, maples
bare and vanishing, their leaves already seeping into the ground. How far

did they come? And what was worth saving? Sometimes I want to drive
for weeks until I can find it. But thirty years later, what’s left is blood and bone
and hair growing under the graves. The house leveled from its charred excuse

or to clear the space for some mall. I want to ask everyone I can see why
they didn’t help. Someone started the blaze. Someone dropped a lit cigarette, knees
locked from a heart attack, fell asleep by a candle under the ceiling fan. Someone

probably burned among such beauty. And this could be anywhere of all
the places I have lived. Because everything turns bright before it turns black, 
and as night finally fades, we’ll always trap ourselves within the walls. 

 

Nocturne with Trash Fires and All We Thought Had Ended

We thought such violence was abolished: bright red blood gushing
          from celluloid stomachs, pixilated funnel clouds in the middle

of one-dimensional plumes, scentless and quickly falling to the ground
          like sheets dropping from clotheslines. Before it was freedom

and the joy of faces shrouded in purples, greens, reds—rocket-fast 
          cracks whipping into the air across sky. Before cars were set

on fire in alleys from which they would never move again. Before 
          M-80s under cats and in dumpsters, softer than bullets, but more

and more, and the squealing that we couldn’t get out of our heads. 
          Kerosene doesn’t blow up anything. It burns and burns . . .

They had eyes on every window, and the streets were always warmer
          as the fires never died. Waves of flame crept onto porches

and through houses. Families ran through streets with nothing
          to explain to their children. We were high up, had no weapons.

We thought of crossbows and maces, contraptions to fly over walls. 
          We closed our eyes and hoped it would all go away.

The blackened windows we tried to secure with anything
          to shroud the screams. But we could still see and hear

and ran out of food faster than we thought. Someone skulked around
          our building. One of us saw through ripped clothes and holes.

No way all of this can burn. Love, I wrote you letters, wrapped them 
          in whatever I could find. I wrote what I could never say then.

It will happen like this, I scrawled in blood. We will not be ending together.

 

Nocturne with Endless Squealing

On I-95 the truck swerves, metal flinting concrete, 
          squeals and howls 
roaring through the median. Everywhere fragments

our eyes can’t believe. This is not the place where 
          people should meet—
glaring and exiting cars by this interstate bend. On I-95

the truck swerves, metal flinting concrete. Ignitions cut, 
          children bawling 
in car seats as their memories lock. Nothing will amend

what’s everywhere: fragments our eyes can’t believe. Flares 
          lit in darkness: red 
flame, red heat scorching our vision—our bodies to faint

and collapse near the truck on I-95, metal finished flinting 
          concrete. We’d give 
anything to be back: familiar streets and long summers,

starlight beginning its lament. Now, everywhere fragments 
          our eyes can’t 
believe. This is nothing but a treatise on defeat. We can give nothing—

there won’t be an ending. On I-95 the truck swerved, metal
          flinting concrete— 
everywhere these fragments our eyes must believe.


The Tulip Neck

Bending, as if the blood leaving
your throat slowly rocketed 
forth, you lean blindly forward,

to imagine it, but you like 
the rising, his hand firmly combing down
your face against the darkness

of his shape, and 

as if dying, you lean down to your thirst

                          ~

the mouth of

the horse to the water trough—
but slowly, oh 
slower than hunger, the realization of

it awakening.  Languishing
tulip.  Limp,
asleep.  And yet,

                          ~

upon thy lips
the cup

of the secret spills forth

only the smallest 
drink for your madness, drink, drink

unsatisfied by your want, your living—

 

Estrella Avenue

You open small windows for love
when you care
and someone else means more to you than
yourself.  Mexico

is a dream still, and we are there together.
The wet hustle of starlight
and the dogs run stray—

There is color, and it’s the most
important thing.  It is.  Because it takes a wall of
star-blue to stupefy a man to his very loneliest
self, to stand before

the real life, and not the practiced one 
a gate of green pipe cactus in the yard and wildflowers lacing
the shadows, in which we bandage the wounds with work
and get drunk

for love.  The place you are now
writing grants and scheduling the hours. 
What a dismal, soulless America
dressed in partitions, so I’m dramatic as chains
like the sea

and when the lyric stops,
its manic, dark murmuring your own
for self-worth,
we’re not in our house in the future in Guanajuato,

for the moment we are alone
kissing the black mouth of a telephone,
each of us considering our own light-year.

Something Like an Asshole, or, How to Read the Rind

You know the greasy spot on the side he never sleeps on
is a sign.
Your palms
are a sign:
The body is more water than flesh.
And if you know how to interpret It right
the way a mango peels, 
meat stripping itself like a slow wind from the rind
resisting to slide from your grasp
is phonetic;
can be sounded out to tell it.

Lovers are the most obvious people
on earth Naked as sky over glow fish
under a Puerto Rican moon.
More than children. 
Censors fail them
every time;
may have never been included in the package.
Labels lie that way
sometimes.
Machines miss that way
sometimes.

To catch it all
make your sleeping
like waking.
Eat the bait, remove the hook later.
Let the blood 
Rorschach you into
deliverance.


you are the rain

a girl at school 
smells like purple 
bubble gum, 
like she took off
all her clothes 
after being stuck 
outside during
a thunderstorm 
& if I could tell 
her why her arms
are boss, why her
neck is boss, why 
her hips are boss, 
I imagine she would 
bandage me softly 
like winter.

 

you are a pharmacy

you have a hundred secret names & I am the world’s worst shoplifter. 
you know what I mean? it’s like it’s 1992 & we’re so happy for cigarettes 
& de la soul & lightning bugs & shit like that. sometimes I wish you knew 
someone exactly like me who wasn’t so obsessed with your knuckles. 
they make me hurt like alligator teeth. I want you to be all fists & bruises like 
tiny sparrows on my face. I want you to be a handgun muzzled into my gut.

 

you are ohio

so I had this dream we 
were a map of the midwest.
you were ohio & I was 
michigan & I was all over 
you & it was so fucking hot 
your spine was on fire all
the way down to cincinnati, 
& god damn if that ain’t 
the most depressing thing
because I knew I’d wake 
up wishing I was kentucky 
& your ankles were a river 
wrapped around my throat, 
but it don’t matter either way 
because motherfuck if you aren’t 
always telling me the same thing—
it’s not happening, uh-uh, 
not in this time zone, brother, 
or any other place.

 

you are zooey deschanel

inside my chest is a coalmine. you have the raddest 
eyes I’ve ever seen & you hair smells like rabbits. 
I want to call you on the telephone & tell you a secret 
about your shins. I wanna call you shakedown. I wanna 
call you shotgun. do you want to make a movie? 
I got this camera, see, & a backyard like forever, 
& when it snows it’s like the whole world is one
giant pickup line. my body in a wooden box
& you just like holes for breathing. if I’m lying 
my neck is a bird neck. the truth is skin & skin. 
your yellow dress. a stick of dynamite between my teeth.

 

you are a boombox

hey, I wanna dance, 
but I don’t want you to watch
              —Paul, All the Real Girls

I can be cool as motown & make my heart 
stop beating. you say bullshit. I say try me 
like a radio, like a Walkman duct-taped 
to your inner thigh. I’m as serious as 
a preacher. like my obit says: bless the city 
of his broken jaw, he would’ve made 
a more respectable skull fracture,
on a skateboard,
on your driveway,
on the front porch of your lap. 
you know, it’s like lil wayne says, 
I gotta sweet tooth. it means I’ll give you 
a verse to every chorus of your fingernails. 
ain’t that like gospel? what I mean is 
your legs are bona fide & your tongue 
is the bass rattling the windows of my ears.

My Skinker

     1.  Sled

In between Charles Wright and
V. Woolf, the poem (tooth)
situated itself and the passive
erased Paul Celan (whew!)
replacing him with Rilke
only after the blue fuzz
appointed the Duino Elegies
as his successor.  Wait,
who said anything about
dumping him for
someone else?  Who
mentioned it?  What
kind of fickle creepstress
would serve gumbo to
a painter and then expect
her to walk away with
dry feet?  And questioning
the undoing is not
an ending.


     2.  Prodigy

We will referent
to cover the bulge.
One black notebook
was accepted and the
wrist snapped, finally,
like it was supposed
to and that backhanded
and wouldn’t leave
after someone announced
that time was up.


     3.  BAP

Who can take that wire
and unstring it from the 
Bolognese figurine crowding
the top of it all with
the younger brother, the foil,
the ambassador’s gum-
chomping fall-guy, the acid
sub-siding, the food, always,
with always, at the
center?


     4.  Nian

Man and she hit it off
along with a bunch
more in 04 and will
again in 05.  That
rubber bracelet
assumes a voice,
in blue, yellow and pink.
Why doesn’t she write
to me and tell me she
likes me?  The Swedish
moonboots walk
lightly on that year
and I want them
to flush out the
coiled aspirations of
those colorists, those
I LENT HER MY COMPACT
those people without 
parents!

 

The Residence or She Gave It To Me

     I     Who is Judah?

I was “reading” a poem by MW
entitled,  Deleting “ForThem This
Brochure is Unnecessary,”and and
People Magazine, one seat ahead
to my left, made me want to 
Live Compassionately.  Would
a baby help their marriage?
Why did I not know I was
in Ethiopia?  I thought
hard with my lexicon.
Then, red, yellow and blue
happened.  Red fastened
itself to yellow seated
while blue belted out
OuLiPo
PooLui.
Usable.  “I use
them for something
else,” she said.


     II    Dialogue

Graphite got lazy,
said, “Take out
the sneeze” with-
out saying why,
articulating the
rhetorical necessity
for establishing order
within the criticism.
“The bald spot
pressed mind
under the square light,”
he snorted, and
we, including those
two in the faux-fur,
all yelled, “Act
Responsibly ! ! !”
The migraine res-
ponded.  The left
side numb,
vomit, “vomit
excised,” one wrist
watch and the closed
cover.  “We do not
need reading glasses.”


     III   World

Wool adorned with
a rectangle, not usable,
used, instead, to attract
attention to the top
of the butt-crack
in commas and coughs
and black plastic 
adjustments.  “Is
this too much for
you?” he asked
so she hid it
in the shadow 
of the thumbnail
only only
“virtuously”
came, stuck on
the shrimp spear
she dared not eat.
She touched the
SGUN.  His wife said,
“poatree ees an ahrt.”
The painting was 
hung too high.
B called the next
morning, packing, to say,
“thank you.”  It
was a cell phone.  It
was Brancusi by the
stairs, it was Susan’s
raw-hide correctives.

It was not
anaphoristic
anachronism.
Conversion reversed
the red X and the
arrow pointed into
the slot where the mettle fit.

She did say, “permission.”

 

Topography of the Sound Universe

My discreet sorrow
Hides in the dichotomy
Of your duplicitous palm

Offer me your hand
Our patty-cake will
Clap away antipathy

Fable of the Hair

Not even a classic fairy tale
could show us our condition
as thoroughly, and it’s true—I hate it

when my wife reminisces 
about childhood. What can I do
about it now? And her story 
of the frozen hair, old and hazy,
not from age, but from
its own illumination—the porch light
and the huge flakes of snow passing
before it. Of course

the point of the story, of so many 
of her stories, is, I could have died

out there, and she tells it with awe
and wonder, but 
it was her own backyard
and no one knows 
what might have happened. Once upon a time.
There was a little girl.

This was right after the divorce. 
Her father’s new apartment. The first
weekend visitation. She can’t remember him
in the story. How did it even happen? She had a bath,
her long, golden hair was wet. She was in 
a thin nightgown. How did she get through
the sliding door and into the snow? 
She can’t get back
inside, so cold and tired, she lies down
on the patio. She lies down into her death, her father
just on the other side, and she dreams…

There’s a neighbor. She’s been crying
in her sleep, her cries have woken the neighbor
but he can’t lift her up,
her hair is frozen to the concrete.

The girl whose long blonde hair
froze in a snow storm, trapping her, 
with nothing for protection. A father 
just on the other side
of the door, but he can’t hear her calls, instead
someone distant comes.

The father is brought from wherever, 
they pour warm water, a bucket, 
a girl rises off the ground, too cold to feel 
the cold, and the neighbor has a look 
in his eye, like something bad is happening here,
and was it bad there? She can’t remember, 
even the next morning

it seemed more like a dream, and she goes years
wondering if it was real. It seems too preposterous
to be truth, like Rapunzel
or Sleeping Beauty, trapped by hair, briefly parentless
in her parents’ world. And her point is, 
Who ever died from their hair? But also
she wants the holes filled in—why was she outside,
how long, where was he? 
It’s either the nothing that a child dramatizes,
or it’s everything real about her life,
she can’t say, and no one else remembers.

 

A Vision of My Death, William T. Young Library, 1998, for Ed Brown

This is where Rikki Foo is lost 
in the maze of carts, carts of books,
the endless task at hand: line up 
these 64 million volumes
in LC Catalog order
before the semester begins. Meanwhile, 
people continue to check out, 
others refuse to bring back
the overdue, invisible bugs are eating 
the foreign language journals, 
the narrative will never be whole. 
This is the spiral, 
the cupola where dissertations are housed, 
the swirl unwinding on 3, 2, 1, 
every imported marble tile covered
by the constant words. We’ve made an unbroken
sentence, book train that snakes every door jamb, 
threading each of the 3,000 tables, teetering on stairs 
down the maintenance-only hall and onto 
the truck bed quaking on idle. When shelvers began
coughing blood, coughing 100 year old dust,
they brought us surgical masks
that turn brown by 4 o’clock. I push carts. A ceremony
when the first book was put in place—news crew, 
library director, and then
all hell broke loose, PS’s shipped before BN’s, 
HB’s lost entirely. In August shifts go round the clock, 
the tension, more students return,
bars overflow to sidewalks, traffic jams on High, we discover
there’s already not enough room. They admit
there was never enough room. There were more books
than construction funds, more books than floors, more words and pages
than could ever be housed, to infinity. Who 
were we kidding? We thought we could put it all
into order, a perfect moment 
before the first patron gouges fuck 
on the gleaming, Shaker-style tables, 
spills contraband soda all over the leather chairs. 
We believed it was best to control the vortex
instead of lying down in it, closing our eyes.
It’s dizzying, hypnotic—it could draw you in—
the gurgling book-ocean on 1, but I hold myself back
at the 5th floor banister. A med student will jump
in six months, breaking everything 
against the marble, but no one knows that
yet. Rikki Foo pushes the next cart
into place, the train lumbers
a single foot forward. The sentence unfolds, the sentence
is churning. If we succeeded, how 
would it change us? I place the next book in line, 
there’s a squeaking, wheels turning, 
the electronic window shades open to reveal
the ancient world beyond the glass.

My God

In order to understand
how a tree burns, try storm

when the fence of poplars
means less than skin.

Think whim, straw hats
woven too small

to fit anything that lives.
Oh, this. No, this:

a seam of tape to hold
my cardboard box

intact. They showed me
that. I ran the metal

edge along my lip.
You weren’t supposed

a penitent until confessed.
Unbuttoned dress

or a black ink X.
A misleading sympathy

involving your tin
mouth, a bruise the shape

of a golden plover
standing on a rusted cliff.

You drove me from one
series of birches

to the next. No matter where
or how I pressed.

 

Route 31

We both felt too close
to the sky, but who could stop

us? All of the rain changed
its mind and became mist,

or resisted naming. We had no
words, and didn’t need coats.

I imagined myself as the pale
dun from your childhood,

brown stretch across highway
onto the shoulder, color of deer

hide tanned by snowfall or plow.
Same shade as the back of your

neck in June. You didn’t listen 
to the lady with the burlap voice.

She told you to get back in
line. I was the girl who pulled

you out by the hand, clouds
turning green overhead. Nobody

else bothered asking the trees.
Three miles away, beneath

an abandoned rowboat, first
time I pressed my hand against

your cheek. I would never 
take it away. We flattened into

the soil, two switchblades out
of our handles and gleaming.

 

Live Girls in Dead Wood Boxes

My specialty was putting clothes back on.
I woke up in a bed that was no bed
and ended on a floor that was no floor.
They never had the same hand shoot me twice
on the same day. Sometimes there’d be a knife.
Once a sisal rope. The sign said please
hold your applause, but of course no one did.
A man sat there for the entire day
and brought a turkey sandwich in a pail.
Next door, someone ignored a ringing phone.
Or was it just the sound of falling rain
hitting the roofs of all the sheds below.
Most days you only looked down at the floor
as I hitched stockings to red garter belts. 
You never watched me like a dog in snow
sinking into the old black river bed.
The lights swept up before I shut the door.
They saw me twist the wire around my arm.
A candle threatened to ignite the drapes.
I held you like a wood box holds a gun.

 

Heresy

Around this time I stopped 
believing. I wanted to drown

all of the wreaths in the river.
Even the one with a cornsilk

rabbit. Especially the eggs,
the way they mocked us all

April. I was a cat walking
across a stove. My winter

coat became a strangler.
Only you could help me

out of it. How many books
could I stack in one paper

bag before the bottom tore?
The answer had something

to do with your arms, but I
never asked you to carry it.

Every day I would peel one
strip of vinyl siding off my

house. I started at the back.
There was shimmery tar

on damp wood underneath.
I did the same thing with

myself and called it purpose.
There was nothing to hate

more than the moon, lone
saucepan of simmering rice.

You wanted an archipelago
so we made one. Walking

down my street near dawn,
I could count all the houses

where someone was awake,
carnation of a lamp behind

old drapes. I wanted to press
my hand against your chest.

The four your body made
under sheets, one leg bent.

I would burn hydrangeas
in a metal drum all night.

 

Where You Store the Gun at Night

There was no boundary to your acres,
just a string buried somewhere under ice.
A moon for the sake of being a moon.
I’d touch it. Wouldn’t you, in the right

combination of smoke-fluster and snow?
There was once a dream about flannel
and under that flannel there was even more.
I was never good at measuring anything,

especially time. If there was a wooden box
big enough for both of us, we could hide it
on the top shelf, next to the kidskin wallet
and fingernail adhesive my grandmother

left behind. I’d never ask you to climb
onto the roof without me. Sometimes 
a mattress creates its own secret space.
When I was sixteen I first discovered it:

a trail of sugar crystals on a thread.
The piece of paper that once crossed
your lips, only neither of us knew it yet.
I tucked my Sulphide marbles inside

a jacket that you never wore. Suspended
in the shooter: a fleck of a girl, and her
milk bucket. I would carry mine all day
if it kept your hands from turning red.  

Love Poem at Edge of the Great Pacific Garbage Patch

                        In the northern Pacific Ocean, there is a subtropical gyre filled with millions                         
                        of pounds of trash, most of it plastic. It’s the largest landfill in the world.

Not a solid, sweetheart. Nothing we could land a plane on. 
More like plastic soup spinning in a salt-stun cauldron—

flip-flops and orphaned toothpaste caps, pill bottles with 
Hindi labels, the ones I ordered off the internet in college.

Like sex, like Xanex, the soup has ways of making us dumb 
and chatty all afternoon on deck, the sleeves of your ochre

windbreaker darkening with spray. Mt. Everest must look 
cathartic from outer space, all those empty oxygen bottles

rusting at the summit, you say. The world is very small, 
suddenly, and duct tape is not biodegradable. Still, God is love

and love is the mercury swimming through my bloodstream. 
With this finger under your tongue, I can almost taste your

temperature. With this finger, I can conjure Travel & Leisure 
beaches peppered with paper lanterns and the kinds

of creatures that make marine biologists hold their breath. 
So, let us follow the converging paths of bikini lines

and fortune cookies: You will enter an age of abundance.  
If abundance is a oceanic desert on a dune-colored planet,

then a standing ovation. Maybe this is no place for ceremony. 
Maybe this is the only place for it—here, where everything

we waste aches with phantom music, the sexual squeals 
of toothless eels writhing beneath the waves. 

When the albatross, envious of our stamina, drops a disposable 
razor on your brow, we will dream the coming parousia,

just the two of us—skewed edges of an abyss, the last, lonely 
pathogens loosed from the chamber of a secondhand syringe.

 

Poetry Is the Supreme Nonsense, Stevens

I learned this sophomore year, reading Harmonium 
in the Department of Maps and Microscopes—
a scab within in a scab within the profane 
basement of a Jesuit institution, where the one
we called Father Fondle kept a falcon named 
Mussolini who devoured the pigeons that shat 
upon our neo-classical chapel. Much like yours,

Mussolini’s work was ridiculous and admirable,
both of you weekend warriors at a fictive resort 
where wit husbands the celibate torch of spectacle,
then drops it on an ermine altar, and the direction 
of the blaze conjures the Creator’s mood that day. 
The ideal, therefore, becomes the urge to find some 
arcane word for a lighthouse on a condemned island,

or the shadow of a groundhog smugly striking 
a cistern on February 3rd. So, the sublime drowns 
in the deep end of a kiddy pool in a waspy yard 
with a bipolar dog and a blessed rage for petunias. 
And this explains how to sleep with a boss you 
don’t respect without giggling over his webbed feet 
at the water cooler the next day. Or, how to burn

a stranger’s bank statements in a dark kitchen, 
with a monogrammed Zippo and a baseball game 
buzzing in the background. How everything ignites
until it’s just embers, soot and symbolism you can’t 
warm your hands against.  And if a friend shows up
at your door with a dead body before the fire turns 
                              to ash, tell him to make ice cream.

Now Baby or Never

After an episodic half-life of high balls & shredded nerves, his hands arthritic tremors—
My poetry superhero slouches at the podium & cannot lift the water-glass to his parched
Lips, the audience polite, pretending to not notice embryonic gunk caked on the corners
Of his mouth, not to mention armpit gin-stains.  Ice cubes rattling the glass seem to be
Wired to a Marshall amp—the whispering gaggle of creative writing students, attending
For extra credit, are acoustic, but the microphone samples Hendrix feedback.  I wish
Most days to place the world on vibrate, squelch all conversations, switch TV’s 
To permanent mute.  People-people, people—do you really need to express every random
Thought?  I, for one, only repeat stuff important to me, which my wife finds particularly
Annoying.  When my team suffers an injustice by the zebra-ed authorities I scream 
Outrage & plead to those washed-up-ex-player-color-guys & my wife insists it is I who
Am crazy.  Normal people don’t shout obscenities at their flat screens she points out.  
Her definition of sanity steals a nap in her secret room I can’t locate.  If I tilt the abstract
Family portrait just so the wall moves, but I’m afraid to go in.  The students at my hero’s
Book-signing are thrilled when I pick up the tab—those free-loaders swigging the last 
Drops of Gigondas from a year they don’t recognize as good.  Even the pretty waitress,
Who I over tip, has a Jones for us to come back again.  Soon.  She’s very clear & specific
About that.  I pretend to not see the man at the next booth whose nose is deformed &
Bluish, like poor-circulation cottage cheese, or a clay duck left on a radiator, a boxer’s
Oxidized cauliflower ear, transplanted, very Picasso.  I don’t doubt his wife once thought
Him a hot potato.  Wedding photos must exist that validate my theory of his historic
Beauty.  Maybe love is just being very polite, pretending to not see the people we love 
As they are now, ignoring how they shuffle around the house in their stained boxers,
Searching for their secret rooms, wiping, at the bistro, delicate butter-based French
Sauces from their lips, which aren’t too chapped, with shirt sleeves over starched from
The dry leaner.  Some days it takes a Herculean effort to grunt Good Morning before
Ingesting that first cup of bitter coffee.  When I am alone I want company.  When
Surrounded at the after-reading party I can’t wait to get home, space out in front of the
Flat screen, fondle my alphabetized wine collection, check my email, check my email . . .
I thought I’d be a little wiser by now, a little more of a world-participant.  But my passive
Anger is a backseat driver who just won’t shut up.  Driving home from the reading 
I’m stuck behind some idiot on his cell leaving his random thoughts on voice mail,
Oblivious to the light changing green.  As a law biding citizen I’m obligated to blast my
Horn just as some maniac tries to beat his light, almost killing me & my wife, convincing
Himself later it was yellow, not red, officer.  At the bar my hero bummed a smoke, lit 
His match, but his hand shook so asymmetrically I grabbed his wrist & guided that flame
That still exists between us to his jittery tobacco stick.  Maybe life is our ability to make
Adjustments to compensate for our inadequacies & love’s measured by our capacity 
To overlook, make up a story if necessary, rearrange truth the way Picasso reassembled
Faces, based upon how we envision ourselves, listening intently in the human auditorium.

 

The Good Ship Lollipop

Walk don’t run along the slippery edges of the pool & don’t 
Swim too soon after eating unrefrigerated tuna sandwiches.
Don’t push in line—we know your life is involuntarily jackknifing 
But only one person on the diving board at a time & no back flips.
Refrain from holding your siblings’ heads under water for more 
Than a few weeks & don’t dive in the deep end with fallible
Inflatable fables if you are not a certified independent swimmer 
& have a blow-up buddy.  Perfect the dead man’s float before 
Mastering the dog paddle which might seem sort of backwards— 
Counterintuitive—not to mention ominous.  Respond immediately 
To the life guard’s whistle & return to your beach blanket 
When there are shark sightings.  What!—the pool has matured 
Into an ocean!  How French Noir!  How progressive!  Wear 
Flip-flops while collecting Sand Dollars so you don’t slice 
Your feet on jagged horseshoe crabs or get stung by poisonous 
Jelly fish.  Evidence suggests something larger than ourselves 
Does exist: a whale carcass washed ashore.  Not to jump ship 
Per se but who understands women who bury us alive in the sand—  
Women so desperate to escape they douse themselves in kerosene 
& tease themselves by striking matches before strolling out on the cliffs 
& jumping without bungee cords or parachutes or functioning wings?  
It was much more civilized when gals smeared sun block on
The parts of our bodies sticking out of the sand & painted lipstick on
Our protesting lips & drew an extra eye where our brains should be.

Oakland on Fire

Oakland is on fire because the people needed something to show them both obedience 
            and mercy. 
Tokyo is a slow steady burn for a master throwing pots big as the capital, a kiln of city limits
            and sky. 
The road to the Haifa airport runs east with jet fuel while a dropped match 
            sprints after. 
Flaming tongues anoint the heads of Memorial Day parade watchers 
            in Topeka. 
Sick blood cells cloud a toddler’s head in Nairobi. The smoke of burnt medicine leaves 
            passes the mosquito net.
Californians spit accelerants of fast-talk the way a windy brushfire gets carried 
            away with itself. 
In Stalingrad the statues are lava pumped through the veins 
            of city streets. 
In Sao Paulo they are talking flint and tinder to each other under a pile 
            of dry leaves. 
In Genoa the youth are tiny glimmers born each time two stones 
            click together. 
The tycoons who own Dubai dig spiked heels into a mountain of oily rags and clamber 
            up the crags until consumed.
Chicago is a sparked kindling that goes up at nightfall. All across the city the houses 
            are courteous cigarettes lighting themselves from the adjacent ends of each other. The sun
            stubs itself into the ashbin skyline. Up from the miasma a bird escapes, in a trance,
            nonstop to Phoenix.

 

Nonstop to Phoenix

We are the cabin cleaners. 
The flights check in

rolling into their gates
and we’re standing by quiet

outside the aircraft’s still sealed door. 
Before our SWAT team of janitors

gets the signal 
all passengers and crew must exit the mess—

plastic wrappers 
and bent Sky Malls

strewn in the aisles
often puke or soiled Pampers

ditched under the seats
a fist-class habit.

We are an hourly wage
wishing for the weather to turn

gray and ground the flights.
An Econoline van

zips us across the tarmac 
between jobs,

our finished planes taking off 
all around us.

The day I just up and walked 
off the job

was the day I had the idea 
to stowaway

on one of the big 767s 
headed west.

You say it that way 
“head west.”

I saw myself looking down 
at the vans and laughing

until I vomited
under my stolen window seat.

The mess I’d leave
up in business class—

forget it, fuck it,
move on with my own damn life.


Designer Vagina

Let’s say a toy poodle shaped ice cube 
melts into her drink.  Leaves her
longing for that past precision haircut.
What’s the difference between standard and toy?
What’s the difference between slime mold and doll
injection mold? They can’t quiver and whimper
if they’re not real, he said, referring to her breasts.
We all know they’re implants, not live puppies,
but what’s the difference between a cyst and an ectopic pregnancy?
Her designer vagina doubles as a door for a tiny dog
to independently enter & exit, to do its business.
The doggie bag contains so many tubes
of candy lipstick, nobody knows what for.

 

Designer Vagina

The heaviness of this body, raw biscuit dough
swelling out of its tube.  Is she wrong
to want to be more like a patisserie,
instead of a discount grocery store.
An exotic candy-making machine
instead of a homey spoon rest.
Home girl swirled with lard ass. 
Pink foam egg carton wastebasket.
She doesn’t want to burst at the seams.
She wants to stay intact and gleam.

 

Designer Vagina

Cutting coupons on dotted lines.  Sharpen the scissors
and paper into scalpel and flesh.  Clip the Extra, Extra
outer lips into new currency, a different kind of
purchasing power.  Ruffles have ridges, 
Always have wings, rip them. You’re wrong
if you think this is surreal; it is hyper-real.
As in hyper body awareness.  Can you feel the humor?
The vitreous humor in your eyes about to explode.
Your voice box wanting to burst forth from the con-
stricting column of your throat. So what happens if
this desire works its way down to the nether regions?
Do you spread your legs and let it fly? 
Do you ask your surgeon to butterfly?

Bunnyman

already the night has gone on too long and it makes some of us break: he’d seen the rabbit of the moon: heard the coyotes growling along the back fences: the night kept rolling on: the wee hours were everywhere: he could hear the cops backfiring: the streetcleaners’ futility: rats chittering out their new world orders: old alarms sounding: he was not a happy bunny: too many predators: he didn’t like pressing his face to the sliding glass windows of forgotten neighbors: he could see familiar furniture inside: blue couches like whales: ottoman raccoons: craning lamps: it’s enough to make his nose twitch: double-paned glass: you can barely make out his song: like an echo hitched to the moon

                                                                                                                             for Andy Jones

 

Moonfaced and Toga 

he had a city on his back: all skylines and smokestacks: coming in up the river: fogbank midriff: small lights and pinholes: camera obscura: you are all moonfaced and toga: such lines as the two of you create are made for dancing: nights in the city: his and yours: someone blows a horn that starts a dream: everything changes: fast steps: strobe night: it’s all second chances and red scarves: new angles: triangle angels: here is the steeple: look at all those . . . : the clock strikes house mix: you know this one: you always know whatever’s playing

                                                                                                                             for Sindy Johal

 

The Urchin God

Everything spiral arms around the royal center. 
Everything has its own halo. Sometimes you think 
of the holy sea urchin. Other times not so much. 
Maybe you could start a new religion, one 
where it’s okay to be hard to touch, 
                  a little defensive, and living 
                                             off crumbs. 
Everyone is out on their sea floor walkabouts. 
Everyone is trying to say, bless you, 
         but don’t get too close! 
Maybe churches and other close quarters 
wouldn’t work in this new religion. Maybe 
you could forget to include the dogma and ritual sin. 
Imagine a religion on loners, where everyone 
simply believes in their quiet spiny way. 
Everyone wearing their own halos, maybe 
a little tilted or elliptical, everyone moving 
around on the sea floor in one giant spiral galaxy.

                                                                                                                             for Louis Bourgeois

 

Ballooning Around the Room

one of your fellow balloonists says he’s fine sailing around the room: if only the windows didn’t mock you with the expansive sky: he points to the carpet which from here looks like waves crashing the shore: so much so that you can see spindrift: and now you see a few puffy clouds float by: the mist of them is cool on your skin: and your basket-mate says you know, I think if we hit the window just right, we might make it outside, yet: and you pinch yourself: because broken glass and balloons are known sworn enemies: but you can feel the balloon rushing with the trade winds coming out of the fireplace: you might jump if it all goes wrong: already the sound of breaking glass: and you rise out of the wreckage of your skylight: into true ballooning

                                                                                                                             for Pamela St. Clair
 

Floating Away at Night

you see a boat: almost too white in the night: as if the universe had forgotten to tell it to dim: its reflection ripples and drifts back to where you are: and now this feeling of needing to be on it: as it noses further into the dark: beyond the few visible white crests of waves: and it’s not for the leaving that makes you want to be onboard: not because you feel entrapped: it has nothing to do with escape or freedom: it is that brightness: slipping into the unknown: casting light where only the blackness of night is expected

Sparkly Poem

I crossed my fingers behind my back and spelled quickly. It was in the day before incarceration or the institution of subtle words such as blistering sun. I looked down and oozed lightly, almost like a corpuscle.

Or a dive bomber.

She’s having a birth, a sort of volcanic rush of dust and doom. She sold her house for the new arrival but she kept her glitter pants.

And I understood that the reason for language dissipates completely over the lights of Hollywood, Florida.

Transliminally speaking.


                                            (Did we hear it?)


It was like a plop and then all the Elvis’ wigs and zeros started shaking and shimmying. 

I wasn’t surprised that we heard it in secret. I was only concerned about stars then, the smallest ones sparkling in Latin.

 

Polyramble, Vulturerealm, Blamesyrup, Rhinovalues

Therefore the naked and living experience in which God has already begun to speak could no longer be our concern.  In other words, in a world where the face would be fully respected (as that which is not of this world), there no longer would be war.
                                                                                               —Jacques Derrida, Writing and Difference (107)

Or not.

Sometimes I’ve got toes that move around at night. Up the bed down the wall in fever or feverish dishes. There. A whole set. 

And then the rain comes with white feathered pudgy peoples.

They sing plastic treccia watch and low slung boot jean.  We all regale the pliable battle.

The curse of the mechanical horse.  Zitterlings. Plenchents. Oreliabus.

Lacerate the glittering yarn.  Get your guns!

                                    Orwell

Still, junkets of Sam I Ams along the way. All that guile.

You can knit a sweater but you can’t make it fit the proletariat. 

A perfect cap is pretty nice on a sunny day.

A mitten is lachrymose if you lose it.

 

Mercifully

I was blabbering about how cold I was when I tried to leave South Florida. How, even when I hit Orlando, my toes froze in my flip flops and I ran a high fever. Mercifully, I’m stuck here now. 
                                                                                                —Virginia Woolf

Mercy, a five-letter word, never suffers from cold toes. She is never full. Her tongue is tied five times but she can still speak. For example, thus, therefore, thunk!

Still, her death was an event for me. I held her birdcage body. I counted her last breaths. She teetered and was history.

Mercy. Merciless. Mercy seat.

Mercy our deaths and rings. Mercy the events and soups. Mercy our ice and humanity.  Mercy our suits and graveyards. Mercy the discovery. Mercy Lou Dobbs. Mercy the immigrants and their paper. Mercy the earth and poems. Mercy the sentences and our cold feet. Mercy I could. Look at me.

I was born with feet.

With a cowboy boot on each hand. Like a pataphysical flower.

 

from The Cadillac Manuscript

Is the way we spell simply a reflection 
of our desire to be a small part of history? 

No.

For it is in the swarmy closet of the present
that rules of grammar procreate.

~

I hate rules of grammar or any rules that
require glue.

I hate using Q’s.  In medieval manuscripts, 
you might struggle to find a Z.

May I have a kiss? May I take off my denim jacket? 
Has she lopped-off her own head?

I wish I had a Cadillac.

~

There is a scene outside.  Can you describe it?  
Can you let it filter through your soul to reach 
the deepest of underpinned non-meanings?

There is justice, certainly, but it’s often strangely
absent from the alphabet.

Yet, listen to cutlery. Nothing makes it forget. 
It is always on guard, like a small onion waiting for his last rights.

~

Of course, his death was premature. (For him, in particular.) 
I copied his face with my windshield wipers. 
He drove away sputtering ells and esses.

 

The Value of Y          

                        (After about 12 iterations, what can you conclude about the value of y?)

1.
FILL OUT THIS APPLICATION:

Rambler:_____________________________

Validation:____________________________

Selections:____________________________

Blurts:_____________(                 )_________

2.
Y is the mind burning. It is the mind burning leaves.

3.
I had red hair 11 years ago.  I loved it.  It came from the box, you know the one.  I can’t stop thinking about shoes. And cake, red cake. That bloody, seamless birthday coming up.  Love us all, Scorpios.

4.
I needed to skip a space. I had green strips of hair once when I was boyish. I paced myself when stripping at Tracks during the accounting fiasco of Iran-Contra. I wore a skirt underneath my trench coat and summoned small gods.

5.
JOIN THIS CULT:

The cult of the jujubes. Admission: 45 cents.

The pastel cult (Miami).

The cults of Mozart and Leonardo Fibonacci.

6.
How many times does it take to count backwards in space next in line to enter the space station orbiter?

7.
ADD THESE VALUES:

Sillymongering. Xenophobia. Grenadine.

8.
There’s a half pint of milk in the fridge with snowcaps written in bold letters, 3-D almost. What should I do with it?

9.
Where did all these numbers come from?  I thought I was on the Dumbo ride, and everything was spinning around and smelled like popcorn. 

10.
Turnateacup.

11.
Thwart, soup, sopa, cranberry. These are the things that go into a box that is buried bedlam. Below the makeshift cranium. In other words, I’m going to join a union.

12.
There’s a footpath outside my door and I’m powerless to stop it.


Insomnia as Transfiguration

Because the night is a scattering of sounds—blunt
branches hurtling to the ground, a nest stir, a sigh
from someone beside me.  Because I am awake
and know that I am not on fire.  I am fine.  It’s August.

The scar on my neck, clarity—two curtains sewn.
A little door locked from the inside. 

Nothing wants anything tonight.  There are only stars 
and the usual animals.  Only the fallen apple’s wine-red crush. 

Rabbits hurtle through the dark.  Little missiles.  
Little fur blossoms hiding from owls.  Nothing wants
to be in this galaxy anymore.  Everything wants the afterlife. 

Dear afterlife, my body is lopped off.   My hands
are in the carport.  My legs, in the river.  My head, of course,
in the tree awaiting sunrise.   It dreams it is the owl,
a dark-winged habit.  Then, a rabbit’s dash 
to the apple, shining like nebulae.  Then the owl 
scissoring the air.  The heart pumps its box of inks.  

The river’s auscultations keep pace
with my lungs.  Blame the ear for its attention.  Blame
the body for not wanting to let go, but once a thing moves
it can’t help it.  There is only instinct, that living “yes.”

 

No One Sleeps Through the Night
                        
                                                from The Baby Book by
                                                Drs. William and Martha Sears                                    

Now the neighbor’s horse is tied to the hitching post and the bats  
keep their own vigils, but they are no ones.  The no ones are

taking apart fiberglass in the attic.  I hear them 
at this hour in the wall.  Can’t you?  The no ones are nesting.

It is beginning to drizzle.  Can't you hear raindrops off the wet-dark cedars? 
The toads, are no ones too, licking their eyeballs

unafraid.  They scatter into the green green grass
while the river shudders all awake.  Little singer.  

Little mouth.  Tiny thumb.  No owls are out.  It is quiet
and the bed is a dark smiling place.  The no ones are free

to come and go as they please. Ease back.  Be the barest 
duckling feather falling, falling.  Fall.  Carry nothing. 

Little no one, peace and go.
I'll be watching while the sleep gods

lean and cast their shadows here.  They bless the no ones—
caress them beyond the pull of gravity or grace. 

And no one sings.  Nobody is opening the gate
or driving the car.  Fiddlehead

ferns are on watch, thrusting their hands up 
through the porch to hold the house down.  The cat

is back asleep.  Your bright eyes,
leave blue glance tracks.  Who are you?

Little rabbit.  Little mole.  Little nuthatch, you blur me 
into middle age.   I feel old as stars, though the constellations

are unvisitable.  And even if they were there are no 
bread crumbs on the contrails.  Lie down.  Lie down.  I’m lost. 

There are only so many hours . . . only so much animal light. 

 

Prayer for What Won’t Happen

I’ll entrust that I’ll keep on living for you—
that the knot in my throat is no longer there

to obscure us from whatever life might mean.
That really, it was an outcropping of stone

meant only to hold you here the way some marker
denotes distance or even time.  Maybe,

in some galaxy we are admired  for 
our dangers and for the lives

we live despite ourselves.  I believe this
as surely as the sound our rain gutters make

tonight in this unseasonable storm.  That sound
so much like the light tap of a prayer block. 

As sure as my pulse
I’m going to believe that this rain is not isolated,

that the two of us will keep 
dreaming our animal dreams

and that every petty blasphemy I utter swirls
into the gutter in a green patina.   Afraid?  Yes.

What I fear should never be heard.  It should be
quick as an eighth note or pressed down with steam.

Each night with you, I will hand over my stories
for another time.  I will pick, from the ruins,

only that which I’m willing to carry.  Only that
which I’ll fail to replace.   I am never leaving. 

On the high hill overlooking our house, I’ll make a clearing.  
The moon will take up half the sky.  It will hold you

without abandon, having neither love nor intent.

 

The Surgical Theater as Spirit Cabinet

I am without wings and obsessed with each patients’ 
            dark physics—the way their eyes are the copper bells 
signaling the end of intermission. 

It is here I come to peel away all guarantees.  
            Gurneys line the hallway, some of them empty, some 
with old men or children hooked to machines whose hum 
            is something I can sleep against.

If this is what I’ll become, then let me turn
            into a puff of smoke.  Let me hide 
in the warm lining of a pocket.  

Somewhere behind me, men talk through 
            their masks and as they speak I feel the space 
between the air and my body.  It is too bright 
            and the world becomes unknowable. 

There is a chasm of indifferences as I am pushed
            to the double door.  It’s all so rehearsed.

Before my turn, I think about what I love
            the most and remember the audience, the man
whose wallet is found in his neighbor’s bustier
            or the woman’s watch now on the wrist of the magician. 

I know.  That’s not love, but a sleight of hand.
            Presto, our lives bound from out of a top hat. 

Now you see me and soon I’ll be sawed in two.
            My brain sets its wavelengths on the flourish
of the sorcerer’s cape.  
                                         The voice’s redirection

and the sotto voce of the operating room’s radio.
            There is nothing up their sleeves and

I am beginning to understand
            my body as the little curtain closes.

The magician’s assistant disappears—slips
            through the trap door soundlessly—my own
 thin voice the hollow slap of a hand on a cabinet.

Interrogation V

He isn’t giving me any answers.
His book of scripture is open on the floor.
If I lean in close, with my lips next to his ear,
He whispers back verse after verse.

It’s no use trying to bridge this world and that.

There is an allision of my joy 
Against his fixed self.
Like a bird against the window,
His reflection is unmoved 
By my strike of flight.

There are far more important things in this world than I.

 

Interrogation VI

I never knew what it meant to be headless.
Rumi says it is the loss of self to God.
In that case—

I have just a few more questions:
Where do I go, to get to the cumin fields?
Where does the Holy begin and end?

If you don’t talk, I’ll take you to Andalusia
And stick you right in the middle
Of the Arcos de Frontera. You’ll have to break
Sometime.

I’ll let you go, if you promise to be my psychopomp.

You were right, after all, pain doesn’t matter.
I’ve learned so much from you.
I never knew that pots are broken at funerals
Because in the other world they are whole.

 

Interrogation X

We have gotten to know one another so well. I could
Capture you and recapture you. Here I am standing
In the words between us, and what are you? Martin
Buber said, He is You and fills the firmament. Is that
What you meant? The fluorescent droplight swings
On its cord. My father had one like that, did yours?
It swung in the basement over the spinning blades
Of saws. They cost hundreds of dollars, machines
Screaming, the smell of pine shavings, cat urine,
And Old Spice. I hid from him. Did you love your
Father? Your chest smells like sawdust. I know 
So much about you. You come straight out of my
Basement like a bad dream, ready to explode. I run
Through the labyrinth of your heart and mine; where
Does one country begin and the other end? Never mind
The confusion, there are checkpoints and dragon’s teeth
To keep things in order. Where were you, the morning after 
I spent the night in Hamburg, nineteen and on ecstasy?
I might have loved you then, but you were just a thing,
A photograph of two men kissing. No, I forgot. It was 1989
And there was a war on in some far off country. You
Were there, much younger than me, still a child
In your mother’s lap, the smell of her like apples 
And rose bushes. Her mouth tasted like bitter almonds.
Where did you get that giant head? It looks like Goliath.
I would call that contraband. I think there will be 
Repercussions. I’ll have to turn you in, again.

The Beautiful Mistake

after Mark Rothko’s final painting, Untitled, 1970

The color that conceals the beautiful mistake is stark
and sets your eye in motion. There is a shade of tenderness, 
a grief that passes through you                                                    

as you stand before the painting—like before a God 
who for the first time sees you.

The color that conceals the beautiful mistake is red—
a red which rises high above the canvas, hanging 
beside death, and forever longing to endure its weight.

To feel that red remember an old lover’s parting 
glance, a wound, the plane you saw so rapidly descending—

then run your hand along the edge of beauty’s veil
and lift it slowly—slowly—
so your eye sees everything.

 

White Fire

for Anne Carson

To describe how rain touches morning in Iceland—
where St. Christopher often leads travelers 
in spring—is to cross the impossible 
bridge between water to drink 
and water that drowns.

If you’re lonely enough, if you listen,
the wind will convince you, in its human-like
sadness—to open the windows
and let something in.

Watch as it lifts above the ice—
the unforgiving element—white
fire.

Remember, you too know something 
about snow's passage to water:

how everything trembles when moving
from one form to another—how soon,
it is water that slicks your eye—
each lash burning
to put the fire out.

The Nature of Memory

You must be a child of shadows, but not
rain, which erases everything.

You must be full of flit and vinegar, willing to
pull light from broken splinters in your palm.

You must be young and willing to be ruined,
in search of someone who will leave you.

You must love the green, sexy smell
of water, the wind of it,
blowing night across a city, no stars,

only tiles of light wavering in a black mirror,
and standing next to you someone

who knows hunger and arson, but nothing yet
about distance, heartbreak,
or the stark light which settles in the winter face.

You must be all hurry, sweat and borrowed sleep,
full of time to change your life.

You must grow old, having learned it takes stone
to break the water’s dark, finally

realizing you’re a northern country, full of forests
and lost ways, the moon so orange and torn
and heavy, you’re not sure if it will ever rise,

the shadows with their needles and their sugar
creeping out to offer you themselves again.

 

Creation

                        from Big Love

high above the earth they glowed

::

though the soles of their feet
were moonless

::

when they fell
into bodies the color of rain

::

their molted wings fell too
making mountains

::

and they learned to walk
quietly

::

on tiptoe 

First Tapping of Soft Tears

sliding down glass in slow abandon, rapid

percussion, sudden run of planetary sobs, 
flung against the skylight. Furious rain

spitting the sky’s frustration, surging 
out of thunderheads, liquefies night.

Wind vibrates into loam and clay, startling
root hairs of coleus and saw grass,

shaking the nuthatch inside her gourd.
Babies quaking with the thud of each drop,

she covers them with drenched wings. 
At daybreak she will fly out and back

a hundred times, filling their gaping beaks 
which are her own.

 

From the Apple Tree

If on the day our father died, 
he remembered the apple tree
like I remember the roar of its blossoms,
after every rain, when they were wet 
with light, if before dying our father watched 
honeybees tasting nectar, and broke 
with his thick farmer’s hands, 
a bouquet of twigs and blooms that wept 
as he carried them to the house and
placed them in our mother’s grasp, if he felt
her fingers, chapped with work and cold, 
close over his as their eyes met, 
if he turned away to resume his chores, as
fragrance filled the whole house, and
the sky over the farm turned smoky-blue, 
if at the edge of the waiting woods, where 
the willows had woven themselves together, 
he parted the branches and stepped inside, 
does he listen now from his infinite space
for wind to stir in the apple tree, 
for fruit to fall in a hush of leaves?
Does he long for us as we long for an hour?
Can he see us through his long gaze, 
living our lives chattering through the fog, 
etching our tracks year after year
upon the world?

Flight 
  
This morning I woke with a new twin 
  
branching forward from my center, conjoined, 
  
facing me, already awake, our body a wishbone. 
  
I like her freckles. She complements my Fantastic Sam’s. 
  
One toe tickles the other. When she stares at her reflection 
  
inside my eyes, I imagine us back within the body of a bird, 
  
any bird really, lodged again between two wings.

 

The Boy Who Swam to the Bottom of the Pool

stays there. Attention trick 
turned transfiguration, his opal eyes 
watch deeper now. 2 weeks pass 
without apology. 3 months the projector 
shuffles images against the veil 
between chlorine blue and sky-blue 
sky. His mother sieves leaves 
from the surface with her hands 
or is she crying. His heart 
now transparent, body of water, 
days pass into circles like a drain return, 
his attention turning wholly to one 
pearling shapeless light— 
The moon. No. The sun.

 

Hearses are the new black

Hearses arriving in style windows midnight smoky moonlight
Hearses craning heads on the Marquette Interchange overpass
Hearses comparing matching casket purses
Hearses harmonica “Love Me Do” in the family funeral home car park
Hearses rear vault door swung wide open
Hearses hydraulic tracks and canvas tension tie-downs
Hearses scolding redhead father how to drive
Hearses hearing voices
Hearses red wagons and rag dolls I chauffeured around recess
Hearses first date prank
Hearses salvaged for go-cart grills and carburetor parts
Hearses combing Brill Cream through black black hair 
Hearses feeling full of themselves 
Hearses day trip to Madison Morgue from Milwaukee I was seven 
Hearses dear Herman Munster I had a crush on Eddie 
Hearses clown car all my uncles for a dollar at the drive-in movie 
Hearses picking up nice Jewish girls 
Hearses tending ovens where bread burns to ash 
Hearses texting limos on designer chocolate cell phones 
Hearses feeling so goddamn empty inside
Hearses sitting shiva with a thousand noodle casseroles 
Hearses biting nails and cinching ties
Hearses mounting magnetic wee flags on their hoods
Hearses excusing themselves like diplomats through every intersection 
Hearses headlights always on

 

What to Do with My Body

Slingshot my eyes into the sun. 
Unpuzzle my heart from my ribs. 
Lay my left scapula in an owl’s nest. 
Use the right to furrow a field. 
Mulch my feet in a rooftop garden. 
Burn the rest of my bones. 
Pour my voice down the well. 
Cock and balls, it’s been real. 
My skin will find its own way home. 
Smolder incense inside my ears. 
All this hair—make a wish! 
Commute each vertebrate to a different time zone. 
Transfuse my blood into my enemy. 
Better take my liver with. 
Imagine my brain inside your television. 
Give my ass back to DaVinci. 
Pile my teeth beneath the holocaust quarry. 
Donate my softest parts to the living. 
My lungs: how will you tell them? 
Take me with you. 
Keep my hands in your pockets. 
Leave nothing behind.

 

Jonathon Edwards Channeling Albert Einstein to the Wrong Family 
During an Unaired Taping of Crossing Over

God begins beneath the subatomic.

An equation that repeats itself has no beginning

and no end. Only man

stands upright as a variable.

The Earth is over 4 billion years old.

Black holes are well springs which sip

from themselves. The only thing

between us and God is us.

A hydrogen bomb is a tiny piece of the sun

set down on a dry lakebed, a turquoise-blue atoll.

Jesus is ink on a shroud—that’s all—

another iteration toward the internal.

Where energy and matter untangle,

quantum strings shimmer

between your mind and mine. I’m not

gone:  you’re still there.

Near light speed our molecules unbind.

We’re all pixels inside this design.

In light of the body

Reading of dinosaurs in dinosaur light. The compressed bones 
of t-rexes dug by someone like Steve Mooney from a hole 
in a mountain and put on a train for a power plant 
in West Virginia.

The best light switches have a definitive snap.

With enough time and pressure after he dies, Steve Mooney
could become a diamond. A woman wears Steve Mooney
on her finger to announce her love for her husband,
if we’re still doing that. The flat rock I glued 
to the round rock like a mortar board 
is who knows where. She’s unaware 
of the irony of a coalminer who becomes a diamond.

If no one hears a tree fall on irony, does it say “ouch?”

A definitive snap in an empty room, when people
are moving out or moving in, when they’re about to cry 
because they’re leaving or about to make love 
on a stack of coats for a first or last time in a house 
that has meant or will mean everything to them.

Light of dread lizards.

Twenty years ago, had you asked what I’d do tomorrow, 
I never would have said, go into a crawl space 
where the mouse lives we can’t get out 
with the shed skin of a snake and the jaw of a raccoon 
and replace the sump pump.

I look at air now and know it’s full of corners 
I can’t see around, that I breathe 
those futures in, making them pasts, and breathe them out, 
making them futures again, that making 
goes on and on and people who shape things 
are happier than people who don’t.

Who hold time.

Who are held by time.

And then, and easier: the letting go.

 

Domestic life

I took a sugar ant to the prom. She wore 
a low-cut blue dress. We made out 
and stayed up till dawn. Years later, 
there she was with several hundred friends, 
touching everything with colonial intentions. 
She looked the same. I didn’t know ants 
lived that long. I told her 
I’d been climbing the walls 
and that seemed natural enough to her. 
I’ve ceded the kitchen to the ants.
While signing the treaty, I wondered if ants
ever get their handwriting analyzed. 
“You are single minded. You have a tendency 
to protect the queen.” In that, all ants 
are English. I’m thinking 
of giving the living room to raccoons, 
the upstairs to bats, my brain 
to science, but I’m afraid science would say, 
no thanks. Then I want a dog’s brain
put in my head. I will dig, I will bark, 
I will turn and turn and turn 
before sleep. To settle the grass. 
To reenact the circle. People will scratch 
behind my ears. I’ll stand 
beside the table, understanding hands 
as that which provides chicken
when there is chicken and meatloaf 
when there is meatloaf. What will I miss? 
The word ovoid. Knowing the sun 
pulls the night behind it 
like a child dragging her blankey 
as she comes to be kissed goodnight.

 

All law enforcement is local

I didn’t see the cows for a few days
and called the police.

            —can you describe them?

            —moo.

The cows are back this morning.

I’m going to bake a pie for the detectives
who broke the case.

Apple pie.

Cherry pie.

Blueberry pie.

I hate making crusts.

I love peeling blueberries.

I love the world and everything in it or on it or beside it.

That’s not true.

Now that I’m buds with the fuzz, I need to tell the truth.

I don’t love root canals, don’t love satellite debris.

I don’t love the Nestle corporation, which is pumping water
from streams, putting it in bottles and selling it back
to the people who live with the streams.

Now that the cow case is solved, I’m going to ask my cop chums 
to arrest the Nestle corporation.

            —can you describe them?

            —they make yummy chocolate, they deplete aquifers.

Imagine putting a corporation in a squad car. 

Imagine going to the tap and nothing coming out.

Imagine being seventy percent sand.

I can’t remember from my church days what makes holy water
holy.

Probably that it is water.

 

The reconciliation of art

The devil is nominated for an Oscar.

He looks good on the red carpet
saying nice things about his co-star.

The night is so exciting, he forgets to pee.

Just before he wins, he pisses himself.

No one knows the devil’s anatomy, so at the podium, 
he explains that he cries down there.

There is a sigh of recognition, as if this 
is the missing fragment in Hollywood’s understanding 
of evil.

Women look at their husbands and wonder 
if it’s not the same for them, there is a silent 
and massive reconsideration of the wet dream, 
the blow job.

Later, the devil speaks to the press:

            The director is as mad and wonderful as they say.

            His children are supposed to be in bed 
            but he hopes they’re up.

            Though he loved being an angel, that is behind him now.

            Without his craft, he would be lost, truly lost.

Before the parties, he’s able to break away for a smoke.

In one hand, a golden man, in the other, a Newport
from a key grip named Ronnie.

Stars are barely visible but he sees them and wants them
to see his happiness.

Thank you God thank you God thank you God, he says.

You are welcome, God says, in the shape of the best boy
stepping up to give him a light.

 

the commute

a small boy flings an octopus at the moon.

thinking, this is why suction cups, 
thinking, i’ve escaped bedtime 
and must make it count.

when he’s older, when he’s eleven 
and driving to work, smoking the day’s 
first cigarette, riding the ass
of the car in front of him, 
which likewise, in a chain 
on to Sparta, on to Troy, 
he remembers the octopus 
waving goodbye, all those arms 
without hands, all that solitude 
without a kiss.

the other people in the car 
are asleep, their open mouths 
remind him of vowels, of sounds that hold 
other sounds together.

very quietly, on tiptoe, he plays piano 
in his head.

very quietly, a woman three cars up
plays piccolo in her head.

the man to their side
waving the baton in his head
is proud, proud as can be,
this is a difficult piece, harder even
than life, harder even 
than being God, 
since who would tell you, 
comb your hair, brush your teeth,
put your pants on
if you are God?

the Devil 
is the only one who could,
but like a robin 
who can’t sing, the Devil 
says nothing to God.

pianissimo, the boy thinks,
feeling the root of his tongue 
move with the thought, 
which leads to the new thought,
“the tongue has a root,”
which leads to the new thought,
“i am the only proof

of the theory of me.” 

Facebook

The body as text and as attachment.

Someone following my comment thread.

Someone writing on my wall.

Someone subscribing to my feed.

 

Grendel, Iago, etc.

So many gifted with great beauty 
waste it,

and those born without it are wasted 
by those who have it.

 

Last Year’s Clouds

Let’s say I left a precious thing on a wet stone.

A leather necklace, perhaps.

From where I stand, I would invariably see shadows of birds on leaves.

I’d dream myself right through the dramamine.

 

All You Are Allowed

A shadow on stage lifted in the rough hands of the wind.

It happened. It didn’t happen.

It happened to you. It happened to someone else.

I think about the inmate’s deliverance, the transport bus by night.

 

Your presence, small wonder

By small, I mean brief.

Like the good Magritte: half the time we exist by absence.

I mean, your body is becoming

a silk chemise, a complicated slippage.


Fifteen Balls of Feathers

1.
Leaving most of the world unturned this early morning,
       I found whispered volumes in my lungs and in my ears.

What I fear most: madness, non-existence.

A hissing magnitude comes and un-houses me, only in the hours 
                     when I am not who I am at all.

For what seems like fifteen minutes I stare at the word “nests.”
          It has too many S’s. It’s S heavy. It’s not a place for a bird.

          All the things I’ve gathered seem so unlikely now, these shoes
          and this packet of seeds with no soil to live in, no drops of good sky.

My mother’s psychic says, everyone essentially wants
the same thing as everyone else, a sense of belonging, a coming home.

I wanted to be a hummingbird. 
    It made sense to long for rapid wings and the ability to hover always—

                      to be Huitzilopochtli taming my snakes.

Sometimes though, the thought exhausts me and 
                  I want to be a slow horse, a tennis shoe.
 

2.
Two years ago I listened to the rain on the radiator
                                           sizzle and ping into obscurity.
 
And I sat up in the no-account streetlight light and said, 
 
                     No one has done anything to me.
 
And the drops kept coming like offerings in the obedient now.
 
                     That’s true. You have done all this to yourself.
                                    
           My covers were not constrictors, nor my walls. 
 
My elaborate constructions 
                     were built of stencils and explosive devices. 
                        
And in that minute I had made you all up.

Not only the lovers whose sickly pink lilies 
                               I had wished into sunflowers,
           but also the whiptail lizards and the live oaks 
that I suspended in my spine to keep me standing,

           even the first fist-bent indiscretion, even the few people I trust, gone
to a ghostly cofferdam of my own mind.

And shit, I thought.

If madness has come to make me a make-believer, 
                                                        then make-believe me out.

But why would I want to be so dead-set, 
                                           so hell-bent on the actual?

Why must you exist, so I can exist?

3.
At seventeen in Darmstadt my love was a jester on the rails,
                      big blond in the bar car he grabbed me laughing and said,

No one will ever know me. His eyes like the blinking 
                                                     red of a junction box signal.

Outside, the fields of white asparagus made my stomach wilt. 
                      I was a black forest.

He was reading backward on the couchette 
           while the world went by and I was 
counting the faces of sunflowers. 1,753,285 yellow fools
thinking they’re going to go on forever.

What numbers can you count to? How high can you go?

Infinity was a difficult concept.
                                 It’s harder now.

4.
In the Twilight Zone movie where the goblin tears the plane apart, 
                     rips the wires out with his goblin hands, only one man
can see him.  Poor mad John Lithgow sweating

           in the pale orange glow of fantastic fear.

I like that one; the plane never goes down 
           and everything’s creamy and eighties cool.

Flying to my home’s coast last month, I imagined that goblin
                     gymnastic-ing the leading edge of the plane’s wing.

Turbulence and a prayer caught coming up,
           I wanted so many things.

I took the window shade down, swallowed 
                     my useless story of normal life and made a list
                     of things we should save our prayers for:

                                the earth
                                the end of war 
                                and more, and more.

We landed. Wished to the ground by our turbojet engines and 
                                navigating lights of redemption, of flight.

5.
When we passed the thin rolled-paper between our lips
           by the Wixhausen train station, we thought how funny
           the word goods was. How it seemed like something out of 
           old movies—Peter Lorre saying, Did you get the goods?

The train roared by and sometimes we felt like we were young.
                      Mostly we were high and felt as fast 
                      and strong as that train.

Standing on the switch point, then jumping tie to tie, 
           over the fishplate bolts, the dating nail, the spikes—
           life was going on too long already.

I can see her now with her hair piled up over a flannel shirt,
                      stumbling over German words and
                      drinking ouzo at the Greek restaurant.

           She’s not as dumb as she looks
           though she’s falling headfirst into
           the eternal misunderstanding 
                      that trains don’t stop.

6.
The very first time I really loved sex
           was the very first time I was happy to be a girl.

And also, found out there were two hearts in a human body.

           I stared down at my smooth stomach, its separate pounding
                       crawling out my bellybutton like a bulldozer. 
            
           I thought perhaps I was a cow,
                       but with multiple hearts instead of stomachs.

                       (What a pleasure to have a dual dwelling 
                                 of mysterious punctuated pulses!)

This sort of thing shouldn’t be allowed in the anatomy
                       of a fifteen year old, or rather it should be captured.

           Laying on a cream-colored bedspread overlooking 
           the plaza, I felt I had swallowed a live bird whole.

           It did not give me wings, it laid me flat out for weeks.

           I couldn’t talk on the phone without shivers,
           and when I smiled, I dripped bird’s blood from my gums.

We are not speaking of love, 
                      I birthed myself into an animal being.

7.
The last person my friend slept with before she died 
was some gorgeous stranger in Las Vegas.

We laughed about it for days
           until we didn’t and her invisible bird broke away.

           My heart’s just fine,
                      gravity is there though
                      keeping me on the lure of lowdown.

           My invisible birds are still intact,
                      I can open myself up and show you,
                      they have muscled deep 
                                 into an actual nest of suspended song.

8.
On the river Rhine, we watched fireworks and held tight 
                      with our own airy explosives.

I was ready to be old.

The man on the riverboat told me to take it easy.
           His broad shoulders navigating the current.
            
His tongue seemed too large for his mouth,
           his teeth small like a fish’s teeth.

I was too young for the captain’s quarters, 
                      but I demanded a woman’s walk,
                      a plank for the best of me.

Over the ledge I lobbed my good luck coin
           and quick, like light in a hurry,
it slipped beneath the waves.

That was fifteen years ago.
                      I’m still waiting for the river to stop right here—

                      me, standing on the watery extension of time.

9.
The Aztecs believed that Huitzilopochtli’s 
                      father was a ball of feathers.

This is true: a ball of feathers flew out of the sky and made his mother,
           Coatlicue, pregnant.

He went on to become a sun god. A fierce war god. Obsidian knife-fighter. 
                      His siblings, the moon and the stars.

Once upon a time, a ball of feathers….

           Perhaps that is how all love comes,
           unexpected and on a blast of transmogrified air.

What we define as human tenderness troubles
                      each of us differently.

Legends wriggle up and we go on offering ourselves to the 
                      day’s ordinary rituals.

Here is my sacrifice: my hummingbird landing in a stranger’s palm.

10.
My mother gutted birds on the kitchen table 
                                 and hung them up 
                      with black nails in her studio.

Found in Limantour’s narrow spit of sand,
                      or on the upended railroad ties used for garden fences,
                      left there as gift from our white cat Smoke,

           tiny winged things pinned to pieces
           on the wall. Feathers for a long study of flight.

What lifts us up?

She painted what flies around us, captured and still dazzled 
                      in the glittered air they lived so long in—

           they were crosses on the door, beasty angels of the jet stream.

           (More real than angels.)

If we define ourselves by what we study, our sordid obsessions,
           how do we hang ourselves up?

           There is no god in this bird; this bird is a god. 
            
           Once upon a time, a ball of feathers . . .

11.
One day after being in the hospital for eight days, 
           my stepmom and I sat by the tall grass under the butterfly tree.
            
We had broken her out successfully from tubes and torment.
                      I was drinking gin at noon.

Going to the hospital is like going to the airport: everyone does it. 
                      It’s best to make yourself flint and stir up the scary air.

           The nurse thought I was in college and I thought, No, I’m younger. 
 
I’m not sorry that I don’t believe in god that way.
                                 I’m sorry about a lot of things, but not that.

One legend says that hummingbirds were sent up 
           to find what was beyond the blue sky.

           (Can you imagine? Such a small thing going so far?)

           Turned out there was nothing beyond the blue sky.
           Which made the sky bluer and more holy than it had been before.

Past the lavender bushes and the big new buds of peonies,
                      an orange-tailed sun-god came to welcome her home. 
                      Buzzing wings—within its trill there is suspension.
 

You know what I mean.

12.
To lay one’s hand in another’s without fear
                      is a seemingly simple act. 

The ways we affirm our own existence—focus on the bright noise 
           of traffic, the blaring music of your neighbor’s radio, 
           the notes under the door,
           the, Do you know what I mean?

I have been lying awake listening to the street sounds,
           it pleases me. The stumbling humming humans 
making their way in the dark.

I must know that I have not dreamt you, 
                                            that most stories are at least half true.

In one story the birds taught a woman to weave,
                      in another they saved the whole world with faith.

I said to my mother after we came back from the doctor’s office, 
                      that perhaps now I was finally turning into a bird.

We sat in the car, in the drugstore parking lot 
                      and took our blood pressure over and over again 
until we were laughing so hard the car shook.

Here’s the pulse. Let’s keep it forever.

13.
At the base of a bird’s feather there is something called an afterfeather.
           The part that looks more like human hair in its wiry bristle.

           It sounds like afterthought or afterlife. It’s the part right after the calamus and the inferior umbilicus that goes into the bird’s body.

           I want one. What happens after-feather? After.

           After we have accomplished the tasks assigned to us,
                                            and eventually burst out of our names.

Don’t worry, I don’t believe that hummingbirds are in love with me,
                      no gods are ever in love with us.

The story goes that Huitzilopochtli cut off the head of his sister,
                      then tossed her to the sky to become the moon,
                      his other siblings tossed to become the stars.

(Because there must be a great vacancy and a great way to fill it.)

My stepmom is home now and she calls 
                      to find out how I am.

I tell her I’m sorry, and she says, This is just the way my life is going to be.
                        
           At the deli, the woman is so nice to me for no reason that I start to cry.

There are times when I suppose we’re supposed to rail against our lot,
                      other times, the moon and sun are siblings.

14.
By the banks of the river, sitting on the fat white stones
                      beneath the hemlocks,

I watch her undress and slip into the current.
                      She looks young. My father is quiet and overhead
                      the sun makes a point to push us closer.

                      I have been memorizing things lately.           

This is not a unique story—
            what we have in our hands is an unsolvable thing.

It’s the passage that perplexes us, 
                      this full weight that must take us down.

She knows we were watching her,
                      she likes to know we are there as she goes under.

15. 
In every story the hummingbird is able to pass between both worlds,
                      it’s the messenger, the winged balancer.

The migration of so many miles beyond our earthly reach
           and still they come to us.

Carving out this pocket of air we are allotted,
                      these small susurrations of wings from the other world, the afterworld,
           can keep me up at night, but pleasantly.

I know what you’re thinking:

Sometimes it’s the rain and the radiator,
sometimes it’s the sun god.


Mostly I think of the story where the hummingbird taught 
                      a woman from the Tarascan tribe (my tribe) to weave.

                      How she saved the hummingbird through the drought,
                      how she saved the rainwater and sweetened it,
                      how, in turn, the bird taught her to weave
                      how, in turn, that weaving saved her life.

Amnesty

Father, I am seeking sanctuary
in the ossuary of remembrance

where we are all rounded down
to the bare bones of our lives.

Will you meet me there
and help me build a scaffold?

I can only know the scarred
places of my own body,

and I’m weak enough to admit
an examination of the wounds

I’ve inflicted on you might
leave me haunted.  I’ve piled

the broken bits and organized
my tools.  The trick is to find

which piece fits neatly to the other,
which new design offers up a healing.

 

Spiral Song—Father

Born of your spiral song, I blamed you
when the kettle of your marriage cooled
and mother turned to ice when you found

another darling.  It was the season of ginger
and spice when you returned, begging
at our knees.  The others embraced you.

I alone held back, a shadow in the cold
corners of that house.  Just a girl, I infused
my heart with bitter branches that lanced

and tore.  A wound like that refuses to heal,
won’t seal completely.  I admit, I watched
and waited while it festered and cracked.

Years later, in the midst of one love cooling,
I felt the pull to pour myself into the hands
of another man; I teetered on the brink

of cheating.  My blood, forced through scars,
reached a rolling boil until I eased away
from that black edge of infidelity.

 

Spiral Song—Mother

As my mother’s third and final daughter,
I follow her spiral song down
to the nesting grounds

where I’m forced to choose to use my womb
to incubate or not.  Coasting
through a covey of men

all stronger than my father, I opt for bare
tundra, the frozen soil that lies
beneath the feet

of my Nordic kin, the gilded plain bedecked
in arctic light.  I give my core up
to the consumption

of the cold and spiral outward into the razors
of the sun, sharp as the ice refracting
any offering of heat.

 

Triolet with a Line by Jean Sénac

Come walk with me under the low-slung stars
until the birds are buried again inside our blood,
sewn in with fishing line, leaving a jagged scar.
Come walk with me under the low-slung stars
while our love smolders like a thick cigar.
Our time swells and ends, fast as a flash flood.
Come hold me under the low-slung stars
until the birds are buried again inside our blood.

The Oldest Animal Writes a Letter Home

To That Mutter and That Fodder:

You never sended byrds unless nuffing is the byrds you sended which was not the byrds I meant.  Even if The One wif the Tooths who is alpso called The CollekTorah brings them in The Jar.  Those is not the byrds I meant.   Or if I was fastly awake under the grandfodder tree when One Turrible Water falled from the wooly Skyys.  Those is not the byrds I meant.  And neever is the parsnips, although One of the parsnip has a littlest feather on the tops of its heads.  That parsnip is maded out of Magiks I obey.  I thinks I loveth that parsnip, but nones of it is those byrds I meant.  At last I invented some idears if That Mutter and That Fodder is wonderling how:  CollekT the byrds auf the roof and outs of the attic and swore to thems out lord that thy Oldest Animal shall be thy Witness Forevermores and At Last.  And if it is scayred said Onto That Byrd “The Oldest Animal is scayred too.”  And if it shaketh in thy Flaysh said Onto That Byrd “The Oldest Animal shaketh in thy Flaysh too.”  And if it is a lostling if that soarless parsnip will never loveth back said Onto That Byrd “The Oldest Animal is a lostling too.” 

I maded myselfs a prayer against forgetting me.   I rasp it out lord wif one hoofs in the ayr, and one hoofs on my hearts.  It says its wyrds like this:  Something Beautiful Is Going to Happen, Something Beautiful Is Going to Happen, Something Beautiful Is Going to Happen.        

Sincerply,

The Oldest Animal (sighted in contents)

 

The Oldest Animal Writes a Letter Home

To That Mutter and That Fodder:

Once I looks up and That Mutter and That Fodder is floating bye in the green baskyt helded ups by the Strings of the Allmightiest Heavens, and what I would not giveth to be alpso in that baskyt isn’t even my bones because I would.  Seventh bones to be exactly.  Once I looks up and That Mutter and That Fodder is floating bye in the green baskyt, and they is laffing, and they is laffing, and I is wif my hoofs maketh so much rakeus and so much boohaha, and I is like “I is Done Be Low!!!.  Why does that baskyt float away?  Where is the byrds?  Once I looks up and That Mutter and That Fodder is floating bye in the green baskyt, and That Fodder is feedling That Mutter the most beautiful pancake the whirld has ever seeped.  Why does That Mutter and That Fodder not look done where I exists and giveth me a bite?  Once I looks up and That Mutter and That Fodder is floating bye in the green baskyt helded ups by the Strings of the Allmightiest Heavens, and what I would not giveth to be alpso in that baskyt isn’t even my hopes to be in that baskyt.  Here.  Taketh my hopes.  Except for the byrds, and the pancake.  Taketh my hopes so that I (The Oldest Animal) can float in the green baskyt wif That Mutter and That Fodder and seeps the whirld like That Mutter who is alpso called Be Trice, and That Fodder who is alpso called Double You Be seeps the whirld.  Ups Ups and All Ways.  I maded you a droaring auf me in the baskyt.  The One wif the Tooths gave me the brushes and the green. 

Sincerply,

The Oldest Animal (sighted in contents)

 

The Oldest Animal Writes a Letter Home

To That Mutter and That Fodder:

What ayls me?  Maybe a revolupshun is in my hearts and my hearts is loosing?  Send bayonets.  Let the bayonets be the kyndness that shall foughts to keeps me here.  How good are bayonets at foughting?  The CollekTorah sayeth “Very, very good.”  I am scayred.  If my hearts loose is that my End or is that my Enter Mission?  Alpso I am wonderling how many moufrasps is between an ayl and an end?  Eleventh?  That is so lyttle.  Alpso I am wonderling how my hearts could loose if my hearts beliefs in so muchly?  For instance, byrds.  For instance, That Mutter.  For instance, byrds again.  Why is it feeling inside my firs like I (The Oldest Animal) is abouts to leave this Foryst for the Uver Foryst?  Send one plain ambeless.  Maybe wif a sirens to scayr the loose away.  I am not ready.  Remember that nights when That Mutter wored around my necks a scarf and letted me outs because auf that rule?  Who belongs to that rule?  The marmalades?  The marmalades sayeth “No, it is the herrings.”  And the herrings sayeth “No, it is the marmalades.”  Whoever is beholdens to that rule shall driveth that ambeless with bayonets in its hoofs.  Those isn’t even my wyrds.  Those is the wyrds of the bibble.  That is how I know I isn’t alone.  The bibble was thinksing auf me when it got wrotted.  The bibble alpso thinkses auf who is begat and who is slew.  That is how all the begats and the slews is alpso not alone.  That maketh me a lyttle hapsy. I herd in the Uver Foryst there is a Mutter who would never wore around my necks a scarf and letted me outs because auf that rule.  I herd That Mutter is alpso called Abegill.  I herd her hayr is yellow.  I isn’t ready for her yellow hayr. 

Sincerply,

The Oldest Animal (sighted in contents)

 

The Oldest Animal Writes a Letter Home

To That Mutter and That Fodder: 

There is sheeps here.  I would never have guesselled.  There is alpso grapefruit skins and whistles for dressling up.  Sometimes there are boats coming with more of us.  In the beginning I hidded.  In the beginning I lookyd around for her yellow hayr because I knewed.  My hearts loosed, and I knewed.  The bayonets stopped foughting, and I knewed, and now forever’’’s the amount of byrds it tooketh me to get here.  I play a game wif the sheeps.  It is a counting game that adds ups all the diffrynces and all the sames between the Foryst and the Uver Foryst. 

Diffrynces:  In the Uver Foryst all of us is sometimes a tree, or PoLand, or nuffing, or one green baskyt, or so many uver things.  Even if I want to be the One wif the Tooths for one whole day I am allOwed.  Even if I want to be the sheeps.  Sames: Where is That Mutter and That Fodder?  Sames:  I was never ready for neever.  Diffrynces:  In the Uver Foryst I looks out and seeps That Mutter’’’s witfur coat perched on the bow of the boat when it sails hencefroth with more of us.   Maybe it is not impossibled the arms wave gloryisplea in the wynds for me?  I ask the sheeps.  The sheeps say everything is not impossibled.  I knowed those arms is not That Mutter’’’s arms.  I clopse my eyes and pretend.

Sincerply,

The Oldest Animal (sighted in contents) 


Bacchus the Driver

You like sex 
And they call you a 
god of the Romans, 
Adonis or Apollo, 
Maybe Bacchus 
When you’ve got a hip-flask 
Ass-up, cruising Santa Monica 
In the age old Ponti’ 
That breathes fire 
From California ozone, 
Doesn’t make a lick of difference 
Where you store, when you smoke it 
Where you snort it, 
It all ends up the same color in the end, 
People end up the same color 
In the end, 
Poison-Apple red to snow white, 
Sleep it off, princess 
And beg dawn for penance. 
It comes in orange pops, like 
The eight micro bursts rocketing 
The Ponti’ towards U.S. 101, 
That endless blank horizon, 
Cut and spread the eternal ash 
With a razor, 
The termination dust that flares 
Within ourselves like neon lights 
On the godless strip. 
Florescent teeth, a hunter’s eyes face forward. 
The city eats us alive.

 

she counted change for toll and I

she counted change for toll and I
(broken and lying)
said something I wish I hadn't
(what was it?)
I was sick, burning from the brain down
(dying slow or birthing quick)
shuddering from rough coughs
(or faking it)
she wanted a kiss
(she wanted a fast distraction)
again I coughed, deep
(it hurt and bled a little)
she turned to face the road
(take us across the bridge)
I pressed my head against the glass
(did I fall asleep?)
she watched the asphalt course
(like medicine)
she knows the way back
(I hope)
we pass the time in silence
(or my slumber)
there’s nothing left
(and nothing from the start)
Put your foot to the gas (drive me home)


Tulips

For three days I have seen sun and rain and now
snow falling but it has slowed to a blunder almost,
a blight. Winter. January 8th. I try to give the season
credit for its importance as one part of the cycle, thinking
pain is life, thinking pain is only weakness leaving the body,
thinking the cold is that which gives meaning to warmth,
our bodies finally finding each other in the morning
after a long night rolling one way and then the other
on either side of the bed. To divide and conquer. The division
is really all that’s needed you see the other is just aftermath
just war just silence just misunderstanding and today I fear 
there is too much of this in the world I fear that we’re not getting it
right as people. I am not a dreamer like I used to be.
I don’t know if I believe in great things anymore
but that doesn’t mean great things can’t happen. When it was
April 7:30 and the sun was just going down and the streetlights
were coming on and the children were out in the streets
the neighbors with their dog, slapping at his mouth
while he barked, the two of us on the porch drinking something
on ice I don’t remember but I remember the cold of it going down
I remember asking St. Francis for the birds just a little bit longer.
These days it is more St. Anthony I call upon saying I think I have 
lost my soul I think I have lost what I want to say, saying Tony, Tony,
Tony, please come around. The trees are so stark against the sky
today I feel a bit like I am living in a picture which is to say
I feel surreal and held in one place and held tenderly by the hand
of someone I once knew, folded and tucked away by someone else,
placed in one of those boxes we all have where we put
the things we cannot let go of, the things we want to keep
but not see, nor need to, and I think the heart is like that sometimes
that it holds distantly to what it might as well just let go.
I tell myself a thousand stories about myself. I tell myself You are
a good man, you are a bad man, you are wasting your life,
you are doing something right. From one day to the next
I am in love with myself or I am looking at myself disgusted
and tired of all the bullshit I repeat to one person after another
I meet on the streets or at family gatherings, all the same things
I have said over and over and over when wanting only to say
I really don’t want to talk or I really don’t even like you
or You are my family, my friend, why are we speaking
to each other like we haven’t known each other our whole lives,
like we weren’t there in that world of childhood together,
like we didn’t talk about girls or our lives in the future 
or the big goddamn possibility of everything we might be 
there is too little of that these days too little of you saying to me 
I want more, I am not myself, of me saying to you I just want you
to not talk about the weather or the next president or all the children
even though I love the children we spend so much time outside
their world just looking in, the brothers and sisters and friends
and cousins, thinking Once life was that simple, once we smiled,
once we cried, once we ran through the house naked 
with no thoughts of the windows or other humans no thoughts
of the real estate market except the large expanse of a room
as it stretched out in front, thinking I bet by god I can run
all the way to the other side. Now we run away, or rather
we do not run but we turn from each other very politely,
we spend a long time at doors and sometimes I have the urge
to say something very important to someone, sometimes
it is right on my tongue and I feel like I could make their life better
just by uttering a few words because people have done this thing
for me and I want to give it back and I can sometimes see
them wanting to give it back but we do not give it back, only
a hug which is the closest we can get or care to get or know how
anymore. We are real people. All grown up now. And I remember
going back to my hometown and running into some older woman
who knew me as a child, who I couldn’t remember if I wanted to
(and I do), who sees only the child in me held in a six-foot body,
sees not my mistakes, my faults, the ins and outs of thirty years
of making people proud and upsetting people, winning awards
and wrecking cars and doing drugs or staying sober they see
none of that, only the child as man, that mannish boy
and we have nothing at all to say to each other so they just stand
back and smile, and hug me as if I was something tender
enough to break, small enough not to notice, unless looking
very hard, very hard as I have grown older now to become.
And I think sometimes I am too much of a man being man. 
I am too much jealousy, too much indifference, too much
paranoia as it comes on, too much guilt. I drag the guilt around
like a dead shadow, a heavy shadow, and sometimes
I don’t even know what I feel guilty for, only that it seems
I should, that it is my destiny. Day to day I am happy or hurting 
or both and not knowing how not to be, not knowing how 
to be everything I want to be for you, everything I feel like I can be, 
everything I feel like we can all be for each other, goddamnit 
I’m dreaming again, it seems again I am a dreamer, but I don’t care 
today, I don’t even care about knowing how my caring comes to me,
how I care so much, how I do. Winter. I’m taking it for what it is. 
The longest season, it seems. The darkest. The hardest 
and by some accounts that makes it worth the most in the end, 
worth every bit of blossoming I can stand.

 

Wreath

The muggy heat of late May comes on, the day
after Memorial Weekend, a day

which seems inconsequential in context—
            I am not sure what to do with myself.

The ice cream shack down the road didn’t open back up
this year, this year the economy is bad, oh, so bad, so at the campsite
I was not surprised to find others there, like us

looking for a cheap vacation, some place for the kids
to ride their bikes without fear of fast cars and interstates,

some place, in short, to build a big fire and burn things.

The water bill, the grocery bill, the electric bill,
            they kind of take up this space on the table beside the door.

Today the mail runs again, and that’s often
what I look forward to most in a day. Perhaps

that is sad, perhaps I am sad, perhaps the sun
will shine on the garden in the back before another spring storm
            pushes through.

Go on and rain, goddamnit. I want everything 
            to be green. There was a woman

blow-drying her hair at the campgrounds,
and it wasn’t right, we thought,

she shouldn’t be doing that,
there shouldn’t be RVs there bigger than our house, it shouldn’t be
                        that easy

to escape, to pack up and go, leaving all the comforts of home
for the comforts of not being home, in the sticks,
            with no grass to mow, no dishes to be done, no laundry,

only the sound of a crow cawing through the night high in a tree,
not so different than the mockingbird at home, still looking for a mate,

nothing so different at all, after all, as birds, and beds, and our hot bodies
touching each other, finding themselves too hot, rolling away

            to the other side of our dreams where we find each other
again, in the good and bad ways of that world.

You were saying something last night about controlling the mind,
laying there, before sleep, we were sticky and hungover,

tired, but not sleepy after the long afternoon nap,
after getting back from camping, after bbq because it felt necessary,

mid-morning beers, a little dip in the lake
which was the best part, the water so calm and cold, the day
just beginning, people skiing, canoeing, and you, swimming

out to the middle, saying, So, this is why people have boats.
            It was Memorial Day, after all, I want to remember,

to make the mind go as I ask it, back to each moment we were happy,
each moment tired, each moment dipping French fries into ketchup,

coleslaw falling all over the place, the ice cream we tried to make
on the porch that never set-up, I want to remember

you at the grocery store, the veterans handing out homemade forget-me-nots
for you to place in your hair, 
            and in our planters at home, outside right now,

there are real forget-me-nots, 
which turns out to be a wonderful name for a flower, I think,

            I think it turns out that lying in bed
doing nothing is substantial, a real important thing, even with the noise

of the many birds outside, the neighbors taking turns
riding a dirt bike through the night, so annoying, that buzz,

and the ceiling fan, and the stillness in between, such a holiday
as one boy after another flew by, the engine roaring,

riding for no good reason except to ride, as we sat 
            in the darkness, a little unsettled, but each of us unable

not to smile at what we must give in to,
            not to jerk awake at some noise in the night,

before feeling safe enough to fall asleep again.

Epilogues

            It turns out that Bambi’s mother
was only stunned, a mere flesh wound, a nick in her brow.
            The gentle drizzle woke her.

Buddha conspired with Amaterasu-o-Mikami:
            “Let the blind prince, Tsurumaru,
be quickly rescued by a farmer chasing a lost pig.”

            In a totally unexpected reversal,
Hitler emptied the work camps, sent everyone back home,
            and retired to a Tibetan monastery.

Judas changed his mind and slunk back to the supper.
            He slid silently into his seat.
Jesus glanced his way and gave him a wink.

            And you, my love, you
returned that crimson Miata, said goodbye to your tart
            and crawled back between my sheets.

 

Pear

You didn’t pick
that small pear

hidden in the leaves.
You moved on,

left it to soften
and fall

where ants grew drunk
on its juices.

Reading Into [4]

My client [ . . . ] would be the last man in the world to do anything ungentlemanly which injured modesty [skirts eyelet lifted the characteristic]

[C]ould object to or cast a stone at a girl who took the wrong turning [now investigate his eyes]

[likes the openness], had worked his own sweet will on her. [the past eyes looking not looking for it. Had my own fellow] Stately, plump

opulent curves inside

cough which so many have tried (unsuccessfully) to imitate—short, painstaking yet withal so characteristic of the man.

Give her beefsteaks, red, raw, bleeding!

 

Reading Into [5]

[The story was] they were alone and he stole an arm round her waist she went white to the very lips.

mercy of beauty,

[it was the grief too that brought out her whiteness]

And yet and yet!

more of her shapely limbs encased in finespun hose


[kittens kittensoft with rushes]

[I hear from] out upon the air the sound of voices and the pealing anthem of the organ.

whatdoyoucallthem dulcimers

 

Reading Into [6]

[I wish I had said] What do they think when they hear music? Way to catch rattlesnakes.

[Animalia chapter]

She looked [to me] fine. Her crocus dress she wore [feature that fine fabric, languishing, bird-singing, fleet-footed fox and torn hem lovemaking]

All those who are interested in the spread of human culture among the lower animals (and their name is legion) should make a point of not missing [listening, listening] [lost to me now]

And baby prattled after her:

—A jink a jink a jawbo.

Nature woman [trying, dissolving, petticoats, legs, language] half a look.

Philosophy. O rocks!

 

Reading Into [7]

They never come back. Fleshpots of Egypt.
 
[Here I imagine] on the quiet church whence there streamed forth at times upon the stillness the voice of prayer [if]

to hear the music like that and the perfume [if]

Touch lightly with two index fingers. [yes I will] Aristotle's experiment.

[back again delighted] of those incense they burned in the church like a kind of waft [taken but up her skirt the world]

the stained glass windows lighted up, the candles, the flowers [I looked, madam]

Then he slit open his letter, glancing down the page and over. [oh father again]

 

Reading Into [8]

[backward now to the favorite] He walked along the upwardcurving path.

LILIATA RUTILANTIUM. TURMA CIRCUMDET. [hastily] IUBILANTIUM TE VIRGINUM [in haste, wondering, the globed mess of it.  Blessed. Blessed or not blessed.].

 A sleek brown head, a seal's, far out on the water, round.

[Here’s what. Crosses in the background midst mist.]

[elsewheres:] Secret of all secrets. [blessed or not.] Seal of King David.

a dam to bear beastly should die by canon for so saith he [relenting] that holdeth the fisherman's seal, even that blessed Peter on which rock was holy church for all ages founded.

[see that.] [history backward evaporating.] Usurper.

[See that backward wishthinking of that seal]

Figure for the Lessons of Water

I was young     taught the children how to swim      their mothers

Came       I made them air to breathe      to see the children made

To breathe     some water lopped about the eardrum      the chest

Cavity caved upon itself       some pressure of water      & the ear-

Drum taught them how to breathe     made them     how to swim

                                          ~

I was young     transfixed by water    a container of water painted

To look bluer than it was     figuring for the body’s mass     before

And after lessons     the knobby knees of children    the bleached

Whirl of children      against the concrete decks      where breathe

Meant breathe & the eardrums droned     to crawl      meant swim

                                         ~

I was young      timing their lungs capacity to hold        to breathe

The bodies of their mothers       in the bleachers       their throats

Parched with lack of air      parched with the swim      the how to

Of breathe & breathe      some capacity for breath       made them

To swim      figure for the lessons of water       how one breathes

 

Approaching Literature of the 21st Century

Where are the clouds? She pointed up & just under.

His truck, rusting in the yard beneath an apple tree.

Under the milkweeds, more grass, a bunch of blue.

Three, four more hours, the dog would come back.

Unbroken, the woman shrugged another marriage.

On the rear of the wagon: a cantaloupe, a blue tick.

How understanding, she said, but would not return.

 

[Do You Resent Being Here? Are You Afraid . . .]

                                    from “The Sea-Monkey Dreams”

Do you resent being here? Are you afraid your friends will know? 
I assure you, what we share carries no burden outside these walls.

Think of us as friends—yes? What is it you think you’re here for?

                                         ~

The difficulty is in defining power—the difference between want
And need, like a joke with one wing & no window to fly through:

The one hand always grasping the other for things it cannot hold.

                                         ~

I have no memories. The nothing I can remember & the nothing 
I won’t remember, pressed between two partitions at the farthest

End of the mind (like wounded grizzlies) fight it out (like Darwin)
Until the weaker ones die, & are consumed by fire—as all things

Are consumed by fire: I am lost in a love story that is not my life.

                                         ~

Your mother has spoken of these obsessions. Do youcut yourself? 
I asked you a question. I expect an answer. I asked a question & I

Expect an answer. Is it really as bad as all this? I asked a question.

                                         ~

My first dog, Shad, was the result of a cow, a calf, I couldn’t keep 
Within the limits of the city—& the goats my parents didn’t want,

Even if every kid in the county had one. Please—don’t start about 
The bridge—nobody’s jumping—& we look stupid standing here.

 

[The Air is Lighter Here, Though You Aren’t Thinking of Bernoulli—]

                              from “The Sea-Monkey Dreams”

The air is lighter here, though you aren’t thinking of Bernoulli—
Of potential, or kinetic. Of Torricelli’s Law being put to practice.

You aren’t thinking Principia Mathematica or deriding numerology
For obfuscating intelligent design . . . only that there is assurance

In formalities, in the practical application of . . . only that there is. 

Erdös to God

For his epitaph Paul Erdös suggested, 
“I’ve finally stopped getting dumber.” 
(“Végre nem butulok tovább.”)            

I doubt You but wish You would not hide my socks and Hungarian passport. Why must you keep the most elegant proofs in The Book? You said (in Your big voice) Go forth and multiply, and though I had no boss or upsilon, multiply I did: theory, theorem, article and postulate. I’ve wandered as the tribes did, more than 40 years, owned little, cared less, traversed a linked list of colleague and concept without proving You exist, or don’t. It does not matter. At three years of age, I’d calculate for friends how many seconds they had lived. And so I ask . . . have You counted my remaining days? Hope is the square root of two (poor Hippasus drowned for – in? – his knowledge) or three, or pi – I must admit, I thought I might be irrational, headed for infinitude, no pattern to my path or perhaps I’d reach 175 like father Abraham (his prime!) but lately I suspect, though my brain is open, there’s an end to my expansion – that You and Time are whole and real and rational, the rest of us fractional at best, allowed only a glimpse into (the fleeting satisfaction of solution) what we call (for lack of an eloquent number) the Sublime.

 

I-15

We pass the 10 commandments, block-stenciled 
on signs along this study

in beige. Sound counsel—hands to yourself, manage 
your rage: take a class.

Across the median, drivers surrender
produce or lie about it—I once did—no, sir, nothing healthy
 
here, sir, I’m certain, the scent of fresh 
citrus, my girlish perfume. An enormous rubber

duck, a gilt pick-up truck: oddities flare
where (landscape bare)

everything can be absorbed 
in lieu of constant choosing.

We race a grain-carrying train,
its serpentine path among Joshua trees

awkward as teens spackled 
by a mirror-ball.  Please explain to me

tumbleweed, genus Salsola, a diaspore, spreading 
its seed, minus the metaphor

but you can’t refrain: Apart from its seed, 
tumbleweed is dead. At the foyer of Death Valley,

I think, if you were once a lake, surely I am 
capable of change. Exit 239,

Zzyzx Road,
begs to be spoken then denies the tongue

its due. Windmills reiterate
above it all. Neon says OPEN—statement

or command, we don’t know, but there 
is a dog on a hill of dirt, his stance

I-hear-trouble-and-must-save-the-baby
framed by mountain-range crepe and crinoline. No

snow, yet: we drive toward and for it. 
The Sierra Nevada concede

to give lessons on stature and posture, 
and there it is, the tallest thermometer

in the world—could this be true?—measuring, ever-
measuring, as are you.

 

Pre-Aubade

At 3 a.m. the moon klieg-lights my yard. 
John and Anton Kleigl would be proud 
though the pageant contestants have shed their sashes
behind the bleachers.
Exit, pursued by a bear. 
When was the last time I read “A Winter’s Tale”? Why do you ask?
Read, write, read, write—now I watch, wait.

I used to know a lot 
about lights – how they made 
the world a stage, turned night to day
often using a fresnel, a lens invented by Augustin-Jean Fresnel.
French guy.
You can’t escape 
what you’ve read, what you’ve done, where you’re from:
Shakespeare, lied, Detroit.

Ursa Major named 
for Callisto. Could I have a star?
This limited moment—you, you there, is it me or the moment?
Now three oh one. 
The yard awaits its script, its cast.
All of us infatuated with the ingénue.
He won’t show up ‘til dawn.
That’s when he’ll give back my soul.
So he said. 

Lingua Franca

I have always wanted to be blended. Biracial, 
multilingual, polyglotal, some inner bead 
in me seeking to unseem despite my fairly sturdy 
keeping within the Caucasian chalk circle.

It could be that first time I drank 
synthetic blended scotch made in Japan,
or in high school after I dropped a tab of LSD 
then listened to two girls fight in Japanese 
I could swear I understood every word.

Sunrise leaves me lonesome and univocal, 
birdsong makes me furious like bass from a parked car. 
The mockingbird! There’s my idol. Chattering 
delirious nonsense, cutting up the morning with clatter. 

Sometimes in the dark I hear owls and I feel 
like Vikings finding Roman settlements 
and thinking they were made by giants. 
I proclaim the terrifying screech owl to be 
my god, behemoth of imponderable darkness.

I drink sweating Gin and tonics in the summer 
and listen to traffic on 95 punctuated by cat calls
and 747s landing just beyond the coal power plant.

With so many voices I feel unable to speak 
but gin leases its tongue to me. I cut it out

with cranberry juice so it bloodies against the glass 
like wood, with mysterious grains. The ice cubes swim 
amongst the machines like teeth. I push them down, 
drown it all with a solid tongue. 

 

In the Stigmatic’s Bedroom

In the issue of blood, I am already ready 
to misread this garment of light 

which wears the look of a woman in a painting 
wearing a look of a woman in a painting in a room 
in which only ten minutes ago the last drops 
of blood were cleaned from the floor, from the beckoning
dark leather of the couch, from this frame within a frame. 
Then, breaking the oil around her lips, she frowns 
and groans a long low negative. 

This is a woman of a bright room in a painting of a bright room 
in the newly minted room. The cleaning woman is gone
but the smell of ammonia, that ornament of defeat, remains.
This woman is bleeding herself into the room from 
her painting. She will be the lady of broken glass.

When the story gets out it will be the fight for 
ascendancy, for the wounds of the room, if the wounds 
of the woman in the room are opened,

and they will be, they will require some stitching, for 
blood flows into the mop head and into the gleaming 
sewer, and into the mocking jowls of cleanup, 
but eventually it will become static, with enough air and light,
will become continents of coagula.

Then there will be millennia of clean up
because the room is bright and the light of the room 
is in the room and of the room and the blood is the blood
of being to, of being in the room and being the room 
and it will come on, and continue to issue.

Room with a Potential View

Pour $100,000 champagne plus a kilo
of honey over the city of Reykjavík.

Call it a yacht, a leak, a cataract of 
angel juice gushing and still famished.

We were left in the scarcity terminal
with an aura strictly American.

A real killjoy depleted of Billy the Kid
reduced to cynical art timers of hunger.

Strike thousands of years of living together
you say it was like pouring everything out

in the way that rocks are documentary
Los Angeles oozing quasi-imaginary

epochs of icy blankness blinking
into being the ancestral city rim.

Beauty brain freeze the proper noun 
walking barefoot over diamonds

the world rolling in ecstasy at its feet.

 

Zam Zam

                        —for Farhad Moshiri

What we do is secret. Zam Zam. Paper appears
reappears airplane.  It’s as if the viewer gives

some direction to the work. I have no idea. I can’t 
generalize. I can only cluster my briefcase void

with crystals at the door of your next honeymoon.
Far ahead wilts radioactive halflight—
 
the market and the art-making process
enter adroit hype, post-operative

twilight. There’s no appropriate space
right now, re: the reproductive rights

of roses, of prescription percocet.
Golden Shower Maharishi Fete, price tbd. 

Ford Tuff Enlightenment Yahweh, 25 billion. 
From afar radars make right shiny robot love.

Zam Zam in Farsi coincidently reads “p-i-p-i”
for Europeans, pronounced “pee pee” in English.

Yes, we will assemble a vast fleet of offspring theories,
a public impossible hairdo farm, a flower field writhing

with featherweight wrestlers, and enamel retro rhyme 
toys. OK, it’s alright, we can just say we did

but sorrow is a lot you can do with glitter.
Hi, poetry ad. Welcome, foaming pithy adore.

Welt

There was first the fact of ten welts.
There was second the coming on of the cramps.
There was third the fact that in this room it is too cold
for facts to emit their clear liquid that raises delicate scabs.
The facts are these: six feet of rope can bind a life.
I am not necessarily married to the facts
of these six feet of rope.
I am not utterly alarmed by no answers
to the question of exactly how many feet of rope
it takes. To make a lark’s head takes twice
as much rope to make the same distance.
Because they are on the back of my neck 
the ten welts do not itch, they have never itched.
If I were to take a mirror it would be the same.
It would not be the welts, only a counting of them.
This cold room, where I measure and tend the ropes,
is not interesting, this continual interrogation 
regarding my cold use of ropes to soothe 
these ten welts of mine. The premise is this: 
there are ten welts on my neck in a cold room. 
I have control of the temperature. I have the ropes.
Clearly their fluid is rising. At such a frail distance.

 

Polaroids

What a pickle, I thought, and stopped there, 
with that in my mouth.
What an uninteresting say to thing.
This pickle, why do I think of it as a problem,
when its mustard seeds float
in a tart sugared liquid?
Perhaps the problem is color, how
its inhabitation of the cucumber flowers
seems so much like the sun and the innards
of the squash beetle at the same time.
What about his impetus to compose 
a pickle up there, that author?
It seems narcissistic, at the very least.
Now there are two figures.
Who was, and who was suspected.
The doctor asked one too many questions
and thus himself became suspect.
Latex gloves among the towels,
manipulation to affirm operation,
soyed pork on the grill.

 

Stomach

A dog ate a turtle from a tub of turtles, cracking its shell in many places but swallowing it whole. The little girl who cared for them noticed. The doctor put the dog under with a shot and opened its stomach and removed the turtle, which lived, as did the dog, which would have died. She’d insisted. She was right. Cut it open, she’d said!
 

Edible Flowers

Gold-winged things shoot from the grass to the line of crepe myrtles too fast for me and the catbirds sing all night their echoes through the pillow wrapped around my head, peck at the dog at dawn, swoop and dive from cables that connect like punctuation or silk knots smeared across membranes, whatever that means. The magnolias drop their brown cups. A sprinkling of water drowns the dust. And there’s that slate car again, erasing its roundnesses. These details are especially Sunday. African, you might say, if you thought about our bones. New England, you might say, if there was one. Now it’s time for History 232: one face turning into another on the screen. One nasturtium turning summerly into itself, as if ashamed of a love so private it could brook no abrasion of exposure.

Voice

Cloaked in
    peacock-purple,
back erect
    against
a canopied-life,

cadaverous shade shelters
your mute, limp braids
and white-gloved hands,

thoughts 
    bleached anemic,
eyes blind 
    to the blue-cracked sea
beyond 
    a salt-blemished sand,

a box-wrapped life 
    floats away 
on bands of stolid indigo;
    a tessellated sky
sweeps silence to shore;

and you,
    blind, mute you,
shielded from
    the striations 
of a jaundiced sand,
    a turbid ochre,
        a toneless puce,
           a sallow woman’s life,

blind, mute you,
    like an oculist,
chatoyant,
    you see 
some other 
    woman’s life—
not your reality—
    you see

it packed in a blanched box,
beyond the froth-spit sand,
over a murky cerulean sea,

you see 
    that life
over there
    floating aromatic,
sinking leaden

into kohl-blue depths 
    of law-abiding deference,
        dutiful submission,
           servile revulsion;

but here,
    here where you sit
obfuscated 
    by purple shadows,
vegetating 
    in aubergine denial,
your white-gloved 
    hands
and vacant, mute 
    countenance
will speak, 
    
from the safety 
    of your canvas,
will speak,
    and the world 
will hear 
    your glassy, retractable
moan for freedom,
    your crude gasp
for air, and,
    like a tendon snapping:

your voice.

 

Chiseled Linen

Sorceress,
you’ve been silenced for resilience earned,
feminine power scorned, chilled, carved 
into marmoreal heritage—broom intact—
washed linen sullied by the stench 
of rotting petroglyphs hidden in wadis;

roots gnarled into dusty marble, 
dull as the dugong your mariner ancestors 
scooped in days that used to glow 
like phytoplankton in the mesmerizing
dark waters of the Arabian Gulf;

gone are the groupers and pomfrets—
slimy, silvery-gray—gone the prickly cockle,
the blue sea-star, Queen Sheba’s hoopoe 
swishing magic over the dhow-crowded sea;

scorned and silenced for your resilience,
sorceress, incised pride fit together
like past potsherds, seared into place by 
the inept hairy hands of intelligentsia 
and eggheads alike, smelted down, 
then sculpted into a grainy, shellacked
stone frieze of a woman, sea-salt garnished;

like a peppery furrow shell 
hanging a blue-striped ormer,
amputated, yet unrelenting, 
you continue to hang linen;
voiceless, still you scream; 
vision ruptured by years of
a binding veil, still you see

that inculcated injustice,
that mandatory cremation
of rights and dignity, 
somehow you see, sorceress, 
that there is a way to be free.

 

Rosewater in the Boudoir

Bulbul warbles
    tinder notes
on a windowsill

unopened
    voice 
catches fire

cleaves through
    heat-heavy air
like tin foil
    slicing moist-hot
cotton balls

voluminous
    with 
waterlogged
    love

exuding 
    amber essence
burnt in a 
    mubkhar

waiting for
    you
here
    as your 
wife waits 
    for you
there.

The Hang

It’s important to articulate
the original,

hurtful,
blurred composite.

Frames should be viewed
sequentially,

in time—
gaps

in the clouds.

Blue shapes

on their way

somewhere?

The slow parade.

It’s possible
to get the hang.

The Hang

It’s important to articulate
the original,

hurtful,
blurred composite.

Frames should be viewed
sequentially,

in time—
gaps

in the clouds.

Blue shapes

on their way

somewhere?

The slow parade.

It’s possible
to get the hang.


Placebo

A five-week-old cat smelling of fresh bread. He blunders
to give me his paw tender as earthworm. Are these walls

peach? Air definitely flirts and fucks with us. This 
small cat’s brother died before they could get him home.

And so I feel more positive about the package recycling
crushed down in the bin, one plastic film per window.

This pays for a drive over the causeway’s simmering tin 
because a memo’s been sent against the egret’s regret.

Like, jam the wire works into couplets so no one will notice
how lonely the hundred brands of soap, the numerous stripes.

You tilt back paralyzed, walk out towards night feeling clean
and empty-handed, replacing the thing needed with nothing.

 

Something Beautiful

The word “like”: a latch that comes back again and again to splice two things together never meant to be compared. Grass, hair. Light, water. And in life, she pointed out to me, do not compare contrast. The dead metaphors blanketed with snow, eventually a robin would single out a moment by dainty lunges forward. Hopping. Or hoping. One letter changes and you get a mystical transformation. All that thinking, like taking a shower: somehow you lived through another red velvet dreary five-thirty Mass, blood heated by a walk down the aisle. When a short man seems not to want to talk to you, you want to wander into a circle of really drunk women dancing to ear-splitting music, holding their heads so their blunt cuts curl around their wrists. A new move, not yoking two un-alike things, but rather following one into a group of like-built, equally drunk motions.

 

Poem Written Standing Up

Death of all handmade objects. Vessels and their collaborators, the armchair. Or you could take a picture of a tractor, a picture of a picture of your father who drives a tractor while chased by your brothers through neutral fields. The death of canola stalks. Those tractor gears had been laid and fitted together, one brain connected to the hand that wrenched them together. A foot that has a burr sticking out of the heel, the pain avoided by wearing clogs; there’s a point at which you forget and buy flat canvas shoes at a bargain price. The news is made too, by hands first then other parts. The news hangs negligibly important compared to the center of the table, the depth of topsoil, the rocks below.

Self Portrait with Forgiveness

Maybe forgiveness could take
the shape of a fish

I place in the heel
of a clear, plastic shoe

filled with water.
There would be one

fish in each shoe. They 
would be in love—

with each other, not me—
but eternally divided.

They would be brilliant
and orange and I

would walk around on them
all day and every night

they’d tuck me in,
repeating: it’s alright, it’s alright.

 

English as a Second Language

He studied hard. He 
was small and quick, like
a minnow swimming.

He liked the idioms
in English, especially
phrases like: I left

the past behind me,
the glass half full.
After class he asked:

what is the word
for the sound a knife
makes entering flesh?

Is it different for flesh 
very young or old?
What is the word

that means to hold 
a fish? I held him 
briefly. His scars darted

in and out and then
we were water
under the bridge. 

#1089

I love you,
I love you,
I love you—

clouds are
moving in
behind us,

storms are
forming in
front, blue

sky purple,
green grass
yellow, all

things pale
to this dark—

 

#1091

My Buddha,
(red flowers
curl around
him) exults

that he may
not be faced
out towards
grey worlds,

but watches
these words
that attempt
to be green—

 

#1092

To be happy,
to be blessed,
are not equal—

see how God
squeezes grace
out of trains,

silver in lines—

 

#1088

Bottoms of barrels—
where I go to get “I”

words to represent
me, but constructs

constrict me down
to levels of humid

air sucked vacuum-
space out past sky,

“I” can never be “I”

 

#1090

Rain falls in Philly—

cars heap up in lots,
mushroom-chrome—

Against My Mother’s Death.
My Mother Will Never Die. And Mother Died. But Just a Little.

My mother will never die.
As soon as one of her eyes grows old, I’ll rush to her
and turn her eyelids young again.
As soon as her face begins to wrinkle, I’ll immediately commission painters
to repaint her.
Without a moment’s delay, I’ll choose the greatest painters 
and send them on an emergency mission
to restore her wondrous body,
fresco by fresco,
like antique friezes
in secret attics, naves, and balconies.

My mother will never die.
I’ll swallow her myself, piece by piece.
I’ll gulp her down and spit her up
more beautiful
and pure.
I’ll sprinkle her with hyssop.
And she’ll be as white as snow.

Mother won’t die because I’ll betake myself to her
and pray, and on the spot my prayer will become my mother.

Mother won’t have a chance to die
because I’ll turn into an air-bag
before the fatal accident. I’ll die in her place every time.
I’ll go and methodically rejuvenate her,
I’ll bring her the water of life
from where hills clash and rear,
the mountains battling tooth and nail.

Everyone who tells me my mother will die
I’ll butcher. I’ll put them up in the coarsest, most barbarous salt
and throw their heads to steep in a barrel,
in a sea of wine.
Of wine and Easter cake.

And Mother died. But just a little.

 

If My Mother Were to Die
in My Chest, Your Heart

If my mother were to die,
I’d enter her body and live.
There I’d live eternally,
There I’d build my fortress, there I’d celebrate
all the anniversaries that were my mother’s.

Sing, I told my body.
Sing.
Sing the gentleness that was my mother’s.
Sing Mother’s beauty, sing her anger whenever I made
a mistake, one of my life’s jokes, whenever I broke something 
in the kitchen.
Sing with fury how you loved Mother.

Sing my childhood’s despair, whenever she ventured as far as the corner of the apartment building to buy bread, bread and milk—I worried she’d abandon me forever. As if your shadow could abandon you. Your body’s own shadow. As if it could just go off and leave you. As if it could go off and leave behind, in your chest, your heart.

Self-Portrait as the Golden Head at Jardin de Luxembourg

The corrupt incorrigible with heavy bags swing,
prone to kisses from boys in black shirts 
and horn-rimmed glasses, through the garden,

some in packs, some alone with their tobacco, 
dying for another glass of wine or day’s first,
while bodiless Head stares golden from its shackle

above a rut of dirt. Minus torso, heart’s tender
lacks a hiding place, so moves beyond the usual
clenched fist or apple core—what we remember

the heart to be—and spills in every direction, 
as shadows spill across a gazing pool and rising
immaculate Head watches lidless, affection

for its lack darkening path that leads
down rows and rows of trunkless trees.

 

Femme y es-tu?

From heaps of ash we rise and twist. 
It’s the burn that makes us
less stable at the core, more split-level, 
cowled round the neck by winter, or the door 
flung closed in despair (of seasons): a wreath, 
living room’s creosote-soaked floor. 
Wood cured of native sickness will endure.

Solemnity is a room when afternoon 
passes without and within: night’s film 
coating a crystal chandelier, presto
swinging open onto cutaways of wing-
backed chair, highboy, fire burning through
the body’s primed and seasoned tinder.
Wood cured of native sickness goes cinder.

Convalesce on a carved chaise just to stand.
Converse with nothing but the room we’re in.
Part perfumed air like a curtain. We begin
the walk from bridge to bar to bed stand, then
collapse into weeping cups, a circle stain
on best white linen. Oh where have we been?
Wood cured of native sickness will rescind.

The fire scores its scores of reams, throws
light on ceiling beams hewn from trees 
in their rings wed to an older form 
of functioning. Grow up. Grow up. We 
shudder at the thought, rise and twist, tiny
slip caught in flame’s orange end. Wood
cured of native sickness will transcend.

Supernova remnant Cassiopeia A

One night the angels came
for her, rustling their wings
in the starlight. She was sleeping.
They grasped her arms and ankles,
lifting her away as though
she weighed nothing at all.
The next morning her feet ached
and her daughter gave her comfort.
That night again they took her,
carrying her past the atmosphere.
She told them she wanted to see
Cassiopeia and they brought
her to the mountains of creation,
dipping her hands and toes in the dust.
She woke dreaming of beauty
but could not walk. Her shoulders
ached and for the first time
she feared. Again in the darkness
the angels found her, hiding
in the bathroom, holding her arms
around her heart. They sang
and she fell asleep. This time
she remembered nothing but
could not smile. In the morning
she found feathers in the bed.
When night came she lay awake
in the dark, pinching her skin,
imagining grief as they gathered
around her. She did not speak
as they pulled her close, pressing
their fingers against her eyes,
brushing their lips to her hair.
She wept and did not look back.
The angels laughed, pretending
happiness, but she felt how they
trembled, holding her too tightly
for hours. That morning she discarded
fear to explain love to her daughter
but by nightfall she knew the angels
had gone and she braided her hair
with sorrow. And when she died
she dreamed of angels crying
in the explosion, scattering
their light in the infinite dark.

 

Star streams of the Splinter galaxy

My mother thinks the dead can hear us,
swears they drift around, walking through
walls and photographs. And I’ve heard
the house creak at odd times but never
believed in ghosts, never felt the remnant
of a person touch me. I’ve told her this,
told her about the faint trails that surround
the Splinter galaxy, glowing like the demented
arms of a long-dead spirit.

When my grandfather died, they would not
let me see him. I hated the acerbic drama
of the house, the stopped clocks. My father’s
refusal to ever speak of it. No one wept.
Fifteen years later I remember memorizing
constellations all summer, shivering for hours
in the darkened grass. I prayed for a sign,
for a shooting star to wish on, but fell asleep
too soon, never learning the details of his cancer,
how death is a surprise even when you expect it.

The streams around the Splinter galaxy are believed
to be remnants, debris from an interstellar collision
so long gone no one remembers what happened.
Odd how beautiful the photo looks, the soft streams
of one galaxy haunting another, the brilliant edge
of a spiral tucked between as though the eternal
darkness was not at all heavy. And I’ve asked her
what it was like, that night, when everything stopped,
wanting to believe my grandfather knew the universe
could be beautiful, but she says it’s too long ago
to remember for certain.

Bum Canto 6.

Lassos of paint. Lipped cigarette. 
Autumn Rhythm. Lavender Mist. The season’s 
At our own end of reality; we take some tequila, lemon salted, 
Monday in Brooklyn, conversation lolling

self-destructive, semi-gloss; synapse patterns, 
indescribable, the body and soul’s conversation 
like clouds over the river, stainless steel light. 
Pizza arrives with sausages that look like mitochondria.

Only he penetrated the emotional cordon sanitaire 
he had thrown around his work in progress. 
Centuries splash in wavelets. A shoe 
falls like a dove from the bridge. Joanie shares a pint of milk.

Oedipus was a wreck. He needed three drinks 
to nerve up to conversation, then the words drifted 
with a cat she didn’t know. Conversation takes 
on a kind of ceramic quality. Almost bell-like.

Few, far between, mumbled phrases. It calmed him 
to think, iron and brick and unsanitary 
life staggers from a cab 
with a letter from Karl we all just have to read.

 

Bum Canto 21.

I estimate by rule of thumb 
celebration of the opened heart. 
Woman clutching her throat, 
the buzzard circling comfortably 
with her hands. Charismatic, I’m here. And I’m there. 
Paradiso. Just another thing 
a quarter mile off has what 
it needs now. I won’t go to work with it. I was quite sure 
once. Now I’ve lost the point, 
roaming out into alleyways; 
there is only and this where she should walk 
in the room and say, 
but she doesn’t and I don’t. 
I think, perhaps, this began 
as indictment; the bear- 
claws are suspect; the most 
penetrating question comes 
from an ATM machine; you 
can’t imagine thirty years ago as I sat in my 
parents’ house with my copy 
of “The Portable Faulkner” 
why anyone 
lives here. Meanwhile, 
at the tire store, the gumballs 
harden in their machine; 
the fan turning my lamp lights my book. 
The crickets had built a huge 
song toward the sky. I realize 
on the ceiling down to the fools on TV 
playing ball. Words in a notebook 
become more fascinating, 
and, at last, how I got here. I think I’m 
snapping out of it, and I’m 
grateful for all those things. 
Who cares? 
That small rodent 
of a heart leaps out of your left 
breast pocket and makes 
a break for it, right into 
the lunch-hour traffic outside 
Hy-Vee. Little feller never 
had a chance. You could go 
to the hospital; more on that later. Faulkner’s 
voice. My dad making a summer 
sausage sandwich and settling, 
but they wouldn’t 
know what’s wrong with you. 
You might. They got me here. Here is OK. 
Fantastically, it is the same sun 
that saw me into this world—
weird, unhinged—
as well take that 
vague sense of confusion. 
Wash it on delicate and 
dry it the same and wear it 
because it’s the only thing 
that matches.

The Styrofoam Firestorm 
(what the Department Chair intim[id]ated over a cup of coffee):

1/
Spin control has limitations; a duck in a swan-suit will not fly.
But one day, you had to ask: To what do I owe this styrofoam cup?
You craved—yet feared—its all-too-white history . . .
The answer? A petroleum firestorm in Iraq. 

And someday, you’ll ask again: What about this styrofoam cup?
See, I told you not to assert your eco-consciousness.
The answer’s always petroleum in [fill in the bank].
Ha! Sorry, I know it’s serious late American empire capitalism.

Well I told you not to assert your eco-conscience
or mix literary metaphors into conversations.
I’m sorry, but it’s seriously late American empire capitalism.
You have to love physical objects in shrink-wrap, don’t you?

Before you mixed metaphors in conversation
you played ball, scratched So-and-so’s back, even undercover.
But you love physical objects in shrink-wrap anyway, don’t you?
I admit I’m addicted to some things I wouldn’t want known . . .

2/
But you’ve played ball, scratched backs under covers
because you like what you like and, well . . . What is beautiful, anyway?
I’m addicted to some kinks I wouldn’t want known. . . .
Some days you feel like the bird; some days you feel like the windshield

and you like what you like and. . . . Well, what is beautiful, anyway?
Beauty is transient while Ugly sticks forever.
Some days you feel like the bird, some days the windshield.
Someday, you should learn the virtues of velcro yourself

because Beauty can detach while Ugly sticks forever.
I mean, you are too old to make moves like this.
Learn the virtues of velcro yourself:
drop your principles—they’re light as dumbbells anyway,

and you’re too old for a move like that . . .
You were overdue for this promotion—you earned it!
Just drop your dumbbell principles—they’re so light anyway.
Oh, I’m sorry, did I—I didn’t somehow offend you?

3/
Oh? Well, you were overdue for a demotion; you earned that.
Don’t thank me—I really love you. . . . (And that’s why love hurts).
Oh, I’m sorry, did I offend you somehow?
Okay, I don’t love you. Go thank your-fucking-self!

Go thank yourself! If I ever loved you, that’s why love hurts.
You think the B, F, and D trains you take stand for Big Fucking Deal?
I don’t love you—go thank your-fucking-self!
Whaddayou mean, “the evils we do live long after we are gone”?

You think your B, F, and D trains stand for Big Fucking Deal?
Next you’ll say the earth is warming—you’ll start quoting Beatniks!
Whaddayou mean? What “evils” that we did ever lasted long?
Come on, what’s a little suppression among friends?

Next you’ll say the sea is rising. What—you’re quoting Science?
What made you suddenly read? No good deeds will go unpunished....
Come on, what’s a little erasure among friends?
You’re Asian—you can’t go out in the streets. . . . Oh, uhm. Can you?

4/
What made you a reader? No good deeds go unpunished . . .
Save yourself—don’t smear your identity with this.
Okay, Asian-American—you still can’t go out in the streets.
At least I’m doing something useful—I’m not reading poetry.

Save yourself—don’t associate with that!
It too shall pass (just like shit), but which of the two will you be?
At least I’m doing something useful—I’m not seeking utopia. 
The Revolution was just a dinner party on paper plates.

It too shall pass (just like shit), and which will you be
at the apocalypse—the manager or laborer angels?
The Revolution was just dinner on styrofoam.
The last democracy on earth was the first, and we both know

Apocalypse will have manager and laborer angels. . . .
Spin control has limitations; a duck in a swan-suit will not fly.
The last democracy on earth was Athens, and we both know
you crave—yet fear—its all-too-white history. . . .

Grief Suite

Everything, even the weather, conspires to speak for the mother: the dense morning fog, chill air cold night, afternoon heat staring down the greenery, newly minted, newly traded for her death. Everything speaks for the mother even though the daughter asks what scrap of beingness could have created this.

Was there a reason she died in front of the sons just as the daughter was coming to see her? Did she love the daughter at all? Can love be traded, bartered by the daughter who kept the mother’s secret of senility seven years and kept all the mother’s secrets since birth?

Every blossom becomes the mother, every dead branch, green leaf.

~

Never can the daughter feel she gives the mother comfort. The mother says she wants a peaceful life, a walk in the park, another husband child house yard. Please don’t bother, she says busy doing laundry.

In a dream the daughter sees her arms are older than the mother’s. The sunspots proliferate.

The shock of the mother worse and worse.

~

                  (not the body but the space around it . . .)

The approximate location of the daughter’s grief is not the body but the space around it, the smothering humidity, the day breaking into time repetition, memory and the blunted colors of. Not people causes bodies streaming past.  
            
Hospitals and doctor visits and the giving up of it. The daughter takes the mother to healers, New Age Santa Fe redemptives gluttonous for, Hasidic rabbi wreaking miracles turning away unable, the Dalai Lama’s personal physician saying, o.k. but let go. 
            
The mother’s purple blouse and pants are wadded in a ball beneath the gurney. The mother squirms, kicks her legs as she always has. The daughter says no heroic measures. She remembers how the mother says dying is like sleep. The daughter cries and phones the younger son, tells him to tell the older son too. The male nurse says your mother will not die. She is fine. The mother’s white skin, white hair like silk, her luminous body sick and shaking, arms tied down in restraints, her heart beats green on the black screen above her head, blood pressure in red, oxygen in blue. They say she is doing well.

The mother forgets her life completely. But even in the midst of her absence, even in the gap of her forgetting she says to the daughter, I’m still myself. It’s true. Her hands are the same. Hair, mouth, same. Teeth are replaced. Still, the smile is. Same. 
            
Gasp of pain between birth and death, whatever’s remembered is never real says a voice in the dream.

~

God does not come to the mother, the mother’s mother comes in the scented present and the mother thinks the daughter is the mother and the daughter like a prince hopes to wake the dream, something else to be good enough for.

~

Many of those seated at the funeral believe the mother has integrated herself at death into the thoughts moods looks of a woman of 40. The daughter starts believing them, believing this was the reason the mother left as she did.

At the funeral, the son who has not seen the mother for years speaks his words. The air turns thin. The daughter cannot breathe. He says the mother was good, kind. He brings up a vague incident from childhood, something about school or house. The daughter misses the gist of it. She sits stiff, presses her back into the pew, remembers the mother stripping naked on her front porch, remembers how she grabbed the green and white striped afghan from the couch, tried to cover the mother. The mother fought and screamed take it off me, take it off me! The daughter watched the mother walk into lilacs, the green and white stripes of the afghan trailing behind. Later that day, dressed again, the mother said, I’m only sixteen, but I have a job, I have friends. I can’t come here again. Your children are wild, they’re bad for me, you need to free me or else I may never want children of my own.

The son’s words, sanded to a fine finish, float above the mother. In the back of the chapel, God sits wearing a black suit, white shirt. He keeps track of the clashing with a stone tablet and chisel. For the daughter it will always be the smell of ammonia and urine, the stench of dying taking its time.

~

The mother’s scrapbooks piled high beside the laundry, a smile, a pose, photographs of men she did not marry, each with the smooth sheen of a lost idea. All the gone things are treasured most, picked at and needed. The daughter’s hereness is distracting, disconcerting. The mother shoos her away like a bird, like a fly, like the reason she could not focus on her real life. The rain is mild but profuse then wild. Everything conspires to speak for the mother.

~

Even the restaurant the daughter frequents is a delirium: Thai green curry with Japanese eggplant, red potatoes, carrots, tomatoes, shitake mushrooms, zucchini, pineapple rice, a glass of chardonnay. The steaming teas, small aluminum pots balanced in the waiters’ hands. The blue room fills like rapturous destiny, unseen but felt in the crest of it, an ache in the chest. Colored doilies stretched across the ceiling, bib lettuces, green papaya, jicama tossed with ginger-lime vinaigrette. The breath of the restaurant will not leave her alone. The insistent forks and knives, the umbrage of her purple blouse, the umbrage of violet. Each tile on the wall, each chili hanging from the ceiling speaks the last hours without the daughter, not waiting the absence of light inside the dying body to speak its end. The daughter waits for a sign, waits for illumination, waits to be carried past. But what she sees for a moment as rapturous turns out to be nothing but a yellow menu left sitting on a chair.

~

Six days after the funeral, the daughter screams sees a blue jay trapped in her room. The same shock over and over. The husk of the mother trapped, flapping her hands, unable to speak. The bird pounds its body again and again, pounds soundless against the window ledge sky-filled with blue.

~

            
Three weeks after the mother’s death, the mother’s birthday comes as it always has, always will. It is a gray day, spring, but the sky reflects winter, only worse. New blossoms on the trees are threatened like children when the mother turns her back. The wind blows through, the blossoms fall. The mother keeps dicing the onions for supper, the sound of the father shouting, the sweet smell of onions frying. Dinner at six. Quiet. Chewing. The liver’s rubbery iridescence, onions drenched in oil from sitting in the pan, lukewarm peas, overcooked, gray like the day, but still a hint of green. The daughter chews the peas. Now she is buying a birthday gift the mother will never wear:  a silk blouse painted with lilacs. The mother hangs the blouse in the back of the closet. The price tags stay on. The wind blows hard, the storm comes. Everything conspires to speak for the mother.

~

In the mother’s scrapbook, a love letter pressed between the black pages. The daughter finds it years later. She reads the stranger’s name. The mother is tearing apart the body of a cooked chicken, she cries against the window looking out. The daughter presses herself into the yellow kitchen. All that remains is the mother scrubbing potatoes for dinner. The daughter collects the peelings. The mother says you look terrible then quickly looks away.

The psychiatrist suggests the daughter take Celexa. He says it could calm her vertigo, which is getting worse. He tells her to slice the 20-mg. pills in half with a razor or knife. The daughter takes out a pink pill, angles a blade on it, shattering it in half, into powder, the taste licked from the blade is bitter.

~

Dreams of running through hospital corridors, dreams of being housed in beige walls, to love, to be loved, the never ever was of it.

The mother lying white like porcelain waiting, her skin shimmering, glimmering with the fractions of, the death rattle happens in the daughter’s absence, the absence of the mother seven years though death is clear and clearer like childhood developing in a dark photograph.

Memory and the loss of memory. The daughter’s dizziness gets the best of her. She takes a test, tracing the dizziness, the eyes register, memorize.  The mother is indelible forever. And the dizziness.

The landscape takes a turn for the worse. Everywhere the daughter looks she sees the mother. Every blossom, every dead branch green leaf. Every seed spread across. The landscape knows itself. All the daughter can do is stand clear.

The mother dead spreads her influence across the mesa. A single match, her light, carelessly thrown into a pile of trash, and how the fields burn. Her birth, lonely and proliferating with offspring, let loose into the corn, and even in this parched circumference a scarecrow stands, and also burns.

The Fall

A secret is that
mothers drop babies
on their heads
all the time.

They make sure that
no one has noticed.

Sometimes, 
this calls for
a distraction—
a silly ringtone,
a nipple slip.

All of us
have suffered,
have tumbled
to the asphalt.

All of us
remember the fall.

Some of us cry out,
even now, still,
to be carried.

 

Ring Theory

Just as we’re sailing a small boat
straight into a big storm, my dad
passes me the paper, points out 
an article explaining that the world
needs more mathematicians.  These days,
the data floats like ghosts, no one
listening to the whispering.
From somewhere far below the boat,
a charcoal cloud, another.  A jolt,
and the jib rips in half.  Halyards crack—
live wires.  I go fetal, dumb, feel nothing.
We survive—who knows why?  Later,
I find the paper in the galley, see
a Tiffany’s ad for rings: precious,
senseless things that encircle us.

 

Slush / No Slush

if the kids are still smoking, though
            the first person
they all know better
            is the one
if they’re not checking IDs
            who lets you know
or making magic marker
            that no one else
crosses to forgotten gods
            showed up
if everyone looks familiar and
            for the party
no one says hi
            thanks to your
if the lights are off
            disinterest 
if the stage is small
            in the invitation process
if the band is from Glasgow
            the second person 
and the first line ends
            is somewhere else
with something about the girl
            somewhere better
running faster
            and more fuchsia
the second line is
            without any velvet or
bound to be about
            expensive drinks
some drunken bastard
            there’s art on the wall
it’s nights like these
            that you might like
that make you want to take a job
            they’re playing the Pixies
on an island and see
            the second person
what happens
            is always within
even if what happens isn’t
            a ten- to twelve-foot radius
in the chorus of any song
            of your imagination
even if down there everyone
            often sporting
dances to the music 
            something small in her hair
swaying and stomping
            a crocodile, an elephant
like no one’s watching
            the third person
if the fan is on all night
            whispers in your ear
if the schoolboys all wear orange
            about the night
if you decide not to go back
            you’re not having
no one will write you letters
            he whispers loud 
about the slush in the streets
            like you’re on the bus
of Boston this year
            and your nose is bleeding

 

Darkness

The band wore white suits
so that all we saw was the song.

At midnight, my milkshake
turned into a princess.

A taxi drove us in circles,
but we paid in pennies.

The later it got, the more
stars your voice made.

Walking home, you said
you felt like Count Dracula.

Or Chocula.  To be safe,
we found a punch bowl,

two soup spoons and 
some fake plastic teeth.

I don’t remember sleeping, but 
I don’t remember waking, either.

 

Donkey as Teenage Son

You kneel down to check and yes, there it is—
a punk rock bracelet around the donkey’s wrist,
little metal pyramids, three rows wide.

As the rest of your tour group clomp away 
down the long face of the canyon,
you and your ass hang back to chat.

“What’s with the bracelet,” you ask,
but he wrinkles his nose, kicks up some dust
in that adolescent donkey sort of way.

Soon, he’ll be wandering off at night,
returning only to stare into the embers, 
to trace the last wisps of smoke

as they bend themselves into letters,
into silent curses and comminations.
You’re sure you’ve lost him for good,

but when you scratch his back, he turns, 
sinks his sad gray eyes into yours
and drops a pile of dry apples 
softly at your feet. 

Poem With/out a Face
     (after the photo “Marine Wedding” by Nina Berman)

Somewhere cadets are fed up 
with polishing their shoes.  
Not here.  They eat chicken 
in their special mess hall 
and do chin-ups outside 
my office window.  Are they 
ever deployed?  The boy 
without a face marries 
his high school sweetheart 
in Illinois.  On their wedding day 
the photographer was not 
saddened by the resolve 
in her face, or his lack of 
ears, nose, chin.  There is no 
work for him because he has 
no hands, so his bride 
is a barkeep, serves Bud Dry 
in plastic cups at a place 
for locals.  The cadets here 
cadence call on the quad, 
shimmy on their elbows 
towards the Dean’s trailer 
as if they’re receiving 
incoming fire, but they’re not, 
and the photographer knows 
we can read her photo 
of the newlyweds any way
we want.  Desire is serendipity, 
is pity, is blind, is danger, is not 
obligation, is poking the most 
alien thing with a stick to see 
if it stirs and clings, the way 
a literary agent I slept with 
one August after we got high 
on a Brooklyn rooftop admitted,
when I woke up tucked 
into hospital-corner sheets, 
that he had attended a Military 
Institute and could assemble 
a rifle in less than thirty seconds 
without light, which is to say 
that unlike the bus security guard 
I slept with in Israel who kept 
his gun under the mattress and 
told me nothing about anything 
except for one childhood story 
about a river in South Africa
that I remember exactly what 
both of their faces felt like 
under my fingertips in the
dark or maybe I don’t.

 

Small, Generic Night Towns

we stumbled all the way to your place—
sultry footpath of August 
(snapped heels          busted straps)

—past the gas station that sold
underage cigarettes because
someone’s mother didn’t care

once

after last call, the air 
couldn’t hold any more lust we were
dizzy with the opposite of remorse and pretending 
to converse           (let’s

cross the threshold               to forgetfulness)

            (these keys are hard to push)

(shhhhh)

            swollen door; holding 
            pattern; night like a terrarium;

your neighbor with a pair of dice tattooed on his arm out combing the block for his cat named Chance who had vanished, have we seen him, he asks

            among the spent fire-cracker 
            casings?  in the cluster of moths 
            trailing yellow light?

            it doesn’t seem like an accident 
            that summer is always gin-soaked 
            and static with

hush-hush wishes and  
furtive sadness of

night growing   
larger than us

holding its breath 
for things gone 
missing; holding 
its breath for 
too long

*

All our clothes, cleansed and nakedness
—we hear the drying, branch to branch
as if a bell would ring and the sky
back away, strip itself—there is no rain
but memory :one thin rope
and everything dries in pairs.

We talk helplessly without our clothes
—the words sitting by themselves
getting used to the light, our room
smaller and what we say is drying too
—we sit and under this clothesline
stronger than what was washed

and shown. We match this ritual
with public care, with a morning
greater than anything else in the sky.

Train Safety Assembly

Each spring, they made us watch
the movie: kids in their striped ’70s shirts, 
foolish on the tracks, all gumption 
and bravado, all we’ll-be-back-in-time-
for-dinner, then the laces wrapped 
on a spike, a scream, a cut to white. 
I carried the movie like a door 
behind my ribs. Sometimes 
it swung into a starless black.

Once, my cousin placed a penny 
on the tracks behind her house as I 
hissed and moaned from the back door. 
The next day, she pressed the flat 
President into my palm. The copper 
burned with her narrow escape. 
Keep it, she said. I’ll do it again.

A train is no mind, no give, just 
roar and edge. What kept me up 
was how it didn’t care for me. 
How its churning covered no mercy.
How its bright, unlidded eye 
cut right through fog.

I would like to end with an idea 
of, say, travel: that fear of trains is fear 
of leaving, or that the metal bellow 
is the sound of swift distance. But 
it would be a lie. The train is simply 
the opposite of what I want my life to be. 
On the other hand, it never flinches.

 

How it Ends: Three Cities

#1: Austin, Texas

This morning we woke to the grackles. Their mouths open, tails oil-black against the blacker pavement. Some had closed their eyes; others had died staring. Cars stopped on Congress and were left, hunched like boulders. The elms, always bright with cries, were still. We didn’t call work, just sleepwalked to the Red Pony Lounge and dropped into silence. Now someone puts Sam Cooke on the jukebox, “Cupid,” and I think of the girl with the gun. The man across from me reaches into his coat pocket and pulls out a bird. Everyone shrieks, draws back, hisses about disease. I touch its small head. Its eyes are closed. I want it to wake up. To see what’s left, even if it’s only this bar, this green drink rimmed with glowing salt, this long-gone song caught up in smoke like light. 


#2: New York, New York

By lunchtime, the city is swathed in sweetness. A woman says Bit-O-Honey. Her son says roasted almonds. Old men find one another to talk of fifth grade snow days. In Queens, a young man veers from a funeral motorcade in search of lemon meringue. A paralytic woman rises, walks to the freezer, scoops mouthful after mouthful of Rocky Road. In Central Park, a man takes a bottle from his backpack. He builds a perfect snowman and bathes it tenderly in maple syrup. He leans in to kiss it. A feuding couple falls silent in front of a window display of petit fours, chocolate tortes, marzipan apricots. After eating, they brush sugar gently from one another’s mouths. A middle school teacher opens the window and students stream from it, called by the air, drifting skyward on the aroma of vanilla extract, as clear and sharp as winter. 


#3: Okemah, Oklahoma

At first the animals don’t seem strange. Most twilights the town is full of stray dogs, alley cats. But the hamster? The iguana? Only when she sees the guinea pig emerge from the garden soil, shake itself off, and trundle down the sidewalk, does she begin to understand. Across the way the one-eyed tabby bursts from beneath the oak. Goldfish leap down the street’s puddles. Hermit crabs scuttle over lawns, and cockatiels preen dirt from their wings. She hears a sound from the movies, and turns to see Major Luther’s old appaloosa gallop down Birch Street. It seems wrong, she thinks, for them to come back only to vanish again. But then Preacher Man, her golden retriever, dives into her lap, and as the stars go black she is laughing.

Emergent Tree

There’s an urgency in the green that I love when I read it
like the breath from a leaf if you’re close enough

to feel it, or the round puffy cheeks of my daughter when she sleeps
in a picture taken by a phone & delivered via email

to my clandestine heart, my heart in hiding, my grey cloud heart.
The sky outside is all mixed up with tree, wishing it could feel

itself & not be itself, & it is trying to put it all down, tangled
branches a tract that it writes about bark & roots & vast

emptiness & O! I love poets with names & I love those without
& the tree is rippling in the breezy breeze because there’s this

thing it can do with itself when it wants called expulsion or
explosion then it shatters & ends up empty & I’m working

on my own people version where I hold up everything all at once
then one at a time let it drift to the ground while it burns

& I wonder if this sounds familiar to you.

 

Everything is a File

I’m compiling sunlight, the glint
& the gluster—extracting the whole array
of elements for later use because later

is when the current value runs pale
& the next element is not what
my pointer wants to point to.  Reset.

While my head is checking each line
for embedded comments, sorting
& stepping through the here to the then,

my fingers are doing this, doing this
while my head is sorting & stepping &
doing this—I’m doing this.  I’m creating

a vast & complicated index, I’m writing
it all down in code {it’s a secret}.
Me is a secret, me is run, me is

simple text edited with grace, looking out
the window while closing that one off,
a directory of sunlight appended to the me

blinking slowly, like a cursor: Hello, world.

 

Can’t Stop the Signal

Proximity increases the frequency
& duration of the beep

beep-beeping in my angry heart,
my claustrophobic head.  Load up

the rainy day escape pod,
blast off for nowhere, serene stars

blinking on against a field of black,
& you’ll see there’s a pattern

broadcast in the delicate swirls
of light.  Beep it says & it means

there are people who are long gone
that I wish were here again.  Beep

it says & it means I miss myself
most of all.  Beep & repeat

the cycle of head swim & haze
dream, the cycle of you

are the most lovely you I’ve seen today.
I would like it if our signals

were in synch for these several hours,
if we could live our lives together

this afternoon.  Beep it says
& it means let’s be everlasting today. 

Apocryphal

The boy has never known his father. 
This is a statement of belief. The wind walking
through the soybeans on invisible legs. The barn
that burns down and all that is left are the charred 
remains and the tangle of new life clawing 
from the dirt. So when he sees the owl,
and the owl is the same gray at dusk 
as the tuliptree, as still statuary in the highest limb,
he imagines that the owl is his father. 
Before the road there is only the desire for the road. 
Then suddenly the bird detaches itself 
from the tree. Its wings are long as a boy’s arms. 
It flies over the cattail reeds in the pond.
Some reeds are swaying forward in the wind, some back.
And because every story begins in longing and ends
in confusion, or begins in confusion and ends in longing, 
I think I must have been that boy. Each story 
is apocryphal. We mean it to be our own story, 
but then the owl detaches itself and flies away. 
Or the cattails sway and so display self-consciousness:
I was one person and then I was another. I believed once
there were leeches in the pond that would cling
to my flesh. I never saw one, but each time
I climbed from the water I checked my arms and legs. 
You have to burn them off. The belief was apocryphal, 
which doesn’t mean it wasn’t true. Every flame 
is its own longing. How could anyone believe otherwise?
I was a boy once—then I tore myself like an owl
from a tuliptree and flew into the evening sky. 

 

The Valley Below

From a distance it seemed 
they had discovered something.
Boy and father gazing down from
the mountain outcrop at our cabin.
Perhaps it wasn’t the spare smallness
of our roof that kept them gazing— 
our lives there half-hidden amid the beech trees—
but the relation of our valley to the slope.
On the mountain you became the way the wind was,
rippling past the clouds without impediment,
but in the valley the stream struggled
for any path that it could manage
and was girded on every side by red oak,
basswood, cove hardwood, and ash.
Years later I would think about my father
splitting wood behind our cabin in October—
the ritual vehemence of his axe,
the white rawness of the logs laid bare—
and I would remember the boy and his father
standing on that mountain outcrop in late evening,
looking down, the two of them listening
to the abiding insistence of my father’s axe—
and I would conjure endless, transfiguring stories
of what it was they’d thought they’d understood.

The 4 ‘0’ Clock News @ House of Sky

In the beginning we wanted

to cast ourselves 
as opera stars, to break apart

like gorgeous women
palm reading at the piano bar ~

music stinging like salt from the sea.

We were spiraling ridges, dust-darlings
and dangerous.

We were peonies ~ cut
and arranged like astronauts

in flight. We soaked in syllables

not water; rode the Southern
drawl of the wind

over cobalt glass ~
backlit by a disc of sun.

Haunted by Waters

Oh brother, the other shore is farther than our father 
carried us across. The same current that hurries 
moss and swirls of leaves leaves your ankles 
broken down in rolling rocks. If you sink

to your belly for a drink, the shallows swallow.
If you try to stand and step, the deep hand reaches
your throat like alcohol. Bite like the blade
of a driftboat oar midstream and strain to change

the river’s course. Fight your end of the line
how steelhead steals rod and reel. Strike 
wet tinder with the pocket thunderstorm you keep

buttoned up. I rain these drops of paper on the water,
but they continue floating by you, brother.


Note: I stole the title from A River Runs Through It by Norman Maclean

 

What Moves in the Attic

In their apartment? Below, we believe
we know—thud of yanked off the bed
by the ankles. There lies another story split

leveled above. Their eyes diagonal over eggs 
over easy, uneasy over groaning hardwood 
gaps in the timeline, allnight signs dark, dark

darker in their hair. Thud thud of hearts in each
other’s mouths. Here, noise complaints from us
no use against the arguments of alcohol

or onomatopoeia of murmur, gasp and sigh
past four a.m., unaware of underfloors. 
How can we have ourselves shut up there?

Thud thud thud on our downstairs door.


Thumbnail Ethnography of the Palisades Parkway 

Parsed in sparse grass 
a single sprig of indigo 
endures well into mid-
January but why?

Spared past seed,  
flimsy stalks signal 
the end of corn for seasons  
to come though cobs amass 
further in the furrows:   
where crows died,  
where farmers did not farm.

There the land blended 
into overgrowth where no foot
(hominoid) had tread for lifetimes  
nor would again before 
bulldozers razed green 
mounds into asphalt strips: 

metaphorical, invisible capital
stretches now across grade 
separations, wooded medians, 
rustic culverts, secreting  
driveways to vast estates
muted from the roar of cars.

 

Play Misusing the Stage Directions from Samuel Beckett’s “Not I”

Note—Movement: this consists in simple sideways raising of arms from sides and their falling back, in a gesture of helpless compassion. It lessens with each recurrence till scarcely perceptible at the third. There is just enough pause to contain it as MOUTH recovers from vehement refusal to relinquish third person.

Stage in darkness but for MOUTH, upstage audience right, about 8 feet above stage level, faintly lit from close-up and below, rest of face in shadow. Invisible microphone. VOICE is heard from off-stage in theater surround sound. AUDITOR, downstage audience left, tall standing figure, sex undeterminable, enveloped from head to foot in loose black djellaba, with hood, fully faintly lit, standing on invisible podium about 4 feet high shown by attitude alone to be facing diagonally across stage intent on MOUTH, dead still throughout but for four brief movements where indicated. See Note. As house lights down MOUTH’s voice unintelligible behind curtains. House lights down. VOICE continues unintelligible behind curtain, 10 seconds. With rise of curtain ad-libbing from text as required leading when curtain fully up and attention sufficient into:

MOUTH: She said the motion alone is not enough. I said boot the bull and catch as catch can. She had her mother always on her mind. 

VOICE: Like you? 

MOUTH: You said to stop to smell the sage. I didn’t plan squat. She was just my dogfall. [Pause and movement 1.] A window in the dark. 

VOICE: When did I?

MOUTH: Tugging my suitcase handle, daylighting as my jewel. But it’s like mi madre told me—if you don’t find someone who belongs to you, you might as well be dust in the wind. Blown. 

VOICE: Wasn’t I dialed in then? But you know I had my own whirlpool whirling. Can’t account for becoming a life preserver or a scapegoat. 

MOUTH: Just buy me a suicide wrap. 

VOICE: Come again. 

MOUTH: Go on, do it. [Pause and movement 2.] Fucking, do it! [Screams.] What are you waiting for? [Silence.] I’m going to ball out here. [Screams again.] Should have never stopped floating. [Silence.] Not for—

VOICE:  Changed an iota? Still going nitro at the least provocation? 

MOUTH: Yeah, just as you freight train me [brief laugh.] Nice. [Pause.] Should have sent you to a slapper bar years ago. Get your greedy lips around some slingshot [Good laugh.] 

VOICE: Stop pedaling and listen. Doesn’t have to be like this. Don’t have to run a needle in the same groove continually. Doesn’t have to be. [pause] Don’t have to run.

MOUTH: I’d like to quit the cow and find a spurring lick to call home. [Pause and movement 3.] Or maybe throw a belt and suck in a bong-hit of carbon monoxide. You’d like that wouldn’t you flopper? 

VOICE: Leave it alone. No more fuel. Like winging another eighteen after holeshot sets in. This is genuine doorslammer material. [Pause.] No more. 

MOUTH: She said the motion alone is not enough. 

VOICE: Go back to her. The words are coming. A needle.  

MOUTH: It’s a goddamn hat bender I’m still talking to you. [brief laugh.] That I haven’t foamed up with static in this ear bath. [Good laugh.] Thank God, I’m not a tree. [Pause and movement 4.] 

VOICE: Go back to her then. [Pause.] The words are coming. Same groove. [Curtain starts down]. Continually. [Pause.] Go then. Run. 

MOUTH: Don’t jerk my arm. [Screams.] Come back here! [Screams again.] Not again! [Pause.] For how long? Damn it. [Looks at AUDITOR.] How much longer. Not again. 

[Curtain fully down. House dark. VOICE continues behind curtain, unintelligible, 10 seconds, ceases as house lights up.]

 

Mistranslated Glossary of Drag Racing Lexicon

Beam
bounce a citrus fruit off someone’s noggin. Particularly trenchant if done when either party is drinking bourbon.

Blow

from Mama Coca to the Royal Botanical Gardens at Kew, from Freud to Jung (George) to Eric Clapton.
to accrue a mouthful of ascorbic acid, blood-group antigens, calcium, chlorine, cholesterol, citric acid, creatine, deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), fructose, glutathione, hyaluronidase, inositol, lactic acid, nitrogen, magnesium, phosphorus, potassium, purine, pyrimidine, pyruvic acid, sodium, sorbitol, spermidine, spermine, urea, uric acid, protein, enzymes, sodium, vitamin B12, and zinc.
Blower
one who swizzles.

Blown
one who issues forth.

Blowover
swizzller and issuer switch sides and try again.

Breakout
Rudolph leads the sleigh-train across the temples the night before prom.

Christmas Tree (or tree) 
Number of tips: 64 tips
PVC thickness: 0.12 + 0.07mm
PVC width: 4.65 + 4.65cm
Packing: 6pcs/ctn
Carton dimensions: 55 x 32 x 45cm
Biodegradable: no

Dial-in
imaginary telethon with all the callers’ voices emanating from a singular subjective consciousness. In large or involuntary doses, this condition may require medication, hospitalization or hours of nonstop Jerry Lewis as possible detoxification.

Digger
Not as sophisticated as Dig Dug in blue and white, brandishing an inflater to burst the tomato-like Pookas and green dragon Fygars. 

Doorslammer
a joke that begins in shared hilarity and ends in screaming invective. 

Flopper
one of a class of young women in the 1920’s who thought Jazz was the same as Blues, who had inadvertently exposed zippers on their short skirts and who tried to bob their hair but came out looking more raccoon tail than Betty Boop.

Fuel
a bit of deceptive gossip that ignites a deep and abiding feud or tragedy.

Fueler
someone like Iago who propagates malicious rumors to self-serving and often noxious ends.

Holeshot
the ennui that results from playing too much golf.

Hook Up
two jumbo jets engaged in an act of aerial refueling; a writhing mess of tubes and nozzles. 

Grenade

1. on Bourbon Street:
            1 1/2 oz gin
            1 1/2 oz grain alcohol
            1/2 oz Melon-liqueur
            1 1/2 oz vodka
            served in a green plastic vial culminating in grenade-shape 
            with jack-o-lantern face. Offered “pin pulled” with extra 
            151 proof rum floated on top and lit on fire (best not pulled
            in plastic stemware). 
2. Operation Urgent Fury to fight “Soviet-Cuban militarization.”
3. Shirley Temple and Roy Rogers remain doppelgangers when it comes 
    to pomegranates.

Lit the tires
(Australian) throwing down hardcore, going ball’s out on Buck’s Night, taking it a rip-snorting few steps too far during B & S (the Bachelors’ and Spinsters’ Ball), enjoying a real screamer and eventually paying the consequences of burned rubber on the road.   “Crikey, that dumbass dingo done lit the tires!” 

Nitro
condition of suddenly going berserk and breaking into a conversation with a wrestling move like the Camel Clutch, Skin the Cat, Headscissors Armbar or the Gogoplata. Going nitro can lead to the dissolution of a friendship, a permanent neck brace or to being followed around by the cameraman for Backyard Brawls.

Overdrive
state achieved after taking a speed, ginseng root, oyster and Viagra cocktail. 

Oil Down
yet because of continued fears of recession and inflation, along with a new round of nuclear tests in North Korea, the markets continued to fall to new lows.

Pedaling
perverted meddling. 

Pro tree
hardy tree that withstands total neglect like the Black Mimosa aka the Silk Tree, Summer Chocolate, Moon Cricket, Mimosa Nigra, Charlotte Black, Tar Baby, or the Black & Pink  
 
Quick 8 (Q8) 
instantaneous infinity. The cosmos in the grain of sand no sooner queried by the questioner then whisked away to no reply. Used in television commercials for philosophy departments whose recruitment has fallen on hard times. Featuring a Sophist slapping the heel of a hand against a Rationalist’s forehead, declaiming “Could’ve had a Q8!”

Rail
place to put one’s boot and marvel when in the act of sprawling. See Les Murray.

Redlighted 
spotted wearing something from Wal Mart, K-Mart or Target and called out in public.

Slapper bar
(British) place to pick up old scrubbers, loose men or women a few years on in age, for cheap, meaningless sex. From the Gaelic “sliobaire” or dirty.

Slicks
places on the scalp where an excess of gel or mousse has hardened thereby causing a spot of sheen in reflected light. Impervious to all but the strongest afro pick.

Slingshot

type of banana hammock.
In the Beverly Hillbillies the preferred weapon of Jed Clampett’s daughter, Elly May.
stiff drink to mourn a broken limb. 
a lyric poem launched to fell the Philistines like a sack of potatoes.
leftie pitcher with sidearm delivery  
Standard tree
ash | aspen | beech | basswood | birch | black cherry | black walnut/butternut | buckeye | American chestnut | cottonwood | dogwood | elm | hackberry | hickory | holly | locust | magnolia | maple | oak | poplar | red alder | redbud | royal paulownia | sassafras | sweetgum | sycamore | tupelo | willow | yellow-poplar

Throw a belt
(idiomatic) referencing a MacGyver-like savvy in the face of a more or less perilous situation. “When you’re out of horseshoes, just throw a belt!” 

Top end
type of Lycra sports bra that makes the breasts within look like ass cheeks.

Traction bars
one of the first places an alcoholic gets a drink to precipitate falling off the wagon. Could be at communion with the wafer of Jesus dissolving on the tongue. Could be at grandmother’s dining table eating a piece of rum cake. Could be in one’s own bathroom taking cough medicine.

Trap(s)
anagram for strap or rapt depending on inclination for pluralisation. Addresses the limitations of the hegemonic theory of language in social relations.

Tire shake
when an extreme endomorph decides to get jiggy with it by swinging his moneymaker around like an inner tube hula hoop.

Wheelie bars
1. place where you can flip the kickstand to lip and drain a lit cocktail, like a flaming Grenade, right off the tabletop using no hands. 
2. (Scottish) really burns. Pejorative, often uttered by someone who has been recently jilted or suffers from an acute case of hemorrhoids.

Woman Falling

It’s so strange you should suddenly be here, how did that happen, in your favorite place, that witchy old orange orchard, the very spot where it gives the impression of stretching forever in every direction, within sight of the three-story house, painted the same shade of white and, from here, right about the same size as this lone bee hive you stand looking down at a moment, no one has lived there for as long as you’ve known it, kept it a secret, parking off the highway and walking a mile down the nameless dirt road in a windy and shadowy brightness, the wind from the sun you would say, in your mind, if I know you, as of course I do not, not really, and never will now, no one will, you have made sure of that, but I can picture you saying it,  I’m not bothering anyone, I don’t even know where it is, that’s the point, no one did, no one knew how to reach you, you are there, though, you were, in the one vacant room with a mattress you even spent a night sometimes, the southern California night wind blowing through the glassless windows over your body, over your hair, maybe God would let you be the wind, but I don’t know what God thinks either, I just like to think of you all at once finding yourself in that place, walking along, without anyone knowing, that was the haunting, that was always the fun, and stretching before you a whole day of wandering and singing alone in the instant right before the one in which your body meets the earth at last.

 

At the End

Bar of jackals shunned by jackals, the scaries that frighten the scaries. Summit meeting of leading deceased souls, where eyes do the talking, in an atmosphere, an opulence of fecal, lightless fear.  Blood-flecked mirrors in men’s room with the dimensions of confessionals.  How many will have bowed their shaved skulls before it in the blank and lengthy moment which preceded the deft inoculation?

reality show

The weather determined the light, 
the moving car, the open window.
I dreamed a room and a key
in a box.  I carried a carnation 
between my teeth.

No one could tell me all the openings 
weren’t a sign, an invitation, 
because I wore it out, wore 
 a red dress for three days.
Wore my nails to the quick. 

There was a woman on a balcony 
and a commotion  I was given a 
small book and I swallowed it. 
Gave up my name when you asked 
and oiled every hinge.

I was a good little despot til the horses 
came with their endless plodding  
Your hand on my back was disastrous.  
I kept opening the medicine cabinet, 
looking for poppies. I was worse, 
but no worse than you with your fake 
name and your little machines.  
Now you see it, now you don’t.  
Luminous, I dreamed a camera 
in the wall where we made it up 
as we went along.

I was blurred, determined.

 

worse case scenario

Tuesday and I can’t stop fidgeting.
Can’t stop the boy in the blue shirt
from opening and opening the cupboards
until his body is a blue, blue, sliver.
When I said shiver, I meant it.
Meant that the meadows were
an awful, grass scented mess.
Unruly, ruled by the trigger happy
and the trite. You were diligent.
The cuts on your hands
tributes, tributaries.
You looked at me like a magician
passing a sword through a woman
when I put my hand in your pants,
put apples, cookies in my pocket.
A little licorice to stop the clicking.
Everything was mine and mine
and yours and yours.
I lost a finger. Lost my wits.
Was possessed by bareback riders
and children caught in the trees.
Heredity, they say, my mother carving
stars in the kitchen table. Heretical.
Hysterical. But I was so good at it.
So good I stole you these matches.
So good I can get you more.

 

thicket

I am all butter cream and lace when
we abandon this house for another
With a picket fence and a tiny door.
Clandestine, destined
to have too many holes we can’t fill.
Despite the flurry of hands, we are drowsy,
playing cards and fucking in the afternoon.
Holding our nostalgia like a cake knife.

Soon, we abandon this car for another
with a blue lush interior that smalls like Winstons.
I  make a flip book out our indiscretions
misspellings.  Finger the upholstery 
while we play roulette with beer bottles.
Kiss me, kiss me not.
My hope all parade floats and dancing bears
until I split the infinitives,
spilt the milk, slit the window screens.
Went for the jugular.

My sleep is still white, all paper and milk.
Counting the cracks in the ceiling and
dividing three and three and three.
Outside the amaryllis was ridiculous,
All lewdly red and unruly.
I was counting spiders in the eves when you left.
One and one and one. 

The Temple

The spires are lit by a low flame. Behind you,
a chorus of lamentations in the dark.  
Approach the temple’s wide gate and begin

praying to the living. Be with the mystery
that cloaked itself in images.
The teeth missing from the saint’s skull

are collected on a string.  Wear them close
to your thin body.  When last were you beckoned
to the wilderness for a terror to behold

and resist? You could have been anything, 
but you have been chosen to walk through the gate 
as the world’s only daughter, aglow with solitude

and held up by a lean hope.  Remove from your body
the desire for a useful love, and the plague 
of angels will no longer haunt you. Only a fool 

can tell the king the truth, and you lie to survive, 
like everything mysterious.  When your right hand 
rises to the center of your chest to join the left

you find you have forgotten to kneel.
How can you hope to hear the howling that is God
when nothing around you is on fire?

 

The Prison

This cell once held the slave 
who told the king he was mortal.
This one protected the people
from the man who murdered

his six sons.  Someone
is singing.  No one is here.  
The stone is darkly stained,
but no matter to you. You still enter

the windowless room where 
the inquisitor broke a suspect’s fingers. 
Because they were your fingers. 
Because that’s where you confessed

that you were no better 
than the torturer. Nothing will save you 
from the prison of memory.  
Can you see the broken light,

striking twin perihelia?
The world is cold now; stay behind 
these stones. After all, 
a woman’s freedom is different

from a man’s and more wild. 
I’ve seen you roam the forest,
your mouth glistening.  What power
burns beneath your silence?  To keep

yourself safe, dig every body 
out of the dungeon. Ready yourself 
for the thousand wanting bones 
in the walls. Resurrection

is an old art, and the most savage 
of all possible joys.

 

The Museum

After the great destruction, looters came with their loose eyes  
           and desire for oil and marble.

They wanted beauty in her old disguises, like statues of
           ancient cities before

they were taken by marauders.  The fractured hands before you
           belong to the conquered gods.

The tapestry in the hall tells an old legend, the tale of the woman   
           warrior with her twisted dagger,

and the many arrows in her quiver that warmed themselves in 
           the bodies of her enemies.

Here lies her spear and shards of the hunted.  When you roam 
           the dark corridors bring her weapons

made from molten and steel, for once men stole their brides
           mistaking possession for love. 

Hide your body in her armor. Hide your heart in an empty grave.  
           When you leave here, take nothing.

 

Fountain

Water drowns your panic like a Sunday blessing.
It’s spring.  The sky above you darkens with rain.

You think passion is your only gift, but a sadness 
older than the sea keeps time in your blood. 

Once you saw two skeletons locked in a kiss. 
Time has forgotten them. Time forgets

everything except the swan’s neck reflected 
in the dark fountain and the way it cried out

its silver anthem of loneliness. Do not drink
from here. The water looks cold and clean

but clarity like that only leads to madness.  
Remember when you came here with the one

who held your body even as it changed
beneath his hands and waited for you to

renounce the world?  You will never renounce it. 

Aaron

I’ve looked at him from behind, while he’s not looking.  His calves are not perfect, slightly misshapen and bowed outward.  But I avoid his face so as to appear indifferent.  I know his back, the part farthest from the front.  If I look there, I am like a piano backed by a singer.  Or a beach backed by hills, always near, but never touching.  If I only imagine his face, I cannot be sunstruck.  But what if, in the night, his face steeps under the door and suddenly I am in his car and can see his herringbone face?  The face that tells me he too looks for me each day.  And when he stops talking, I cover my face, my headstone, my head, my stone.  Because the front of the head does not lie. 

 

JC

He came back in French class with a leg missing, the pant leg in a knot.  Then he disappeared.  I never cared even though I had used his body for watching.  One night he appears, but looks fatter and older.  He sits on a bench.  Here, I no longer need to look away.  I look for his legs but can’t see them.  Even in a dream, there are frames.  I bend to see if he has two legs, but the border cuts them off.  I climb up the ficus tree to see, but I hit my head.  I walk to the right, but a baby coos and looks at my breasts like they are wet-aged beef.  They drip grease when they see its two front teeth.  The more I walk away, the more of him I can see, but the less clear I become.    

 

Donald

Once I loved a man who had so little body fat, he sunk to the bottom of the pool while I hung at the surface like a plastic duck.  I watched him disappear.  He seemed finally happy, looking up at everyone’s feet.  Somewhere there was a child getting fluid emptied from her stomach.  Maybe that’s why he was always thirsty.  A truck beeps when backing up, as a warning.  A man should come with the same lights and sound.

 

Aaron

I never miss my own hands while clapping.  But the High-Fives I give to men never match perfectly.  What if inside every woman’s locket is a picture of herself?

To Be Born Like This

Better days & all that vanishes 
into the flyspecked meadow. The rigged sick-bird, 
the ensuing days of September 
& October.

Imagine one never arrives at it 
but builds rather the conurbation’s fiction 
to hold:

the sun in the naked flora, 
cows in the giggling dim-grass, time 
in the open leaves.

~

Drunk again, night engraves in me: 
I’ll make myself until I reach the very core.

Dark becomes October 
& a murder of crows in the leaning spires.

In the heat-lamp warmth I sit in the torn & padded booths 
of Alice’s Wonderland Café,

& sip autumn from the murky pool 
of a coffee mug.

I become preoccupied 
with the nakedness among peoples’ lives.

~

Thus far the strangeness is a blind acquaintance
with the winter writhing

—a bloody moon over Camp Grayling, 
a lover’s moon over Island Park,

a small town moon over Millbrook 
& Blanchard Mill.

~

Again, night engraves in me: 
I’ll make myself until I reach the very core.

Thin sash of light, 
sleet on black ash, & reduced always

to the to & fro. Dark 
tires stamping down frozen tarps

to stacks of hay near the Interstate.

What I raised I raised there in the imaginary
a would-be man, handsome body

no longer whittled 
to a few sad shapes of chaffed bone.

~

Better days now & all that blossoms 
in the flyspecked meadow.

A calf-littered moon

over Mission Creek, an antediluvian moon 
over Saginaw Bay.

But how mal-lit & bawling the calligraphied dawn 
remains in the ruptured bird chatter.

 

Body, Echo, Afterbeing (2002)

Everything is already & the horizon’s melody is a dull hum on the dew-spiced lake. Each note of light echoes as it enters, reduced to the cracked moon’s taxed patience.

It’s simple this feeling of nakedness. The periphery is lonesome & I’m left with my shadow’s body half-body sawhorse. In the dogwood & Interstate’s debris August thunders.

So much for the florets of summer, for the sunlight forever going. What pleasure is it, Love, to collect daylight along the grassed fire roads? What pleasure is it to mouth the liquored syllables meant always to steady a man’s failure?

Fragments of a landscape; an after hours club

There was once some snowfall 
that made things white,
and people red.

Even in her sleep
you can hear the sirens.

We smooth the seconds away,
stare at a piece of sky
rock the miniature monsters 
beneath our bed.

The cold clocks all flash 
their naked numbers
and the snow, millions of little asterisks
go on crashing.

In our sleep, winter with 
all the children whistling,
pulled away by gigantic dogs.

The snow looks like glue
over the lake 
full of everyone’s salty tears.

 

Though I don’t know you, I think you could probably stop the rain

It’s raining downtown,
which is normal for 
a city with skies the
color of past tense,
and there’s people 
wearing puffy coats walking
away from the center 
of the city.  The buildings
are all vacant and small 
enough to photograph 
in a single frame. 
People in cars turn 
on windshield wipers,
back and forth I looked
at you and you at me.
You told me Dostoyevsky
meant something to you,
something like the waves
in an ocean as your cell
phone gave off just enough 
light where I could see 
you smile. And it made
me want to know what
it was like to hear music
the way you hear music.
But you turned your head
away to signal for your friends.
Over here, you yelled
I’m living my afterlife. 

Miracles

Spiritual texts are the most boring books in the world.
None of them mentions a bicycle
or a Ferris wheel, or baseball, or sea lions, or ice cream.
They just lump them all together into “the world.”
The “world of appearances.” The “world of illusions.”
You can walk through this world and not 
believe it for a minute. You can get to the end of it 
and not believe that either. The miracle is seeing
right through the world to another 
world that’s right here, right now. 
But you have to let go of everything. 
You have to let go of everything—you can 
start by letting go of these words, just let them
go. Let them fall through the air, skim
your knee, spill to the floor. How to read these words
when they’re lying on the floor face-down
like bodies? That is the seeming difficulty.
You can sit in a small room all alone with your body
and not believe it for a minute. You can 
don the humble johnny that closes in the back,
and when the doctor comes in with his numbers 
which are your numbers, you can
not believe that either. You can let them fall from his lips, 
skim your ear, pool on the floor where your eyes
and his eyes have fallen. He won’t
mention the bicycle, or the Ferris wheel which is
taking up a lot of room right now in the little 
examining room where a sea lion has clambered up
onto the table and is barking, and the baseballs are flying,
and the vendors are hawking ice cream—because he can’t
see them. He can’t perform a miracle.

 

The Quintessential Impotence Poem

Quintessence is the fifth and highest essence
that permeates all nature and is the substance 
that the heavenly bodies are composed of. Impotence

is the state of no sex in heaven. Or if there is
sex in heaven, it will technically have to be masturbation,
because everyone is one and the same in heaven.

Hell is having nothing to read but your own
poems. A psychiatrist is someone with a hanging
psychiatric shingle outside his door. A prostitute

is someone who sucks dick for a living.
A dangling participle is a relative clause
in an ambiguous sentence, or it’s a life sentence

in a man with erectile dysfunction. For example:
“Jerry Remy hit an RBI single off Haas’s leg, 
which rolled into right field.” You would think

the leg rolled into right field. You would think
getting to first base with a girl would give you
a boner as hard as a baseball bat. All we know

is that Remy got to first base and someone
scored. Whoever it was, he must have been very
happy. He probably got an erection. He probably got

a raise in pay and self-esteem, and he probably 
had an erector set when he was a kid. My mother
never bought me an erector set. And my father never

learned to speak English very well. He thought
a home run was something you did when your mother
forgot to pick you up after your baseball game.

 

How to Touch a Woman

Technically, and with a love of
technicalities mixed with childlike
wonder, and also a little shame
at the long history of the ignorance
of men. Touch her the way
you would touch whatever’s behind
glass and a Do Not Touch sign
if the glass were suddenly removed
and the sign were given you
to fold it into a beautiful paper crane
to give to her. Touch her that way 
every time as though it were 
the first time. And when you consider 
your cells and her cells are dying 
and being born all the time, technically, it is.

 

Blues Harp

More like a cross between a saxophone 
and a five-alarm fire 
than a Hohner harmonica
small enough to fit in the palm of her hand
or breast pocket. He was thinking
the fact that she even had breasts 
was almost completely beside the point. 
Almost. For he had never 
heard anyone, much less a woman, 
play harp like that. It was 
powerful, intelligent, sexy,
downright athletic the way she ran 
her tongue up and down it, breathing 
hard into the bullet mike, Chicago-style,
trading licks with the rhythm guitarist
center-stage, bending the notes into 
shapes that conjured up for him the beautiful
catastrophes of train wrecks. He wanted 
to get her alone after the set, out behind
the club, and in the darkness whip out his
own harmonica, play a long train with her,
show her his rhythms by starting out slow,
then building speed underneath her 
while she whistled and steamed and moaned
on top, letting her juggle the high notes 
like so many birds in the hand, so many 
waves upon waves, while he chugged along 
steady and low, running like clockwork, letting her lead,
letting her go, letting her, letting her, letting her.

 

Suicidal Ideation

It wasn’t that he wanted to take his life. 
He wanted to take his death
into his own hands. There was 
a difference, he knew, though he couldn’t 
articulate it. More speculative than suicidal,
more curious than depressed,
more interested than not,
he didn’t want to talk to a therapist. 
He wanted to talk to Walt Whitman.
He wanted to talk to his best friend from
kindergarten, who’d moved away 
on the cusp of first grade, and he never
saw him again. He wanted to climb a tree
and sit up there all alone in the top branches 
watching it absorb the carbon dioxide. 
He had a bit of the tree in him himself.
He had similar aspirations
and spent much of his time in the branching
ramifications in his head. But because his children
would never live it down, he climbed
down from the tree in the car in the garage
every time, and walked back into his life with a few
leaves and twigs still sticking to his head.

Westbound: Little Cat Feet

A universe of near-unendurable suffering, in which our fate
      is to endure pain rejoicingly in order to receive more pain.
The man in the light rail car is bleeding from the chin.
      By now it’s just an ooze, but his face and shirt are stained.
There is something—what?—peculiar about his cheerfulness, 
      an electrical storm rolling over the prairie of his hippocampus.
What do you do for a living, he asks, and, told, asks it again.
      I’m bloody, he says. Bicycle. And he points where it hangs
From a rack. It’s mine. I’m restoring it. What do you do for a living?
      I like poems. This one’s my favorite: The cat comes in
On little cat feet. You know it?  The cat comes in. The bicycle
      hangs perfect on the rack, dusty, but well oiled and functional.
Restoration? The arc of our lives carries us forward, its pace
      controlled by an invisible metronome. He says that boys
Laughed at him when he fell. I said Fuck You. What do you do
      for a living?  His hands worry the thickening blood
On his neck. I like that poem too, I say, but it’s fog: the fog comes in
      on little cat feet. He frowns, thinking. Yes, he says, the cat
Comes in on little cat feet, and he slouches his shoulders, arms out,
      creeping in the air. See? It makes an image in my mind.
When the prophet Elijah entered Bethel, the little children
      mocked his baldness, and, the Bible tells us, he turned back, 
And looked on them, and cursed them in the name of the Lord. 
      And there came forth two she-bears out of the wood, and tore 
Forty and two children of them. His bloodied hands shake.
      We are going somewhere. It makes an image in my mind.

 

Eastbound: The Book of Enoch

We recognize the man with the whip by his smell, even in the dead
      of night, as we call it, even when we sleep, as we say,
Like a stone: he enters our dream and the stink of his sweat
      wakes us just before the flagrum comes down, commuters
On the platform driven, train driven. The world is burning,
      Heraclitus wrote.  East, the great desert takes the lash
Of solar flares. The man in the window seat is not perspiring.
      A leather bag and a bottle of water rest in his perfect khaki lap.
I have resumed the studies I started years ago, he says; I investigate the angels
      who are everywhere around us. The aisles of this train are full of them,
And the platforms at the stations; some of us in these seats are angels.
      His face behind his sunglasses is serene as the train rolls smoothly.
In the ancient book, canonical in Ethiopia, the angels lusted
      after the daughters of women. They made a pact of silence
And fathered a race of giants, who prospered and devoured the earth.
      My grandfather learned this from adepts in Addis Ababa:  
We must love everyone and be kind to every stranger, lest we offend God’s agents.
      Beyond the horizon there is a great mechanical quaking,
The gears of the Imperium grinding into a corrosive bronze dust.
      And there I saw One who had a head of days, and His head was white
 like wool. And we recognize him because he punishes us for our inconstancy--
      we are not faithful to our Being like the stones or the fruits of trees.
Therefore shall ye execrate your days, and the years of your life shall perish,
      ye shall be blown across your desert lives like tumbleweed
Before the Mercedes-Benz, ye shall enter into office buildings weeping
      and drive yourselves, and marry, and suffer the everlasting scourge.

 

Paul Celan in Paris

What was it Heidegger wrote? Everybody wondered. The words were plain on the page, 
      but the sense of that German prose would break a skull. 
Past midnight, Antschel struggled with the massive book. Do not imagine he did not know 
      the Philosopher was a Nazi. He marked the obvious 
Lines with a marginalized six-pointed star. He could feel the book burning itself, its ashen 
      pages yielding a crematorium pollution. The Jew 
In him attended, with the greatest care. The Jew in him? What was he thinking? Had he 
      become a prison? The Philosopher's German strung 
Its concertina wire around the bedroom. Soon everyone would die of it, soon everyone's 
      name would change. Retranslate: Dasein. The Seine.

 

Poe on Broadway

       —in memoriam J.D. Salinger

He could not hold it against the bird that it shat, 
      copiously and often but unpredictably—
Lacking a sphincter, it had no choice—
      But its moodiness and outbursts 
Of viciousness were harder to forgive. While it 
      could not take off a finger, like certain parrots, 
That beak was dangerous, and he had the scars 
      to prove it. It rode his shoulder
Like a miasma of depression--it was a raven, 
      it had a role, a tradition to uphold—and he walked 
The city, from boarding house to subway to diner, 
      bearing an imposed symbolic predisposition 
To gloom. A talking raven was a common idea, one 
      explained implicitly by the role it played: it must seem 
Like natural supernaturalism for a black bird on a shoulder 
      to utter the fated Nevermore. In truth, his raven 
Could not talk—he had tried to teach it and failed, perhaps 
      because he could not bring himself to split 
Its tongue—and so had himself learned ventriloquism, 
      which the bird consented to accompany 
By opening and closing its beak on a secret signal. 
      That was all it took to make a modest stipend
If you were content to live alone in a cardboard box 
      down the throat of a blind alley, with a shitting bird 
For a neighbor. It was a living. Each morning on his corner—
      a good spot on Broadway no less, that he’d swindled 
From a juggler—he’d set his tip jar down. 
      It might take an hour for his repeated riff to catch 
An ear, especially on busy weekdays, given the traffic noise, 
      but always sooner or later, someone would lift 
An eyebrow, pause for a moment, smile or not, and drop 
      Something into the jar. This was the routine 
For years, and he never ceased to be surprised
      no one inquired, ever, how the thing was done.

 

Rx

That was a harsh, dark gift; no one wanted it, but it sustained them
      through the suppurations, vomiting, and delirium
Which many were convinced was caused by what they were given.
      For some, it was the true, pure cure; for others it was a poison
That might heal them despite itself and them, or might destroy them.
      But there was such a plague on the land—so virulent and disgusting—
That sooner or later everyone would be brought to the point of trying it.
      There was the smoking cityscape, shop windows smashed, subways deserted,
And I, numinous I, was the carrier, with my medical kit, and my one filthy syringe,
      and that chemical poetry that in the end they would kill me to possess.

Alarm

You sit on the porch swirling 
your wine. Red. Tomorrow, there’ll be an ache 
in each temple and the pillow will row
the scent of a French vineyard further 
from your tongue, your night-breath 
branched through the batting’s 
cotton. Not now, though. Not now, 
even though the universe is moving 
away at too many goddamn miles 
per second to count. Lately, you’ve counted
August cicadas dried to the sides of cars,
mailboxes. You found one stilled
in the middle of the sidewalk, 
pinched its dry thighs but the shell 
wasn’t empty and so rang like a house
broken into. Lately, you’ve set off alarms
without even trying. Lately, you step
from the summer porch as if 
toward something you’d steal.

 

Lullaby for the Knives

There was the man whose schizoid mother 
once stood over his childhood
bed holding a bread knife. Since then,
in his nightmares, he’s paralyzed,
stares as the blades of his ceiling 
fan swing backward, turn 
into knives. There was the therapy
he’d read about, which aimed to revise 
recurrent nightmares. Before bed 
the man would repeat the same scenario—
he’d imagine all the fan blades breaking 
into vines. Each one benign, blunted 
with honeysuckle, with wisteria. A whirring 
that drops—in his soft, green 
sleep—only a petal, kiss of a leaf—lets him 
keep all of his fingers. What more
could a man ask for? When he wakes 
he winds his bedroom in a cushion
of climbing ferns, spider 
plants. He places a potted white orchid 
on his bedside table like a face
with eyes that bob on stalks. He whispers 
goodnight, and it rocks.

 

Insomnia

You won’t accept sweat
as currency—won’t exchange
the salt on my skin

for a single penny. No passage. The glass 
on my bedside table blurs 
its hem. You’ve transplanted

my heart with a rabbit’s, scavenged
my tongue for its furred pelt. You’ve hung it
from my closet’s hook by my

belts and scarves. Are you now 
at the thermostat with your wicked
flick of a thumb, once again

adjusting the temperature?
My only motion
sips water, reaches for socks. I switch

off the lamp the mirror the book
and stare at the bulb’s 
lucent coil. I heat a blue

ceramic dish of lavender oil 
to induce sleep. Its scent winds up 
the rungs of my window’s blinds. You say,

Climb them. But you lie, 
say I can return. As I step up, the red 
in my hair burns, blows out. The metal

blinds bow, like a singing saw, 
with all the nocturnal
homesick timbres of a voice.

 

Dreaming of the Castrato

What’s missing—
not my rhubarb’s skeletal jade, 
not that weird

corrosion in a blue bowl 
where strawberries jimmy

their black edges 
back into water. This summer I’m sick

of the squash blossoms’ slow machismo. So when 
a Byzantine choir rises suddenly
from the garden

on the gust of voice, I turn and they drop
like yellow crabapples

to just one song:
a man-child’s
cool soprano. He’s long-limbed

and smooth by my cedar fence, the fence
hemmed in eyelets and a grackle’s 
stray gaze.
He’s thin as if something

has sunken and left 
only his larynx’s pure treble

Sing me something,

I say, that will make the whole 
garden flare. When his lips open

I stare, trace the skin around his blond mouth’s
downy vibrations. It’s like that

moment my wet finger circles 
the cut

crystal lip of a wine glass with a touch 
that sets

all the ghosts singing.

Who Will Bury Me?

The stuff of a mouse is missing. Somewhere
in air above my pantry shelves fur
and whiskers disappeared. Dissolved
in time, tiny eyeballs, white wormlike
intestines. Small organs. I know

these parts are missing because my hand,
reaching for something else, settled
upon a skeleton. Frail bones, perfect
as webs, intact like dinosaurs
at a museum. Believe this:

that mouse had been chewing on a box
filled with staples. Gray fluff
of nibbled cardboard, reinforced
with metal prongs. Safe maternal nest.
What interrupted this mouse

business, so ordinary and warm? Did
one staple, swallowed in exuberance,
disturb the delicate flutter of breath?
Have I, with no babies to nest,
lived with death for so long?

 

Mother Hood

When I send you into the forest, child 
I will lock the door against your love. 
There are wolves in the shadowed pines 
waiting to wring the pity from my heart. 
I would not venture there.  But you

Always the brazen one, breezing into darkness 
on scarlet wings, trusting the strangers 
that populate my dreams.  Who am I 
to teach you fear?  Sheltered here 
with my custard crocks and muffin tins

I stir and knead, pressing down 
desire, my conciliation rising 
in the humid warmth of domesticity. 
I will wipe your safety from my mind, 
scrub away my need to protect you.

The day grows long.  Loaves of bread 
adorn my hearth as I wait.  The shadows outside 
stretch their limbs into regrets, reaching 
for the shriveled heart that let you go.

Divorce

I slept through the whole damn thing, 
twelve years old: sirens and screaming.

It’s never enough just to tell the story:

you have to have seen the flames, the blackened couch
shining, mirrored like onyx.

As a boy, smoke meant leaves burning,
Dad had come to gather us for the weekend.

I’ve told myself: in case of fire, any god will do.

 

Tornado Warning

           All the dirt and dust I’ve wiped from the TV over the years,
the cans of Lysol emptied in the bathrooms
                                                                (our bedroom on certain nights),
and all I can think of is how many times I’ve left this body
for some other body that, despite my best wishes, had irreversible constraints.

           I spent hours of my childhood standing in doorways
waiting to hear a freight train lift my house
                                                               from the ground,
rattle the windows rubbery and insubstantial.

                                I couldn’t stop myself from pressing
the backs of my hands hard against the door frame,

           pinning my wrists, enjoying the resistance,
and when the sirens stopped, when the air smelled
                                                                          like dry dirt again,
I’d step away and relax my arms, feel them
                                                          raise from my sides to parallel
the floor, drifting upward as though filled with sky.

Chantepleure

As it is passed at night, this is the snow, the snow past and future, 
light snow lifting, lifting down to the tracks, the train, 
this the snow by feel as if in bloom on boughs earthbound.
Simply on eaves, inconceivably on spires, on trashed trolleys, rail ties, 
for who in this train of faces pressed to glass would resist the snow, 
the suburbs soon, soon the suburbs absentmindedly white by the reflection
of their own electric light—
                                      a self that lives just above itself 
on dead cars in yards, on rusted drums and sloops on blocks,
roof to wire to roof and so on the snow collecting the lake 
a cracked pane, for what is not helpless when snow falls, softens, cancels
sound, snow sheeting the lot a man walks a horse across,
his brim layered, sleeves sleeved by it, snow
glove to dark rein to joggled bit to ice-shagged mane—
                                      this snow, immediate and unto itself,
that does not look hard, or at all.
In a passing home, a mouth in a window.
In the passing homes, mouths in the windows form the O of snow.
Now more hungry a mouth atwitter, now a mouth making eyes,
now a throng of people for a mouth to part,
a mouth that cannot help itself—
                                                   how the snow baffles
the window, the train’s slim gallery 
of sound, a mouth opening to speak,
and how, in the occasional moonlight
a distance opens—
                                      new, whiter
than white, an instant not meant for this Earth
of touch and be touched.

 

Chantepleure

You see yourself simply, as afraid
for others who speak with too open
a mouth.
                                       No, more simply
you see yourself as afraid: the white
in the nose becomes ethereal, becomes deep signs
in music, then a face’s simple form of heat.
Dark speeding cabs
become little worlds where your fumbling
cannot unclasp her. No one
can forecast the midnight of museum animals
when they slip fever-eyed from dioramas
into wilder degrees of want. 
Tomorrow’s news: a young painter does a chivalrous thing,
slumps to Earth. Tomorrow 
the swans once a loveliness against even-ness
will nip at wrists with a tenacity too great 
for hunger, and in yet-to-be recognized irony
a galleon hastens for you, plays future
wind with a math heretofore unseen.
Whether what you come to 
or what comes for you—
                          Will what becomes of either 
                          finally be a world.

Say nothing. The difficulty between changes 
in dreams and changes in what forms dreaming takes
is orchestrated by a series of slips. 
Now fog on the park
tears and the trees leak past their edges.
Now all is involuntary, is moon.
Do not speak now: for the thing said is a night
lake, and now there need be nothing more
than the swans’ glide.
Their vees cannot help but widen.

 

World

Against air
another beautiful bird’s
blue body
into the bright cannot.
My captain: children, a city, close clouds.
Color come dark
as the deep down earth evens
evening and the eyes of a face
fall, fall, feel the field go glass, go hands
having heads hear horses,
ice itself go la la la.
Lake, at last. And leaves.
Let light line a little.
Look, my love—
man may, might,
might mouths move, moving near
night.
Nothing now.

Once open
our own palms part, pass.
Radios rise into the red—
say sea, say “see,”
say should sky simply
sleep in smoke and snow?
Someone. Something. A sound
and still sun: surfaces.
Things by the thousand threading through: a throat,
a touch, trees turning.
A voice. Water. Wave white
on whose wind?

A window through which a wing becomes word
becomes world.

 

Chantepleure

Should they fall into more
                                       Of me, the leaves,
And in doing so reveal whence I came:
Bright pinelands in radials, slow pull of the mountain
Chain, fish hawk holding for some iridescent
Mistake out of want, its image
Impossibly back upon itself—
                                       That some absolute
Would cancel the whole of the mountain,
The strange crown of the turning trees,
Void the shrill, glacial silence
                                       Of the hawk closing,
And the lake would arise from a body to speak
Gently in confidence of emergence and closure
Until all surface and tricks of sun would obsess
Of me, become encompassed
By me, and in returning the whole of myself
To that which bore me,                      
                                                   the whole of the lake,
                                                                Deep core to rippling shore, 
                                       Would sing. 

Obeyed Orders

They say “simmer down,” 
“Slow down,” “take it easy”
Slowing down, 
A mire
Sucking     slowly,
Shifting existence?

For I will forever be     a   wanderer,
    A seeker, 
Questing,
           Questioning, 
Never satiated
        Never satisfied,
An        unreachable        reachable.

Diving head first 
Every encounter fulfilling,
Every experience savored,
Mind buzzing with dreams,
Soul thirsting for the stars of the unknown.

Arms spread out wide,
Wings of wonderment whirling,
Flying the coop of closure.

The days
The dizzying dive
Stops,
Is the day
I die. . . .

 

Take a breath

Pull it in and let it out
as you contemplate the innermost soul

Take a breath 
and consider the Everlasting Unity

And dance in a daze of discovery
as the Creator’s essence gives you breath

And breathe, breathe, breathe. . . .

 

The Shielded

To live in seclusion seems a luxury
in a society that has no limits on privacy
in a society of imposed, expected directives by all
in a walled, segmented, corrugated community
of affable masks donned night and day.

As even the growing generation
dons on armor, holds up shields of enforced obedience
paying the price on a bounty of approval
as acceptance supersedes logic,
supersedes optimism
supersedes the very essence of individuality
and the robes of truth are shredded over and over
with sharpened daggers of commanded, approved actions

With each passing page in the album of life
curtains thicken till dreaded darkness
invades the very core of existence
and faceless seamless hordes
rampage in stilted, stifled silence

Will the rising generation
face and welcome an open doorway
jump over the imaginary and existing cemented walls
break the prison of molded existence?
and enter an arena of
                  possible possibilities?

His Will sets the current flowing
rocks, corals leaves
revolve in circles of freedom

Yet man pulls out
torn, tattered lips pull back, back arched
shaking, shuddering,

And the rising current
turns into sorrowed struggles
chained, blocked passage

When the spirit of ridha, of acceptance ascends
the current flows
        in a soliloquy of mutual peace . . .


*Ridha is acceptance

 

The Written

Compromise, a word or concept
each letter a hammer, 
pushing down hard
a shock to the system
the resistance builds up
yet we accede 
as the tides of trials wash up 
the shore of living, breathing upheavals
and the glimmer of hope
of resolution
of peace
shifts in ever-widening realms

As  we tread the boards of 
the written and emerging path.

Not Silenced, But Needing

The muscles in my forehead tighten hard,
touched by this cold air cradling her voice;
her shadowed words, my steps around the yard,
trace the halo binding the moon: one last choice
before I go, carried by a winter wind
to where its consequence will be refused
and then regretted. He wants me to rescind
my leaving, but some things cannot be excused,
and now that she has called, my way is clear.
Follow the white dogs limping through the mist.
You have no self to lose. The clock’s hands spear
each flake tumbling from the sky’s clenched fist.
Pages turn. I’m more than halfway through.
Her face at last is mine. You see? It’s true.

Wish Camp

What do you want to be when you grow up?
—Every adult I ever knew

The Firefighters and Pyromaniacs are evenly matched. Early afternoons we are surrounded by sirens and burning houses. All morning Carpenters hammer up the firewood structures, then the crazy Pyros run past, trailing gasoline. Policemen catch them, read them their rights, let them go. In the Performing Arts Center, stocky Ballerinas dance Bumblebee Remix to a recorded audience. When they fall on their clavicles, they go to the hospital where everyone’s a Nurse or Doctor. The Astronauts know how the Ballerinas feel. They get dizzy too.

Down the hall from the Veterinarians, aquariums bubble with blooming frog eggs. I am a Biologist, my nails pond green. We touch everything: newborn moles we call jellybeans, the dry squeeze of snakes, underlip of turtle shells and their feet pumping air when we don’t put them down. We climb a ladder to measure giraffes. There are enough microscopes for everyone. We watch movies of dividing e. coli, whale migrations, time-release plants jerking to adulthood, human fetuses glowing red in their round belly containers. We know about sex. We don’t tell jokes about it. We’re not Comedians.

The Stylists do our hair twice a week. For dinner we eat pizza with heaps of pepperoni, and wedding cake, our lips pink and blue from icing roses. Pizzeria Cooks and Bakers in big hats receive our applause. No one makes salad. Movie Stars come out smoking cigarillos, followed by Circus Performers. The Biologists don’t want the tigers doing tricks, but we sure wish we could spin on ropes like that. The Presidents say, “My fellow Americans!” Pilots give Soldiers a ride to war. Each day, a few don’t come back.

 

Pleiades

After visiting a sculpture by James Turrell

What if night 
were like this room? 
so dark we can’t see
our own shoes. 
We have curved 
around the corridor, 
groped down the hand rail 
to a pair of wooden chairs 
where we look ahead, wait for light.

What if it appeared, creeping? 
a cloud or swarm of bees,
silent as a meteor shower. The edges
might be red, the rods and cones
in our eyes making blue at this twilight
like the Seven Sisters of Taurus
who can’t all be seen
straight on, the last coming out 
from a slow side glance.

What if we woke
before every dawn, 
opened our slant faces 
to the almost light, thinking, 
Where are we? What happens next?

Big Bugs

I adore rhinos 
so gray and definitive 
I welcome their awkward ways 
of leaning elbows on the table 
The crumbs on their round lips 
when they eat yesterday's bread 
between ferocious laughter 
The delicacy of their intercourse 
A symphony of asses bumping 
against the walls 
The elegance of their departures.

Sharks with Yellow Raincoats

Their boobs walk around 
alone 
on the sidewalk 
without trumpets 
in fishnets
Never sleeping 
Drifting with open eyes 

They are sharks 
with yellow raincoats 
The sadness rains  
on their shoulders 
slightly fallen 

They sell what is priceless 
a francesa
a quickie
a long kiss 
For nothing 
a gentle caress in the crotch 
for a second the face of God 
the relief that cannot be found 
at home 

Neighborhood whores
leaning on the breeze 
against paradises 
Who would not give money 
life 
to scare the loneliness 
from their skirts.

You’d be Better Off Never Knowing Anything

a woman in the water is the sign of a shipwreck?

where can one go if the sky is broken?

to paint is like passing through windows?

the most unexpected day is the most deeply felt?

Creationism

From all over the planet, travelers bring home 
reports of wondrous, unexpected beasts: 
an ice-clear squirrel that leaks snow from its eyes, 
rodents rat-like without being rats,
a giant-headed animal too majestic to be real,
the starving child with his belly bubbled out,
the same child looking at herself in the mirror,
the same child looking at herself in the mirror 
& being photographed by a professional photographer.
Consider these beasts from the position of men 
who believe that knowledge is order, one order. 
Consider revelations from the position of the ark.

 

Some refuge in a pious agnosticism, 
forever giddied by human research. 
Some in the credulity of currents. 
Snow falls & then rain falls 
& then buildings are built 
atop the puddles. The last trees 
of a species are burnt by a wildfire 
resulting from drought conditions 
resulting from over-farming 
resulting from the need & the need 
for need. Habit becomes habitat.
Habit becomes destiny, an object,
to which each sample is applied 
after it has been collected from its self.

 

Rivers of seawater 
vein this ancient land. 
One must buy oneself 
a boat. The accommodations 
are rough, the blood-sucking flies 
are pestilent. But the traveler’s skin 
is of red spun glass, 
with eyes of metallic green. 
We must induce ourselves
with the dried taxonomy 
of spirits & skins, 
the burnished fingerprint 
of the mahogany armoire. 
The traveler builds his boat 
of mahogany & ideation. 
The last two birds 
of every species 
are ensnared 
by his billowing sail.

 

What seems mystically different in a museum 
is by proxy of its demonstrativity.  
Tortoises the size of bears. 
Elephants the size of dogs. 
A map tattooed on the dead skin of a sailor, 
labeling each port ‘here be monsters.’ 
Here is an animal both mammal & spice. 
Here is the mirror that reflects another’s face.
That which a man does not understand 
is the potential that one is not able 
to build any thing he can imagine.

 

Where there is fresh water 
there is not necessarily 
the piles of bones 
that become a house, 
nor cutlery, nor words 
like mayfly or dragonfly.

Where the traveler ventures 
the ark follows. Or, perhaps, 
the ark is always there, 
shaking like an image 
from a busted projector.

Piety invites. Faith unfolds. 
There are lizards larger 
than men waiting 
just below the water line 
to dispatch the non-believers. 
But one must believe
to be bitten.

 

Special creation was one attempt 
to understand the impossible, 
that order emerges like a volcanic island 
from the steaming brine.

That the chaos of who eats whom 
can be understood &, & worse, 
willed. But order does emerge: 
the null-set is the most stable order.

Correctness is another attempt. 
To be between oneself & another self 
is the state of looking in the mirror, 
the state of saying a word out loud.

 

It is an old rhetoric, the failed earth, 
the soiled white sheet of presence. 
How every generation 
fails its antecedent. 
As if we should believe in solids 
like an epic generational novel. 
As if we should even notice 
the rim of minerals 
at the bottom of the evaporated 
glass of water. The species drop off 
one by one. Language fails 
to contain its meaning. 
The paved paradise, 
the silent spring, 
the good old days. 
What flat earths we walk with. 
What constellations the stars intend.
The darling little insects 
that sip from our eyes
know just as much as we do
about the failures of children. 
It is an old rhetoric, like a last breath 
exhaled into the bluest, radiant waters.

 

If you have good eyes 
you can look out to the treelimbs 
& see all the animals that have ever been there, 
every sunning lizard, every flitting moth, every croaking egret.

If you have good ears 
you can walk through the woods 
& know every bird contained therein.

We contain them, 
through the photographs, 
through the chopped up islands of forest 
discarded beyond the asphalt.

If you have very good skin you can stay inside 
your clothes for your entire life.

 

What we become when we know something 
is a piece of white paper that was once folded 
& now lies flattened on the table.

When we truly know something 
it means we can look at another person 
& tell them that they do not know something.

I have a few facts: isotope, paper-clay, steel rim, kestrel. 
Each fact ends an evolution. 
Each set of hands that will stroke will strangle.

 

Creationism

She is asked about a bomb placed in the prosecutor’s office. She denies this repeatedly, but she says, of course if I am beaten up I might admit to it. The interrogator then tells her to imagine that she is repeatedly flogged, what would you say. The prisoner says, yes I will admit to anything then. The interrogator says imagine you are really severely beaten, tell us how you planted the bomb. The interrogator says, now you are bleeding. She says, maybe I took it with Haj Ghassem. The interrogator says, imagine you are now beaten up even more, that you can’t tolerate the pain. The prisoner starts saying, maybe there is a car entrance. She is then pressed to tell the exact day when the bomb was planted. She is beaten up with a shoe. The interrogator says: You are like an insect, while we crush you. She is seen being beaten up again with the shoe. She still denies that she planted the bomb. The interrogator says: Once we flog you the version of events you give will be exactly what we want. Here we beat you so much in this very room where everything happens.

 

Creationism

I have bound my demon.
I have bound his tongue.
I have bound the points of his teeth.

I have bound you to an enormous remote control.
I have bound you to all the shovels & all the hoes that never grow dirty. 
I have bound you to the sun’s fat tears & to the invisible tears of the oceans.
I have tied you with an infinite number of electrical cords to the mountains & their collapsing tips & their explosions. 
I have made you sit on the couch for so long that your skin has grown into the weave of the fabric & you are in essence a couch-man or couch-woman. 
I have fed you daily of putrescence & sugar & we have strolled arm in arm along the promenade of the fecal river, where the fish eat their own scales in prayer.

There are seven wailing children. Girls. 
There are fourteen wailing children. Boys.
The television is wailing all night long. 
The seven girls & fourteen boys are carrying a woman above their heads & chanting her name. Her name is electrical, like the light of tumors.

The brickmaker has ceased making bricks for the building of wells.
The stars have stopped carrying their darlings in their fat tails. 
There is a glowing light in the distance that growls like a billion hornets.

I will lay my bag down at the foot of the well. 
I will lay my bag down at the foot of the well & then pick it up & lay it down at the foot of the gate. 
I will lay my bag down at the foot of the well & then pick it up & lay it down at the foot of the gate & then I will pick it up & I will throw it down at the foot of the well.
I will throw my heavy bag down at the foot of the well.
And all the heavy things inside will slam against the delicate things & they will all shatter & it will sound like a thousand fragile children.
And when we open my bag a cloud of dust will emerge, tall enough to reach the top of the tallest buildings & wide enough to cover all of the land masses of the earth. 
And you will then be bound eternally.

Solstice Poem

My sophomore effort has a frozen coyote kind
of smile, what you think of as a dirty energy

source popping out all point 
of view. She is focused on the first 
person like a catbird

tasting Clementines. Only boxes will do
for our indigo tootsies now. 
How many punches to the center

of her gravitas before she gets smoother
than the mashed potatoes and drafts out
of here on harpy steam. I think as maw

and paw but I cannot pull 
the pipe out of the architecture. 
You cannot hack a mummery

based design. Melatonin begat
Melanie and Sarah out of 

Seratonin. This is one of the reasons
we have lamps and we also have fire.

 

Promise Ring

When the horror materialized I was noodling
with my boots on and waiving everyone’s
signature. Since then I know I have arrived

with keys where the fingers ought
to waggle but teenagers do not enter
into it. I didn’t want this way back when

I was mean. It is an accordion effort
just to breathe with you, to align snouts
and buttons and no jumping to conclusions.
On the idiot box a woman in poltergeist

drag and all my instincts chewing out
of me like field mice. I thump the cushion
away like a professional but can’t tell

you where the hawk will land. Crook
of your consciousness, funny bone
splintering danger in 

the dog’s soft palate. Cool as a bowl
of anti-freeze that holds
still the moon’s reflection

A Kiss Less Consecrated

I.
An elegy
of entwined
limbs, supple
skin.  One
body trans
figured, another
gone.

II.
Psalmists
sing myths for
the millennium: rose
water spills in
to the ground, fallow
soil and flowering
parable.

Disintegration Loops V

—for William Basinski

Landscape flakes
into a pile of iron
oxide: a nation’s
industrialized
pastoral rusting
behind the ears.
Landscape flakes:
       a pile.     Iron
oxide:    nations
industrialize,
              rust
behind       ears.
Landshape
         piles       on
              nations

   dust
behind       ears.
Landshape
         plies
              nation’s

 

behind.

Inevitable Peaking Of Conventional World Oil Production

Down
down saurian
depths, geologies
collapse collapse
into tell a
               vision: white
noise and babble
water through 
                    porous
rocks: 
         secondary
recovery of a nation
gone
         too soon fields
dry into shadows
and evening
flames.

Lullabye (I)

Wax-eyed
communiqués tilt day
light into moon
                        waves: ear
eee, ear eee!  Knock
turn all seeds
cast across land
escape.  Azaleas
drench memory in a
                                cry
lick, an oral history
our bodies will never
remember.

Blue

Because the dress was worn.  
Or wasn’t. 

A blue of forgetting.  
A blue dress I might fold 
in a basket and carry to the meadow.

The weathervane cannot tell me 
if it will snow. 

The blue isn’t 
mine, but I wear it. Through

frost and foolishness, 
a field of mourning,

a Sunday morning when I awoke
to learn she was 
no longer.  Blue

dress of basket. Blue dress 
of memory, hospital parking lot,
missing bead in my bracelet.

Because I was worn, 
I slept in the car, maybe

the blue dress was a blanket, maybe 
a pillow. I am a hollow-boned

bird in the meadow, blue wings
of my dress. Maybe a god of blue,
a lullaby of willow.

I run from myself, remove everything,
everything I can from my skin.

I raise the dress over my head
and it becomes my sky.

 

Melancholia

Violin sleep
            in the back of closets
next to a rack of wide ties
and rust-colored clogs.

Listen—
            at night you 
can hear their strings
crying.

 

Zina’s Hookah Lounge

            I wonder if I've been changed in the night?
                        —Alice from Alice in Wonderland by Lewis Carroll

In the corner booth, a belly dancer 
eats baklava while old men play cards.
Smoke drifts through the room.

We sample dolmas, baba ghanoush 
at a table that wobbles 
when we lift our chai. 

Hummus mingles with tabouli. 
Parsley escapes from the plate.  
The men next to us smoke, keep smoking 

as a woman stops to ask them, 
What's inside your bong?
When a man answers, Pleasure, 

she sits down, puts on her lipstick 
in the reflection on the hookah. 

It’s last call and you buy us passion
fruit martinis, say, 
Before we go, let’s try a drink.

Smoke circles and a hazy calligraphy 
fills us like the caterpillar 
atop the mushroom—who are you?

Some nights we aren’t sure 
what brings us comfort, 
but we take it all in—

belly dancer, baklava, chai. 
We are not rich, but full 
of spices, honey cake, and tea. 

Memorizing Poems

It is no different than lighting a candle. And, holding it high. To see better, the inner door way of the heart: Its red knob. Framed trellis. And the names of ancestors. Penciled in yellow and purple calligraphy.

Holding that lit candle, the door melts. And you find yourself in the market of an ancient city: Teeming with people of all ethnicity. Peddling tomatoes. Onions. Silks. Winged sandals. Drums. Saffron. Milk . . .

You walk around for hours. Till tired, you sit on a bench. Then, notice. In an empty stall away from the noise. A girl, wearing braids. Playing with her veil. The way your mother did. When about her age. 

 

This Woman with the Issue of Blood

Given her country. Time. She has winged maxi-pads. Pony-stamped tampons. But wouldn’t mind. Nor, would I. If some messiah

Opened our door. Raised his hands. Said: ‘Do you believe child.’ She, ‘Yes, lord’. He, ‘You’re healed. Go, and sin no more’.

Then, Holy Midol. That disciple so terrible at its calling. Would shrivel in the prison walls of the cupboard and collect dust.

Not to mention St. Tylenol. Who we’d manacle. Blindfold. March to the edge. Then kick, into the water-filled funnel.

Then she—you. Wouldn’t feel an urge this month, to knife my suit. All for a milk grime [spilled yesterday]. In one of your shoes

But, hold me gently against your small breasts. As I lick their wet boulders. Broken trees. Hot sands. And drying seas, instead.

 

Telling Your Life Story to a Dog

You begin with that moment in grade school. When, sitting in the middle row. You dropped your lunch money by the popular girl’s desk. And bent, for that glorious chance to glimpse her pink polka-dotted underwear.

You don’t leave out that afternoon, when food fight turned sour. And the pupils in class, after being asked how it began. Broke from silence. Pointed at you,  saying ‘yes, he was the first to spray water and throw rice.’

And you continue about how, instead of copying down three syllable words in class. You drew stick figures of you and your big breasted teacher. Wearing ski masks. Breaking into banks. Making away with quinzillion dollars

Entering your super-duper house. She, Bonnie. You, Clyde. She, ripping open your pants. You, her blouse. Having a long sex-bout. Resting on your mega-fantastic couch. Then mounting each other again, and riding for hours.

You go on and on about barely being able to read. And how little you cared, back then for those stupid books on science experiments and hygiene…

Only hours later, do you realize your old friend—the dog. Much unconcerned with your story, but too polite to leave. Is resigned beside you asleep. His food bowl empty. His new flavored bone chewed thin.

You cover him with blankets. Turn off the lights. And walk quietly, outside.

 

And They Lived Happily Ever After

Doesn’t mean they are in the room right now. Naked. Wrestling. Saying: ‘You like that.’ ‘Yeah.’ ‘Go slower?’ ‘Pound it.’

Or that his gaze at this maid’s pointed breasts. Or that one’s. So full against her cheap dress. Is a mistake. A chance occurrence.

But that. Just three years after going door to door with the glass slipper. Testing each maiden’s foot, to find his mystery woman

He’s the one fat from inactivity. Boring from the same speech. Remarkably dull in his musings. And she. Once he starts snoring

Will again slip through doors. Past corridors. Into a room, with another male servant. Where, unlike the ones from nights previous

She hopes to be thrown to the floor. The royal bra ripped from her chest. Her legs spread. Hemmed. And pinned against the wall.

6220 Camp Street

                        Artist and local eccentric Ellen Montgomery, 85, lived with 33 cats in New Orleans, 
                        refusing to evacuate during Katrina because she did not want to abandon them.  


The morning of the strange wind, 
                     I opened tin cans, 
scooped chicken livers into pie plates.  The city

                                  emptied of trumpets, neon, 
loaves of bread.  All around me,

a shotgun of nails.  I unpacked boxes 
                     of tempera, acrylic, 
synthetic bristles. 

                     When the oak fell across the lawn,  
           I sat in the hallway and drew

its chalk outline.  The city 
           became soft, there,  dark 
water slashed across paper.  I counted 
                        
                                  shed claws in the red rug, 
           rubbed whiskers with my thumbs. 

When the light rose again, its bright splinter               
           cracked every surface: broken 
window, the street

                                  a canvas of roof tiles.
                     I filled my pockets

with black slate, these chipped
           relics.  In my hands, I painted this 
ruin into a strip of starlight, 
            
                     slash of half-moon.  For days
           there was nothing but oil smears,  gloss 
            
of orange, my cat-circled shins. On a napkin, 
           I watched water turn each greenburst, pop

of blue into shredded leaves, mold-blooms, a buried sky.

 

The Wishing Tomb

                        In St. Louis Cemetery No. 2 there is a vault bearing the name of Marie Laveau and 
                        is distinguished as the "wishing tomb” where young women can go to petition the 
                        great Voodoo Queen when seeking husbands.


Each night, women come with baskets
of fruit, rosaries, clippings of their own dark

braids.  Leave candy, and tomorrow
a flower will appear on the doorstep.  Tears,
and no one will break

your heart. A love spell scratched in brick:

three red Xs chalk-marked 
over her name.  Place your hands

over your eyes and circle the weeds, the half-
filled bottles of rum, the bright 
beads.  Knock three times against this

whitewashed tomb.  Listen

to birds rise from magnolia, a man
decanting a saxophone on Iberville.  Everything

becomes possible: a plastic rose blooms
to a diamond ring.  Broken glass,
a divorce.  Do not idle among the candies

and coins, the others tapping out their offering,

but touch your lips to your fingers, your fingers
to each X.  Give her what you wish:

bread crumbs, earrings, your high-heeled shoe
and she will show you what you’ve earned:

a rain-smeared kiss, a letter, or nothing
but nights of teacups, an empty bed.

 

Lighting the Candles

                        Mission San José Catholic Church, August 2009

Let me speak to you now, you
who belong to the white-washed

frescoes, roses carved
into crumbled stone.  You

who have no face left, not even
in memory, no voice, no hands

to lift to my eyes.  Here in this soot-
shrouded chapel, I touch

sand, wooden stem, flame, 
make you again of light, my burned

thread of hair caught in the blue
votive.  I light the dark wick,

give this offering a name.  I give you 
the sweat of my body

in early August heat, the silver roots 
of dusk between us, the coins

slid into the empty metal box.  I want 
to keep you to myself inside my mouth,

watch your smoke drift over the lip
of the cross-cut cup, stain

the walls.  Let no one enter
this room, open the doors, stand

beside me in grief, strike the match.  Listen
for my breath, how each word

comes for you, an echo of this burnt prayer
rising through the high arched windows.

Another Orphan Story

Quickly: take the woman and the girl, the woman born to watch over, 
half-proud, slapping both arms of the chair, 
the orphan straight from the south Georgia flats, a girl so ready to adore.

Rake the grit of the world into the hand.  The word is hurting.

In the beginning, the girl never wanted a saint, only a tree.  So the dust 
of the woman’s body was the trunk she learned to put her arms around.  
Little soul.  Little child.  Come.  The truth was the girl was no child, 
yet she asked simple questions (May I touch your pretty cheek?) 
and knew tricks that could wrestle the woman to the ground. 

The woman grew weary, always stumbling out of the heroine’s milk.  
She swore the girl’s blackberry heart wouldn’t touch her, 
the storm wouldn’t touch her.  But some days she wanted to eat the girl; 
some nights she dreamed the girl carried her for hours.

The girl grew old under the glaring sun, the chair, worn and half blue, 
the girl’s gray hairs sprouting like dandelion tufts, and still she chirped too much 
and turned too often from the light.  The girl wanted to be Buddha or Jesus, 
or a low-bobbing devil in a pond.  The girl was only a philosopher of pine needles. 
No one wanted her unruly sorrows. 

This is a human misery.  This is the first sagging pain where a God is born.  
The woman left quickly.  The word is hurting.  The girl could not stop laughing.

 

No Time

No time to do right for my child.  
The warm skies shriek and nothing smells of orchards.  
I have to fill in with eucalyptus oil.  
How to mend in misery?
  
The memory of swans keeps me alive, and a girl 
who bludgeons tentworms with the handle of a rake.   
And what of the body, especially one that never settles in?
How can I wash it down the river with the tears my small child sees? 

When she calls, I go to her.  It’s one thing I can do.  
When I tell her it is time for me to leave her to the night, 
she says she must keep me for a little while.
No time to do right for my child. 
 
I kiss her forehead that is firm, and pray for ground.

 

Householder’s Love Poem

For love I stir the air with all I have, 
tongue, soft feet, pale weeds of hope.  
I prick my fingers, crack apart my spine.
  
For you, I hook my fingers to the hoax 
of security, then weep into the trees; 
their cool strength leaves scratches on my cheek. 

For you, the listening to ruin that won’t shut up.   
For you, the rain, the days we sat on the porch, 
watched the storms come on. 

Sometimes it’s pain that makes the only sense I know.
For you the bird behind my eyes resets its claws.

 

Listen

to the honeyed residue of beeswax,

not so much to the wren’s song, 
but to the pulse of its ochre colored belly,

to the weeping at the forest entrance,

to the clatter of crowds and plagues. 

The earth is not speechless.  
The trees forgive and outlive terror.

The moon-soaked hills are raw and answer mildly.

There is a small girl who dances, laughs, and shakes 
a spoon.  The spoon is sighing for her future. 

At night when her mother washes the girl’s quick feet, 
she makes a softening of softness.   

Later the mother braids thread, drops it to wax, lifts.  
The sounds are small and lonely.  
The wick is pure with secrets. 

 

Litany

Breath of metal and surge, 
Breath of the failed sparrows, dirty-faced, blasting their dull songs, 
Breath parted by the rains,

Breath leaking from the pained undersides of stones, 
Breath of omen and rose, 
Breath born and carried, fueled by the hunger for morning,

Breath shivering from the daylilies, 
Breath of the wind that lifts the man's comb-over, 
            so much life sworn to strands of silver and old hay,

Breath spread across the lettuce and the green peppers, 
Breath of the girl swearing in secret, 
Bashful breath, attracted to ritual and greed,

Breath of the daily grind, of worn teeth,
            Breath inside the tree 
Breath of the watcher in her torn coat,

Breath billowing in the ragged hours,
Breath of the sweeper and the follower, 
Breath unnoticed,          then noticed again.

A Bird Brings a Dream in Which You Are Orphelia

for Jesse Lee Kercheval

the white bird brings you a rose: she sits on your shoulder and grooms your hair and your ear: you know that such actions are displays of respect: she’s an odd bird: not a dove: nor a gull: more an albino crow: as though not the ancient messenger: the envoy from underworld: she talks to you: she speaks likes the radio in Cocteau’s Orphée: silence is twice as fast backwards: you give a wry Mona Lisa smile: somewhere a man is stepping out of a mirror: in a white tuxedo: he is peeling off his driving gloves: putting his naked touch on everything in this world: you reach up to tickle the bird’s neck: she nuzzles your fingers as you try: you put the rose in a slender vase: the water shimmers and sings: your shouldered guest goes right on talking: birds sing with their fingers: you place a white feather next to the rose: outside you can hear the Rolls Royce pulling up: cloud white: Mr. Mirror stepping carefully out of the back: the crescent of the moon glinting off the fender of the car: you say to the bird: I’ll be out late: no need to wait up: and you’re sure she winks back at you

 

Orphée on the Radio

for Mac McKinney

All night Cocteau is singing 
a love song to a woman
who steps out of her mirrored world
continuing to move as though the universe
sprockets backwards in a film can.

The Rolls Royce never sleeps,
it is a shark with the radio stuck
on the one channel that handcuffs
Orphée to the backseat—
the Stockholm Syndrome passenger.

A woman born of the mirror 
does not bite into an apple
but puts back whatever she’s taken
from a previous life—this is what Orphée
loves when he is not in love. 

She has a million phrases for entropy
all believably good—when read
aloud they wing into poetry.
Orphée translates the radio of her
song—he will play in her top 40

bandstand show. Other doo-woppers will
compete for the heart of a mirror.
He wears his best skinny tie,
tight thin-legged suit. Gels his hair;
grabs the microphone and sings

her heart undone. Shatterglass,
if you look back—he always does. 
There is no beauty without bright edges, 
the depths of the heart, loss and love 
and loss, strobing wildly in a mirrored hall.

 

Training the Wolf-Girl

Fundamentals were laid out
like clothes on the bed.
I walked the dim lit halls
with dog biscuits in my pocket—
unsure whether she could see me,
or hear me, or smell me first.
I heard her breathing in corners.
I bought a book on lycanthropy
and dog eared several pages for later.
I learned the lunar cycles.

Sometimes I spoke at length
to the gypsies passing through town.
In the dead of sleep there was howling,
sometimes scratching
at the pantry door.  I accused
myself of too many movies.
She was just learning verbs,
the power of names, casting a spell-
ing bee where all the participants
were less tame, unleashed.

She loved the sound of chalk
scraping along the slate—
especially the lazy looping g
and y.  She seemed to intuit
and push boundaries.
She growled at hall passes,
preferring stealth.  This made the other
kids uneasy as barned horses.
The newsmen in their stabled ties
told stories of disappearances

and untimely demise; I mapped
phases of the moon. Each morning 
the tables and chairs were upturned 
and scattered from their unnatural 
order. I never saw a paw print. 
Tried to keep an open mind about 
her and her ways.  Yet my fear 
remained unchained: that she might
discover another of her kind.

Angel of the Waters

Stone-cold sober when the silver angel appears  
     On Bourbon, you fall in. Religion is for boneheads 
Who won’t take a drink
     Unless someone leads them to water

Your demented friend once said laughing and even Rilke 
     Whispered every angel is terrifying.  But you fall in. 
You give yourself that shadow-shuffle along Decatur,
     That see-through ramble past the Old Absinthe Bar.

The she-males at the Black Cat Club won’t arch
     A pencilled brow—she strolls a soft shoe over
Mardi Gras gumbo paving the cobbles, chipped
     Pedestal slung under her arm, wings trembling.

The angel won’t hurry or pause…  her half-smile stops 
     Tourists passing by and they stumble, she seems 
So lost. We’ve flown like moths to her dream:
     The Vieux Carré, a storm blown from Paradise.

Verily this day is nothing like the movies. She doesn’t zoom
     To a library, place her light hand on a shoulder, tap
Into the steam. She hangs listless on no trapeze.
     No armor and no bell, she stands there, waiting to become

Stone, skipped into the mind’s eye and you, blue ghost,  
     Leave her to the murmur of the crowd gathering 
In the square to watch and wait, each one looking
     For the smallest tic or wink to betray

What she could be under that silvery alien skin. 
     Hour upon hour she brings down the strong
Spring sun, almost smiling. Bets are taken.
     Small offerings are tossed in the overturned hat.

Los Perdidos—they’re worshipped in Mexico, the paper says, who survived 
     On rainwater from the bilge, gnawing seagulls and sea turtles.
289 days they read Chava’s Bible & mad Lucio played air guitar.
     They saw the angel twice, toxic as seawater, walk the open waters. 

Milagro. Now you’ve come back to see. She’s moved into the shadows 
     Of Pirate’s Alley and its magnolia park where duels whirl on
In the dust, where drunks have labored and screwed themselves
     Up in garrets, writing the way out of desire.  You fall in.

She steps down from her rickety stand and you
     Follow, second-lining down the way of sorrows, and while
You stumble and you burn, she won’t look back,
    Not until you have passed beyond
 
The edge of the Quarter, where the angel stops. 
     You stand beside her to look into that face.
When the illusion shatters, its stone and steel release
     Someone with tattooed shoulders and a nose ring,

A pierced nipple and a past.  Once she was an actress,
     A little dancer, once she was somebody’s daughter
Running down the moonstruck hall of a house silent as 
     All of bloody Kansas now. That girl, she tells you, is dead.

You discover your body in this cloudy noon, the dead girl gone 
     Into the angel again, stranding you flayed with hunger, 
Flaked with thirst, with scattered stone and broken steel, 
     The temple veils torn, the curtains flying, that thunder rolling in.

 

Is This Where It Hurts

she said, pushing her fingers in
and I fell out. Broke into a flash
of light whirling down into a hollow  
scream, a cave filling with murmurs.
They tell you if you fall
from a great height in a dream
and finally hit, you wake up
dead but every day our dreams
fall on us like snow from on high,

and so I woke on the checkered floor 
like the cauliflower ear of a punch-drunk
palooka swimming up into bad news,
my thigh swollen tight and twice 
its size, kneed hard in the game, even then 
muscle turning to bone, and wanting to be 
fair to all that pain standing behind me, 
head bowed, holding its hat, unbelieving still 
a big old nurse in a winged cap would do that,
for pity’s sake—or even for pleasure—on purpose, 
fair to all those pains standing in their great long line 
like Ditto, Ditto & Ditto, the Silent Missouri Boys, 
like me, writhing under her touch all those
years—and so I struggled for us all,
standing up finally woozy with intent to do bodily 
harm, get all over her like white on rice 
and balled my fist to send that starched thing  
off into her own previously unknown state
of being, to clean her clock, ring the bell 
on the next round of a new era, like
that stuff stops right now forever
Miss Myositis Ossificans
even Jesus down from the cross
can’t help you now 
 
but on the other hand (if the right one
don’t get you) also wanting to be fair 
to that halo of pain I began to see gathering 
in her silence then standing behind her pushing
her back down pushing it in and pushing 
her forward now to take my hand 
to lead me slowly to the examination room
its fresh blank sheet of paper
without a word and a face 
like mine that could not be read.

 

Milagros

            Chula Vista, California 1991

into the night air sweet and cool
pouring out mums and roses 
red silk ribbons Lourdes water 
a child’s pretty toys the saints
fire in their eyes painted on tall
veladoras people kneel to light 
bread broken onto small white plates 
that knock at the door she answered

when the big shots take away
the lights we put them back 
even if we have to steal them
from the Marlboro Man when dark 
comes now she appears
many people have been healed
thousands by the wall of prickly pear
fat paws to slap yourself awake
they stand there watching crazy
goddamned Mexicans the anglos say
they think it is all in our minds yes 
it is in all our minds nothing
nothing but night in their caved-in
skulls when the helicopter beats down 
its white eye beating down over 
the gathering people like Hollywood 
cops moving in hard damn your eyes
nothing matters now but when
the shadows on the empty billboard 
begin to swirl like gathering dust
up there in the barrio sky she has a way 
of coming back to us 
to warn us ask for something
say her name 
Laura Arroyo murdered nine-year-old
translated into heaven bearing my name
we are to look for who 
stole her the children are still 
in danger who is this people
ask phone calls from the dead
I will comb her black hair straight
se cuenta el milagro pero no el santo 
yet the killer’s name will be told 
                                                
she will not eat dirt like me
the billboard blacked out three nights
the other world is rising again
when I bring my mother’s comb
bone for the bone world I bear
it I am a big woman yes I will bear 
up under his cross he has slipped
off down the Boulevard of Hell
carrying that pickaxe on his shoulder
but I am standing here and I see

 

Portrait of the Artist with Columbus in Chains  

            Born 1451, of disputed origin. Sent home in chains, 1498.

Cabrón, we were born to travel cuffed to the numbers, the not-yet
     forgotten years of the rotten centuries in whose middle we were conceived.
Prisoners of our names & days, we might never slip the bone ache, waking
     hard in the stiff ligaments of every unbelieving morning,
the slow cold drizzle, the smell of wet iron,

except those few moments we might look straight in the eye
     of some foreign face, handsomely formed, broad-browed,
and what do we see gathering there, cloudy with hope?
     They have their gods, and they are not among us. We are lonely 
and abandoned again. What face for an incensed god hiding in smoke?

Death there makes his little clink and clank turning over 
     to remind us. We wait for the sun to come again 
and loosen every joint. Remember the tall Asian-eyed woman,
     her thick black hair, her voice a spiced balm so smooth 
it raised every stubborn scar? She sang us to sleep, it changed nothing.

We fight on, smack our swords on the waves, but sailors 
     steer badly and time is wasted, asses bray and we are sentenced
to listen. Milk and honey. What do they know of finding such
     gold? May hurricanoes sink them heavy with treasure.
Admiral of the Ocean Sea, you and I have come to discover

the great water is no pale nimbus, no blank sheet to etch
     with a name, not a bucket to piss in, and all maps lie. What good 
were our puny green flags and those charters written 
     in tears and blood? We brought them death, they gave it back.
Our errors have made us. We might end up buried anywhere.

Carve what you wish into the tombstone, it’s lies upon lies.
     Let us not be confused forever, anointed one, with textures of dirt & rock.
The sea’s the place to be. We’ll taste the water, test its salt
     to see how far we are from land.

This Is Not the Poem

in which the good girl learns
         the leather jacket, the joint,

                  the rug burns on her knees.

The poem of a small flask filled
         with heat she tries to swallow,
            
                  as she will swallow other things,
            
because he likes to watch
         her open mouth.  Not the poem
                        
                  as spinning bottle in the basement,

the body that turns and turns
         upon itself, dizzy taste
                        
                  of spiked punch, ashtray lips.

Or the first tongue stud.
         The first tonguing like someone lost
            
                  in an unexpected room.  Not

the first hand fumbling her shirt,
         discovering the lay of buttons,
            
                  the tease of eye and hook. 

Instead.  The poem of pimples.
         Call them zits.  The poem of braces                                  
            
                  pinching until a kiss becomes

the same as being punished
         by her mom.  She hates this poem,
                        
                  that she is not the ponytail,

the pop of cherry gum.  The poem
         that cannot flirt—a skirt flipped up,

                  a flash of panties in the breeze. 

 

Grunge

Ugly is the new beautiful, my best friend said,
          brushing shadow 
on my eyes, a color called sludge.  
          Suddenly plaid flannel 
was a way of softening how strange we’d become,
          our arms like streets 
in a stretched-out city, how tall we were, 
          jangled with caffeine.  
The end of school was a rest stop someone kept moving 
          further away.  
The clock kept dragging its aluminum hands.  
          We changed our minds 
about boys, dumped the ones who slid the walls
          of empty swimming pools, 
gliding their skateboards in reverse.  
          Or the debate champions 
who answered every question with a rough 
          tongue of tweed.  
Other strangers were the answer. We tied 
          on weighted boots,
painted our nails radioactive, 
          forgot to wash 
our hair.  We played the same CD a thousand times, 
          imagined heroin, cocaine, 
any foreign beating in the blood.  Ugly 
          was the new desiring—
it made asphalt easy to love, our mouths a shade 
          of oil slick. 

 

Proscenium

                    Theater camp—which meant we acted 
like adults or how we thought adults would be, 
if they stayed brave forever, 
          always reciting secrets to the dim

          audience of the world, 
                    each whisper pitched to carry.   
It took training to speak so clearly or the backstage 
shadows, the velvet curtain

where we watched lovers imitate desire, 
          the O of open mouths, 
          one body draped across another 
                                        like a yard of cloth.  
 
                    Michelle, who strangled my hand
as if in answer to the scene—all day, we ran lines, 
passed words in the small company between us.
          We practiced fighting on the mats,

false slaps, a choreography of jabs
and punches that left us with real bruises.  
          Three-quarter speed.  Full speed.  
                                                  The trick to falling

was locking eyes.  The trick was looking back at her.
                    We dressed in black, 
                    carried props to the table—
          a bowl of wax oranges

          that looked so fresh we almost tasted juice, 
a wallet full of counterfeit, 
a plastic baby in a bassinet.  
In vocal class, we said to be, or not be

                              without the consonants.
We rolled on the ground to find the infant cry
inside our lungs.  What we wanted—a speech 
                    about the thorn-memory of flowers.

Everyone was an ingénue that June 
or played the ancient lady or wore the pants.
                    Everyone was in costume, 
          moving like someone else, from

                              the hips, the jutting chin,
                              from the gap between our legs.  
We learned to hold a sword—the foil 
                    just our sharpest point. 

                                        We sang on cue.
One night we bought sangria with her fake ID,
drank from the box until the dorm room faded out. 
          Wine and citrus on our tongues— 

                    the word for blood.  
We had rehearsed the bed and the drawn curtain.
                              Easy, then, to close our eyes,
                              improvise the way

our teachers told us to, Yes, And  
—and Yes and Yes, repeating like an exercise until we fell 
                              asleep.   Skin to skin felt true 
          enough, like what actors call the moment. 

                    We curled into the moment of that place— 
          only my fingers in the naked dark, 
the opening of that summer, 
                              the brightened arch of her.  

 

Water through a Hand

In the changing room, 
  a woman loops the tape
    around my chest.

I hold my breath against
  the measurement
    and remember

my mother, how she used 
  to stand this close 
    when I was five,

shampooing my hair,
  the scent of apples 
    filling up our bath,

how I watched through wet 
  eyelashes the small wet 
    curls of her,

and her breasts that swayed 
  like an afterthought
    of the body. 

I never asked to touch,
  although I often did
    as if by accident.

At other times, so distant
  from the nakedness
    of the shower,

she exchanged a black lace bra 
  for nude, her back to me, 
    a strand of pearls

laid out across the bed,
  her clip-on earrings
    oystered in a velvet box.

That was thirty years ago, 
  when what I wanted 
    was dresses pink

as tender parts, or a pair 
  of Mary Janes 
    in mirror-shine.  Here, 

I raise my arms to learn 
  cup size and band.
    I try on bits of cloth

that match my skin—
  and this satin 
    paradox of women,

the wire of our movements,
  the way we slip
    like water through a hand.

Shock

This emptiness is normal, they tell you—
how you float inside your own mind
like a buoy cut from its line,
wandering in a sea of darkness, unable
to perceive current or tide.
This is normal, the way it should be.
What’s more—you will never know different
or recognize change until after
the fact.  Nothing of you will remain,
so there is no sense in remembering
who you were before.  All that’s left is to
keep moving until your feet touch land,
pull yourself safely to shore.

 

Ephemeris

“Here is this sextant, useless in my hand”
                —Sandy Longhorn

There is no chart to navigate these open seas
in which I am lost; no table of values
for me to plot my course.  No father
taught me how to harness the wind, or
speak with the Anemoi in their private tongue.

This is the definition of my insanity:
I have searched you out my whole life
knowing you could not be found, that you 
don’t want to be found.  In my hands 
I finally hold the tools to live without you
but in the end you are still all I really want.

~

I know I should have something more to say
but what else is there? We both know there are
no words, no maps to navigate our shared terrain. 

Dusk of the Afrikaner

Aku’langa latshona lingenanduba. 
                                —Zulu proverb

I.

ONCE UPON A TIME, WHEN TIME was measured in the length of shadows, I met a woman—on a dirt road much like this one—who did not know the smell of rain.  

How sad, she said to no one.  I want to know it.

Her long Zulu eyes were not nearly as long as her gaze, on this day, impossibly February: heat billowing in waves; the once-White sun finally lowering among the aloes, by great pallbearers of Light, into the ground.

On the day I met this umfazi, I stumbled over her shadow & felt a sudden chill.  Sure & black as thunderclouds.

Far beyond the townships, beyond rivers of dust with no memory of the sea, her gathering shadow was easily the longest I’d ever seen.  It must have been the longest in the world. 

As a desert without clouds, she said. As a sleep without dreams.

Such a shadow must have meant she was very old.  Perhaps, the oldest woman in the world. 

But I am not, she said, as if burning the pages in my eyes.

 

II.

THEN, LIKE A MIGHTY black river of Night, the umfazi’s shadow fell across the Earth, crushing the aloes & the hills & the trees.  & all throughout Zululand, the blackest nightmare of one became the other’s dream.

& the sky wept. 

Like one who has not wept for centuries might weep, she said.  With the kind of weeping which feels like thunder, which makes the earth shudder, which portends the end of days.

& some ran for shelter. & some ran for the sea. But millions more had waited lifetimes for this storm.  Through moon, through sun, they clutched the aching earth. 

Till rain & mud, she said, became tears & blood.

& there they stood.  As ones who have not stood for centuries might stand. As if standing for something, she said. As if suddenly aware of the straightness of their own posture.

Then they raised their faces like black moonflowers till the whole of Zululand was ablaze with Midnight

& stars rained from her tongue—this witness, this poet—so moved she was by their forgotten beauty.

 

A Brief History of Okra (Master’s Take)

Discovered in her wild state 
on the flood-plain of the Nile, 
Okra arrived at Port of New Orleans
circa 1700: 
Germs stored in a drum.

~

Start Okra from seed.  She does not transplant
well.   She’s best planted 
in Southern soil, after all danger 
of frost has passed.

~

RULE OF THUMB: Keep them 
separated. Okra seeds are large, easy 
to handle, but they need 
warm weather to grow well. 

In Northern climes, you won’t have 
much of a crop.

~

Picking pods while wet 
may darken their skin.
Which might make them seem bitter 
at first.  But really, their taste 
is unaffected. 

~

Unlike her fairer cousin, Cotton, 
Okra’s showy yellow flower 
blooms just one day a year:

Just make sure that day
don’t last 
too long. 

A diary of like


   a shape


like watching the strong man nibble an apple core 
down to a polite history of his teeth: that

is half a simile: as in bed, alone, you wait 
for shudder to be applied to your skin: then a body

comes down from the mountain, made entirely of light, 
and drinks the river, you included, you most of all


   a kiss


like coming down, into: a pool, light: or wearing
a shirt of blood, still wet but holding form, yours,

a lover’s: not from wound but gift, as when a thing
is said to a candle and the candle bends away

from listening but listens: lithe: the flame all ears, 
mostly ears, fifty percent ears, the rest, a mirror

for slitting the throat open to a shadow 
taken out, planted: call it word: call it seed: call it

in the air: heads, tails: and there, in that moment
of open mouth, i meet your tongue as a place to live


   a history of a sound


like the shadow of a bell 
ringing: as when “whoa” is whispered

above a riderless horse, who stops 
among the morning thoughts of birds

where there is no bucket beside the well 
but a spoon: like to jump is the only way

to drink: to tie water to the lost 
end of the bell’s rope: umbilicus to the hand

that thrives where there is no bell 
but behaves as if there were: pulling:

and the arm of the hand: pulling: the shoulder 
of the arm: the spirit of it all: pulling:

and the pulling pulling back: where the appetites 
of pathos and ecstasy breed: where ringing

is listening: where listening is the shadow 
of the unspoken word


   dear borders


like feeling i’m the enaction of a waterfall by my tongue 
upon your body, as when a boat is brought to the edge

of exile and a hand extends to a hand or a tree 
beseeches with its shadeshawl: however born,

there is reaching, we agree the wind smelled of copper 
one day, a passport the next: like how to escape

my brain’s slum of words, the ghetto of the said, 
while adoring there the rocks, the teacups,

if half of me is a Molotov cocktail and half 
the infection of lost and half a genuflection

to breath: like wondering if this extra half 
is a country mapped with invisible ink:

like how windows ask to come along with the going 
and preside over the staying, and i look at them

with all the love, all the shatter i can muster:
shards cutting me when i try to put the sky,

the distance back together: boredom cutting me 
deeper when i don’t


   mind


like searching for a man in a burning house and finding 
a piano as echo flees: a whetstone still warm

from the blade: sheets pressed with brainfolds 
of sleep: a whisper from the bathroom

of running water: but no body: and you carry 
these things to safety that are not the man: the piano

in your arms, running water in your mouth, the vespers 
of sleep, the knife, so like a wing, like flight:

and say of him, that was me, to the ashes, the char: 
and sift the memory of flames for their sorrow,

holding smoke to the mirror interested only 
in solid dreams: like it will finally see

what isn’t there and give it your face, this presence 
of absence you have tried and tried not to be 


   in absentia


like you’ve taken the sleeves of my blood shirt 
with you to Seattle and sleep with them

around your waist in sight of a mountain, 
leaving the forlorn ghost of my torso

its one pocket: like what there is to hold 
is small and breast-pocket-shaped only: when fog

is everything shaped and i’ve told the willows 
to start without you: like a bomb may be hidden

in the road-side deer corpse when i notice 
i’m thinking of crocuses as stabbings of beauty

because my eyes are in someone else’s head: 
who wonders where his eyes have gone

and why suddenly the taste of yellow is all 
he dreams of: like being out of place is where

we keep how we feel: like someone 
comes looking for every last drop of sweat, every

last drop of kiss but finds tracks of beasts 
inside tracks of larger beasts, until they’re following

the path of the universe walking away from itself, 
to arrive where it is not, until where it is not

is where it is: like the word “home” wins the pageant,
wears the tiara, waves and waves as practiced

before a mirror: like reflection itself is being told,
goodbye


   closing arguments


like my penis was becoming a vagina until manly 
hormones swept into blood: the folds i carry in what

is not a fold: wept into blood: openings secreted 
in closed: the seemingness

of the river after three inches of rain: 
like the storm had lamented a river

into the river: a thing to say 
to make the point of bounty, churn: an errant calf

muscled away: the point of death: like endless 
liquid biceps traveling south, flexing to rejoin

the all: a thing to say to make the point 
of inside, where language smashly or tip-toely

goes: like every word is a skirt 
wind lifts, wind settles upon line or thigh:

whereas a yo-yo is so much itself 
it astounds our breaths, shines our hums away:

and what did we do to make our yo-yos 
spin/sit at the bottom of the stroke: walk the dog:

when there was no dog involved: and i don’t love you 
to death: like a man is the interruption

of a woman: a woman a man 
who could have been: like if i told you

all i had to tell, i’d still be trying 
to nail my tongue to some leaf, some bristle:

like we are the hole that grows in poor, unmendable 
nothing: we blind needles: we unmoored threads
re: incarnation


To you who say you’ve been here before, I say 
I’ve not been here yet, I say 
I’ll be here soon, I say 
what a mess you’ve made.

Next time, come back as an apology 
or broom.

Next time, bring enough doughnuts 
for everyone.

I would ask if there’s a next time 
to be the phrase, life is brutish and short.

I would have a child who is the phrase, life is supple 
and vibratory.

She would have a child 
who is the clamor behind a waterfall, twin of the child 
who is the ruckus in front of a waterfall, sisters 
to the child who is the screaming of the sun 
against the dark.

The first atom bomb came back 
as whispers, fallen eyelashes, dew.

Sometimes I hope I’m shiting out 
Hitler, Stalin, Pol Pot.

In those moments, I wished Americans believed 
in bidets.

If Americans came back as Europeans, we would believe 
in bidets.

And the carrier pigeon would come back 
as the carrier pigeon, only this time, 
it wouldn’t be the fashion to shoot them.

It would be the fashion to say look, the carrier pigeons
are back.

Everyone would turn and wait for the buffalo.

Everyone would turn and wait for us 
to honor our treaties with the Indians.

And while everyone was turned, all the interesting stuff 
would happen up ahead: the bumper car
would come back as making love.

Advice as minding your own business.

Slivers as trees under skin.

And there God would be
trying on all the slippers, hoping one pair 
fit, hoping one pair got him from the ball 
to happily ever after.

As if.

As if.

 

Oopsadaisy

Turning a window-crank, the handle comes off 
in my hand. In that moment, I am of two minds: 
the moon is a better painter of houses 
than I will ever be, I should like a small arm 
to grow from my cheek. Through the closed window, 
I can’t hear how the valley sounds or feel 
how it breathes or know if cows are singing 
quietly across the river. It’s always 
a capella with them. I suspect the handle 
wants to go with me to London and Amsterdam 
and Paris, to come back and tell the window 
everything it’s seen. The window will think 
the handle worldly, the handle will miss 
the Red Light District of Amsterdam, this is one 
possible future of all possible futures, 
as is putting the handle back the way life 
could go. Amid this uncertainty, I wonder 
if I’d slip a small sleeve on the small arm 
to keep it warm. Sometimes when I break things, 
I’m sure this is normal, that unbroken 
is the strange state, the odd condition 
we sometimes find ourselves in. Everything turning 
we want to turn, everything glowing 
we expect to emulate the sun. But are the cows 
singing? What good is a poem 
that doesn’t answer that question? 
Singing to the grass and of the grass, 
for the grass and through the grass, 
as the grass and with the grass. Could that be 
my philosophy and I’ve not recognized it 
until now? On the threshold of heaven, 
I’d wonder if the cows and the grass singing 
get to come with us. 
And if they do, the flies have to come. 
And if they do, the mosquitoes have to come. 
And if they do, the night sweats
have to come, the plane crashes 
have to come, the little black boxes
and the big black boxes, and I will pretend 
to wipe my feet on the threshold of heaven, 
but I won’t. Not of this, not of any of this.

 

Things I’m telling so you’ll know the things I’m telling you

Lend me your ears. With your ears and my ears, 
I’ll have one ear per wind, per Horseman 
of the Apocalypse, I’ll hear the end coming 
whichever way it comes. Lend me your lookouts 
and forts, your ease among crowds. As collateral, 
I offer acres of moonlight, pounds 
of moonlight, footpounds of torque 
of moonlight to tighten the bolts 
of your grass. I’ve closed my eyes 
and am thinking I’m somewhere else, somewhere 
my closed eyes are not, somewhere 
even the thinking behind my closed eyes 
is not, I am a secret I don’t know 
to tell myself. Lend me the secret you are 
that you don’t know to tell yourself, 
I’ll add both secrets to the pebbles 
in my mouth, they’ll be safe and portable 
as whispers. I’ve always wanted 
a team of secrets to justify the stadium 
I’ve built to give purpose 
to the cheerleaders I’ve acquired to fill out 
the tiny uniforms I was given 
years and years ago for Christmas, 
as if my parents knew I believed in rah 
and sis-boom-bah. Chrissy, the head cheerleader, 
in every cheery interview she gives 
with her cleavage, with her klieg-light smile, 
says someone has to cheer for the unknown. 
Lend me the feeling that your hands 
are oars in search of a boat, I’ll lend you 
the conviction my chest is a spinnaker 
devoted to the acquisition of a breeze. 
All we’ll need then is someone born 
to be a rudder, someone destined 
to be a sea-chantey, someone who knows
where the life-jackets are, which reminds me:
why no life-pants, life-socks, life-knickers 
and jumpers and tuxedos and skirlots, 
why no life-culottes, which tell me again 
what they are.

 

From the overly sensitive to the overly sensitive

This stone hurt my feelings.
I got a jack-hammer and hurt it
into a thousand pieces but the jack-hammer 
hurt my hands. I see grass getting along

well with wind, I ask it
what’s your secret, this is where 
not taking a foreign language in school
leaves me in the lurch, in the larch
on day’s I climb a larch. Those

are few and far between, both the trees
and my grasping of the many handles
trees offer us in the spirit
of shade. Higher and higher 
I go, wearing a green breath
along the way, until at the top,
there’s the difficult question, what

next, and often some kind of bird 
going by that seems to be answering 
a completely different question, the one 
the previous person in the previous tree 
had asked, and in this way, the world

is talking forward to itself, or the part 
of the world with splinters 
in its hands, that is thinking, 
jump, thinking, poor tree, 
that never gets to climb a tree.

 

el uh gee

A house is never so empty as when the trail 
of spoons leading from the fire 
in the living room to the waterfall 
in the bedroom is broken, and just like that, 
I’m stranded, not knowing 
which way to turn or if turning 
is prophecy or if the mountain 
behaves green or is green, the dog 
who would have answered these questions 
years dead, my wife

in the garden, her left glove buried 
to discover if a hand has wished 
in the darkness of the finger holes 
to be born of it, like don’t you expect a body 
in the pile of your clothes 
on the cold floor come morning, some you 
with broader shoulders, perspective, this rising 
surrounding her in the garden 
she can’t decide is weed or flower 
so she pulls every other one, the window 
through which I look at her 
a wall, the word elegy circled below

where I’ve written I am a harvest 
of phantom limbs and speculative 
is to speculum on an envelope, never finishing 
the thoughts, the dishes, the wiring 
from me to you, tongues of I guess, I want, I hope, 
and how will that story end: dead mouse? 
sunflower? since of course there’s the push 
for the definitive, as when I open a book 
to this phrase, Was there really no alternative 
to cannibalism? which when I ask the mirror, 
the meal of me, the answer comes back the color 
of my eyes: no

 

The narrative of an image

An image floats wherever images reside 
of a wedding dress spread on a green hill. 
Other images are aware of the dress: 
the woman who put it there, the farmer 
who mows politely around its border, 
until I believe the dress 
rises through the summer of my feelings 
on the grass that grows beneath it. 
The grass grows and lifts the dress,
it casts a shadow, there are two dresses 
now on the hill, a sense of time 
in the projection of lace. The bride 
who comes for the dress dreams actually 
of wearing the field, but this child 
of the field will have to do. 
I see now it’s not a wedding dress 
at all, she’s not a bride, I’ve wanted 
to be a bird so long or wind 
that I mistake the shape of my wishes 
for a story my mind tells itself 
in the belief a denouement will be reached 
some might call the beginning 
of a beautiful life. I’d phone Rothko 
if I knew his number dead and ask 
for a field of green 
dreamed by a beckoning of white, 
since imagination is the only beauty 
that never lies. Once more, I’m at an end 
that doesn’t feel like an end, as every piano 
I don’t own could be anywhere 
going on about the version of life 
two hands hold true, uncertainty removed 
in the touching of felt to metal, 
only to return, once echo tires of saying, 
I told you so.

 

In a battle between ethicists and travel agents,
            I’d take the travel agents

Another article about Venice drowning.
I have four of them together
with my memories of the Bridge of Sighs
being photographed to death. The day we walked 
from torture in the doge’s place to Miro 
in Peggy Guggenheim’s house was Tuesday without a sign 
of rain, of rats like the night before. 
I could see Islam in the ogee arches 
across the canal from where she lived 
in the 50s with Miro and Chagall, arches 
that suggested the Mamluks, suggested nations 
trying to kill each other now had gotten along 
in the past, in opulence over tea, as everyone 
who gets along in a polite society must eventually 
come up for tea. We got lost after Peggy Guggeneheim’s 
life with Miro, Chagall, Braque, Picasso, 
if those walls could speak they’d have lips 
and in Venice when you get lost you’re never 
lost: there’s always water and water is a map 
of itself. Have you ever looked at a glass 
of water and wondered, how will you get home? 
All white-coated lab assistants who drop mice 
into mazes should be dropped 
into Venice and feel they’re being watched 
from above without kindness but full-on 
Skinnerian reinforcement, whatever that means. 
In our lost-but-not-lostness, we were passed 
by tuxedos on their way to Verdi, laughing tuxedos 
and susserating dresses on their way to Verdi 
and followed without a bow tie, without wind 
in a bustle, followed and arrived at Verdi 
and stood a minute outside Verdi as denim 
among the silk. Then moon. Moon on water 
and equally rats, such good swimmers, the moon 
and rats and gondolas and Venice 
swims best of all. Then the sinking feeling 
we had to leave by boat to leave by train 
and would never pay fourteen hundred dollars 
again for a crappy gelato I believe 
was made entirely of human sweat, the hard work 
of getting anything into this city, like an orange, 
like a refrigerator, like privacy. The next day, 
we were two of eighty thousand who left 
and negative two of eighty thousand who arrived. 
Venice is sinking in people not from Venice 
and everyone should go to Venice before everyone 
going to Venice destroys Venice. O radiant 
consciousness of the locust: I feel myself 
emptying every field of field and wanting 
nights again of walking through what feels 
like the mind if the mind is three parts 
shadow one part water lapping against the end 
of shadow.

Fault

The geography, it hums. A house halved. Some bitterness come down from the mountain, a satin heel lost in a creekbed at the base.

The one you loved or worse is in the next county, gone to child, drowning in the smell of himself. You think of him, rub your mouth.

He waits with the others who brought you stuttering into this world, watching for signs inside the vein, this end game, brief knife.

 

A History

Had I not been born
a container, room for cream.

The girl who catches salmon with her hands
still hides her face in her father’s shirt.

And he is afraid,
her father, so afraid. 

Lover Come Back To Me

Curiosity flared—
His journals cleared up nothing:
nonsense dreams, conquests

labeled hot sex: scenarios 
impotent as flatware.  
Friends, I was a fool—

I confused blankness 
for mystery.  
Do you think I want him any less?

 

Siddhartha

Once there was a murmur, low
and distant: an electric storm softly 
rumbling.  Heeding its signs the king

wrapped his son in asbestos whites.
As if monarchs (or fathers) could rule 
the mind and keep it from ranging.

So it was with the prince, who left 
his child sleeping in the crescent of his wife. 
I’ll find the way for myself and for others. 

Why is it men suffer?  
That’s still the thing to ask, heart folded 
lotus petal style, in Deer Park, in Sarnath,

under cloud-sized Bo trees.  For men still 
botch their lives and leave their wives.

 

In Brindavan Woods

She waits for her blue-skinned god.  Night ringing to the sound of anklets.

                  Of you I dream 
                  Of far-off featureless hills

On his wooden flute he plays, a tune to still the gopi’s ankle-bells. 

                  I remember the first time
                  You were the one tree in a meadow

Entering, she vanishes into night-blue skin; lotus eyes lamp the dark.

                  I’ve never said this to anyone
                  The twilight sky is no match for the flame tree

On the green at the water’s edge, envy spreads like a marigold dress.

                  Why won’t you come?  Tonight
                  only the cricket trills in his grove

He plays all night and into morning: first rains drenching Kangra hills. 

                  Can’t you be like the parched earth?
                  Patient for the summer rains

Beneath the flowering mango, she lifts the anklets from her feet.

                  Promise me you’ll let him go
                  Let the crimson leach from your palms

Resting his peacock crown, he loosens her hair.  He dabs her forehead with musk.

 

Smoke Gets in Your Eyes

Did I gloat, friend,
over his good looks and my good 
fortune?  Now look—
like the unfortunates before me
I’m scalding his slut with my looks. 

19 Poemes Elastiques: rubberbands around my heart

                                               after Blaise Cendrars

1. Tower

Paris 
I was eating an orange in front of the Orangerie

When suddenly—
it wasn’t my birth 
it wasn’t a Metro strike 
or the taxidermized animals 
in the Natural History Museum coming to life 
or the Seine flooding, water whistling 
though the stacked bones in the Catacombs 
or Jim Morrison rising in Pere Lachaise 
whiskey bottle in hand

it was you 
it was the Eiffel Tower 
it was sex

                   O Eiffel Tower 
I didn’t give you my umbrella for nothing 
I didn’t leave my son’s stroller in your elevator 
to leave & never come back 
I didn’t write 2 novels with you on the cover 
not to dream of you 
when I sleep in a bed damp with sex

In Florida, palm trees are you 
In Pennsylvania, rusting derricks 
In Wisconsin, cell towers 
In the Gulf, offshore oil platforms, blazing with light

the way fireworks, zodiac signs, arabesques exploded up your sides 
in 1929 
when you were the world’s tallest 
advertising sign CITROEN

You are my spine— 
the one smashed to dust & then 
made whole

You are my gallows— 
if I am ever hung for 
my crimes as I should be 
liar that I am 
unfaithful daughter 
of an unfaithful father

I have climbed other towers 
I have eaten escargot in Windows on the World 
on a table that—later— 
fell burning 
from the sky & took my waiters 
with it

But you stand 
But your elevators 
still rise to the sky

Tower of towers, World Tour Tower 
Paperweight, thermometer, desklamp 
souvenir tower

I am, was born, hope to die in your 
shadow

 

2. Poemerie

The door of my poem shop opens 
on the boulevard 
Its display windows 
square cut diamonds of light

Listen to the accordions 
Listen to the Bal Musette 
& know you have stepped outside time

The typewriters never heard anymore 
in the world clatter here— 
tat-clack-tat-a-tat 
Everything black or white 
but still burning burning

On the corner, workers 
from the night shift drink 
red wine at a zinc bar 
as if this were 1956 & I 
were just being born 
bloody, squalling, by the Canal St-Martin

From time to time 
a car passes through the Arc de Triomphe 
on its way to great victory 
or to commit an infamous crime 
Today is film noir 
Today is Belmondo 
Today is France under the old new management

& my American father 
drives a vast American car 
with fins like sharks 
down the Champs-Elysees 
& takes his sleeping bastard child 
from the arms of her French mother 
who is walking, always walking, by that same canal

The mother who is France 
who is the winter sale at La Samaritaine 
the airbrakes squealing at the Gare du Nord 
the old aerodrome that survived the war

a girl & a maid & a whore—maybe 
though one raised by nuns 
who might have raised me— 
in this Marcel Carne film version of my life— 
near the Hotel du Nord 
to no good end at all

& my life would have been— 
a cigarette in the dark 
a glass of vin ordinaire

short 
dark 
sad, maybe

but French

 

3. Portrait

I am asleep 
I wake up 
I write all this down 
I write “Cathedral, possibly Notre Dame?” 
I write “No such thing” 
I write cow & you are one 
I write knife &, by god, you are bleeding 
                            or I am 
I write cock—because I want one 
                            inside me 
as much as my mother did

For France without sex 
is my body without thighs 
I write “ass” 
& it’s your ass 
It’s yours, reader 
It’s yours, lover

Who doesn’t have one, after all?

Or I could be genteel & 
         say the “ass” belongs to 
my fiance, not to you

Just as I could say my mother 
         was a milkmaid 
         or a midwife 
         not a woman with good tits, a nice ass

Or so I am guessing since my father slept with her 
when he was married to someone else

Me, I was born in thanks to a knife 
the Eiffel Tower the corkscrew 
looming overhead 
Christ dying on the cross 
in 1000 nearby churches 
even on the afternoon I was born 
It gave me a taste for blood

Watch out— 
I have ink left

I could cut your throat

 

4. Dance

Call me a wandering Jew 
since my mother was one

No place for her in Paris 
parents deported 
she & her sister left at a convent 
me, in turn, given away to a new life in a new land

But once sent on my way 
I found I could not stop moving 
continually coming & going

I became a woman who flies above 
the world 
gazes, disconnected, from a tiny window 
at the blue or green or white below

Even the news doesn’t interest me anymore 
flicker/drone 
Dance of disaster 
Dance of daily deaths 
intercut with the failed marriages 
of those famous merely for being famous

But even those who fly 
fall

One day, I will pirouette 
Turn on one toe 
Come down 
from the clouds

If I die 
If you die

I will smell it 
the way I can smell 
falling 
snow

 

5. I Have A Body

I am wearing skin not 
                                  just clothes 
Never mind the wrinkles in both 
it is Glorious, this having flesh

body wired with the most sophisticated sensors

my upraised palms are scales that weigh 
the truth of everything

I can feel how much you want me 
just by touching 
my lips to the small of your back

O yes

Everyone else in line for the morning reveille 
steps back, leaving you 
the lone volunteer

The sun undresses us 
clothes fall to the floor 
until we are only our skins 
moving

Nothing in this universe ever stands still

Outside is the river 
I can hear carp slapping, spawning 
in the shallows

body on wet body

I love you too

 

6. Hammock

There is one on the porch 
of this cabin on the Wisconsin River

There was one in the house 
in Florida where I grew up

As a metaphor— 
the hammock is not cotton or nylon net 
but the curve of the earth 
between where I stand & France

My future always my past

I sit today on a river that on early French maps 
is spelled Ouisconsin

& read Apollinaire

Of whom Cendrars writes 
“Apollinaire 
1900—1911 for 12 years the only poet in France” 
Apollinaire,

dead 92 years 
& voila

still, he lives

Am I that alive?

 

7. Carnival

This year I was in Montevideo 
it was carnival— 
Mardi Gras—

& I was writing of France

Foolish me—always my heart 
in another country

But I was not the only one— 
everyone in Uruguay is an immigrant 
or refugee or transported slave 
or their descendent

all dancing through the streets 
of the Ciudad Viejo 
to the drums of the candombe 
to the Desfile de las Llamadas

I bought a copy of El Pais Uruguay & 
in it were the futbol scores—Penarol, Nacional 
& the reviews of the murgas— 
which group sang the most 
satirical lyrics

Carnival! 
All printed on the front page

next to the latest casualties from the latest wars 
& a picture of the First Lady of France 
herself a singer

Even in South America, the world brought me 
the foolish beauty of France— 
wrapped in newsprint 
framed by the names of the dead

 

8. Siren

It is a song 
It is static 
Tour Eiffel as radio tower 
television tower 
cell tower

In Rene Clair’s film 
Paris Qui Dort 
the city is frozen 
by a mad scientist’s invisible ray— 
every human paused, midstep, 
like a stopped watch

Only the watchman at the top 
of the Eiffel Tower 
& the passengers on an aeroplane 
just making a grassy landing 
move in the morning sun

The silence total 
except for the phonograph they steal 
& take to the top of the tower 
to dance in their equally stolen fur & pearls

The film moves 
but the world below is 
still 
as a B & W photograph

A soundless world

Not like now—when the Spanish King 
snaps at the President of Venezuela, 
“Por que no te callas?” Why don’t you shut up? 
& it echoes on Youtube 
as downloaded ringtones 
Shut up Shut up Shut up

Weatherunderground promises 
“A fair day for Paris” 
but in this new century 
I smell hellfire 
I smell war

There is no future but the past 
No, no scratch that

I am going to send this stripped chassis 
of a poem on a long trip 
by snail mail, by sea 
to you in Uruguay

Let it be the future

Let it arrive— 
infant Moses in papyrus basket— 
on the doorstep 
of a new world

 

9. Journal

Jesus 
It’s been decades since I thought of you— 
not since I married then abandoned a husband 
who was a Methodist minister 
         who saw you even in Star Wars 
         thought pop songs on the radio 
         were about loving you

Christ 
My life has changed since then 
except what hasn’t. I am still the same 
I wanted to become a writer 
I still do

Here are the books I’ve published 
shelves of them

For me, each one is about me 
thinking about you 
Jesus

what a life 
shipwrecked, shellshocked 
Everything sunburned 
skin splitting like an orange

My books hurt just looking at them 
none the paradise, the peace treaty 
I longed for them to be

Today, I spent a sad damp morning 
thinking of dead friends 
& writing in my journal 
reading the Times online

Christ 
the whole world ends up crucified 
in the morning paper

arms spread, wing spread, spread eagle

bombs 
ululation 
cries

You’d think another airplane was 
         falling from the sky

but it’s you 
it’s me too

 

10. Breaking News

Alabama Evangelist Gets Life For Dead Wife in Freezer

Mobile, Ala, May 20, 2010—

An Alabama evangelist who 
authorities say 
terrorized his family while preaching at revivals 
has been sentenced to life plus 51 years 
for killing his wife 
& storing her body in the home freezer

Hopkins, 39, showed no remorse

The Asst. District Attorney called Hopkins 
“evil of the worst kind” 
She said he taught his eight children things about Jesus 
the Bible tells us are not true


Found poem, Associated Press

 

11. Midnight Express

The life I lead 
is designed to keep me from suicide

Everyone else leaps 
throws themselves under iron wheels 
in a universe of ambulance sirens 
& sad last calls in all the bars 
on this planet

Get thee behind me, Satan! 
I have an accordion!

I have music 
when poetry leaves through 
the screen door like a stray cat 
like a lover who came for the night 
without so much as a toothbrush

I have blood 
microscopic bits of human tissue 
under my fingernails from clinging 
to the ones I love 
when the tsunami tried to suck them— 
time & again— 
into the black 
salt that is no earthly sea

But I don’t know any more. I don’t 
understand what you are saying 
Is that a poem? That last one? 
Is that the tiny thing 
a camera & a phone?

I was born in a great city 
rubbed raw by war 
My son was born in a town 
so quiet 
I can hear my neighbors dreaming 
He is 12 now & tall 
How could he have ever come 
first into 
then out of my body?

If I told you the story 
of human reproduction 
& you weren’t human— 
you’d laugh

I no longer read books from libraries 
dead Dewey Decimal world 
This poem will be the last 
I write with a pen

Bon Voyage, books I have written

See how you like 
being alone—unloved— 
in this world

 

12. BOTNIA

I am torn 
I grew up in Florida 
I have smelled the stench of paper factories 
seen the pus yellow discharge in rivers 
Seen the perfect rows of trees 
soldiers at attention 
waiting to die

But Uruguay is such a small country 
Botnia, Finnish paper giant, invested 
40 million euros in that factory in Fray Bentos! 
More than a million euros for every Uruguayan!

No matter the new President, Mujica, wishes it otherwise 
no matter I do

He is never going to shut that paper factory

No matter the Argentinean piqueteros blockading 
the bridge, closing the border 
No matter the small print 
on the Treaty of the Uruguay River 
No matter any ruling by 
the World Court in The Hague

For 150 years, an earlier factory in Fray Bentos 
sent enough tinned beef 
across the ocean to feed the British army 
as it built an empire 
fought two World Wars

So I ask—

1. If there were no rations 
would armies still march?

2.  If there were no writers 
                              no readers 
would we still need paper mills?

For 2, the  answer is yes— 
the world needs its boxes 
its touchably soft toilet tissue

For 1, as well, yes— 
Armies march

                            & eat what they find

 

13. At the Crossroads

4 houses sleeping 
in the sun 
an old dog, fur knotted like a bathmat

Dare to shout 
Pirouette on toe 
Movement color light 
melting on my mouth 
like chocolate

me, translucent 
                   blazing 
in the dusty street

Love, you said 
I didn’t know how to open 
my eyes

But here I am— 
blinded by the light

 

14. Tricolor—& the sun

Blue 
only the sky over Paris 
never the Seine

White 
all the paper 
the bureaucracy requires 
even in this digital age 
to decide if I am a citizen

Red 
My mother’s blood— 
giving birth to me by cesarian 
Her mother pricking a finger 
on a needle the morning 
of her deportation— 
the only blood she shed in France 
which so neatly outsourced 
the murder of its Jews

                     ~

Red 
coming to America 
crying until my eyes 
were swollen shut

White 
the thin sheet of paper 
declaring me 
American

&

Blue 
the color of my 
American father’s eyes— 
my American mother’s were hazel 
but so sad 
they looked blue too

                     ~

& if there is a third flag for me— 
Uruguayan bandera with stripes of

White 
blank as the page before I stained it 
with these words

Blue 
as the ocean 
on the nearly empty beach

No red, no blood shed here 
yet by me or mine

Only a yellow sun 
with rays like a lion’s mane 
& a cartoon face 
staring, wide-eyed

at the future

 

15. Les Vampires

November, 1915 found the walls of Paris 
plastered with posters 
of a woman’s masked face 
question marks wrapped around her neck 
like hangman’s nooses 
Qui? Quoi? Quand? Who? What? Where?

Les Vampires 
Feuillade’s silent serial 
starring the great Musidora in skin tight black 
as Irma Vepp—as thief & murderess— 
her very name an anagram of vampire

Every turn of plot 
really about death— 
male actors disappearing from the serial 
to die as soldiers in the trenches

Every plot twist 
really about sex— 
Every scene 
really about desire—

Why else would Phillipe Guerande, crack reporter, 
pull a tiny gun on Irma Vepp 
only to find she has stolen his bullets?

All he wants is Irma Vepp 
All we want is Irma Vepp

To peel off her tight black body stocking 
To be her when she stabs a banker 
through the heart with her hat pin 
& throws his body off the moving train

All Phillipe wants is 
not to live with his mother 
not to be the one too weak to be a soldier

For once 
to be the one grabbing Irma Vepp 
around the neck in the Apache Dance 
their breath, their tight, hot chests 
the bellows of the accordion

For once 
to be a naked with a naked Irma Vepp

For once 
for her to escape & take him with her

But all he gets for being good 
is a single bed, night after night alone

In the final episode, The Bloody Wedding 
Irma Vepp dies 
a bullet in her  heart

& leaves Phillipe to his life as a reporter

Better to have been stabbed by that hat pin 
Better to have been thrown from the train 
Better to have been gassed at the front like Apollinaire

Better to be a poet, liar, thief of words, 
than a reporter— 
16 million dead in WW I— 
responsible, in the end, 
for all the world’s unpleasant 
truth

 

16. A Life in Titles

Home Is France, 1956 
Falling to the Sound of My Mother’s Voice 
We Step Quietly into the Future 
I See God in the Movies 
My Life is a Silent Movie 
Things That Have Escaped Me 
Grief in Paris 
Last Poem 
Bang

 

17. Rock ’n Roll

has a Hall of Fame 
and in it 
Buddy Holly’s high school diploma 
a very skinny pair of Dylan’s jeans

Never mind— 
turn the radio on 
turn the stereo up 
let’s go for a drive with the bass cranked 
as far as it will go

Rock is the music of America 
It is the best thing I have found here

I live in a town where Otis Redding’s plane 
plunged into a cold deep lake 
& still the music plays

Take that, Edith Piaf!

In the next life, no pens only drum sticks 
In the next life, sex, drugs & an electric guitar

 

18. Constructivism redux

Black & white & red 
no need for other colors

I think about sex all the day 
I think about you sometimes 
I think about God more often

The earth is full of molten magma 
The sky is full of snow

Everything—through my eyes—grows 
dimmer, less in focus 
even with trifocals

But 
if the print is big enough 
if the art is sharp enough

I feel the knife edge like the old days 
Hear the breath of both humans & machines 
Feel you trace a tongue along my spine

I gave birth the way my mother did— 
split wide open

See me? Dressed in black like Irma Vepp 
Qui? Quoi? Quand? Who? What? Where?

Wet nurse for future poets 
Engineer of student souls

See? In arabesques writ large 
across 
an accordion of sky

My portrait

 

19.  Every end has a beginning

I have seen the Seine pushing hard 
against its stone quais

but I am not there, not yet

I have walked along the Canal St-Martin 
crossed a bridge, looked

into that oil slick water 
for a past unmarked by any stone

My passport says I’m still there

I have waited, bundled, on a platform 
at the Gare du Nord

for a stranger to take me in her arms 
Mother taking me from mother

Twice, I waited until they came to get me 
Twice

then I decided to be born

not yet, 
but soon

Sometime Sweep

I

Never mundane, the Brooklyn Bridge
Swivels through sunlight, spokes going, a stone soaring

While I sit half-asleep on the D train
Wobbling through Robert Musil, wavering in and out of the same sentence

Suddenly Ulrich saw the   Suddenly Ulrich   Suddenly Ulrich saw the whole thing in the

Rocking in rhythm with the other sleepers, the slumped, the shrunkfaces
Slivering open at the mouth
                                            comical light of the question

Trying to pull myself out of the suck
Of sleep, an “epic, comic struggle,” as a teacher of mine once put it, in words not exactly 
     like that


II

                     there was certainly an abundance

A Bridge-glimpse through girders
Picks my head up a little
                                                                      of mind around  

                                           other half-conscious heads tilting towards it

The Bridge is a statement, always flexing across the river

Always stalwart ambition
                                               posed beyond the flickering

Girders, graffiti, D train going the opposite direction
Girders flashing like extra lashes on eyes that can’t go wide enough to take in all of it


III

This is the best homage to the Bridge, the natural prayer
Of sleepy heads turning towards it, offering the tribute of what they have left

Of their attention
                                the only thing wrong was
                                                                            dimmed minds
Briefly firing
                        the only thing wrong was that
                                                                          the distance

Between themselves and the Bridge like a physical regret

                               the only thing wrong was

The distance between
                                         mind itself
                                                                what they could have been,                                                                                                                  was
What they still, possibly, could be
                                                         devoid of mind
                                                                                       and now

     the only thing wrong was that mind itself was devoid of mind


IV

I feel the Bridge as a challenge and a rebuke
What’s happened to you, mild man, what have you become

He was himself, after all

You used to attack books like this you used to mow them down
Now you sit repositioning your pants loathing that guy’s thigh for touching yours
                                                                                    
He was himself

What happened to your day-by-day determination
To work through the world’s volumes to build up the stamina to match me

                   one of those specialists who had renounced responsibility

Crane walked me, Mayakovsky walked me
                                                                      for the larger questions


V

The Brooklyn Bridge requires a total poetry

Never nods off
Never makes itself feel better by looking at the Manhattan or Williamsburg Bridge dozing

Never resents the East River 
For lapping against it, the millions of overweight people for walking all over it,
The guided tours with their caesurae
Of historical morsels, the joggers jouncing it, pollocking their sweat

The water bottles brimming over its trash cans,
Scuttling its planks, the bicyclists superciliously moving through them flaring their 
     messenger bags

The bad poetry thrown at it daily, the cantos of crap,
Young poets climbing its cables at midnight to feel gusts they can’t summon at their 
     computers


VI

The Brooklyn Bridge never manages
Its website, never shops online for patio furniture at Kmart,
Never explodes at the handle
Of a mini barbecue grill from Target for failing to screw on properly,
Never dreams of coming face to face
With Samsung Customer Service to give them a piece of its mind


VII

The Brooklyn Bridge never gives away pieces of its mind

Always a braining fire
                                            He was the less visible

                  of the two 
Always
                                       searching for 
                                                                   a cathedral of conveyance

Always mustering
                                    a possible handle to grasp
                                                                                    never muttering

Never merely, never flinching
                                                      the real mind of the mind

 

To LeBron’s Elbow

I, too, sometimes go numb. I’m numb now,
      deadened all over my apartment on the day after
The Chosen One crooked you by His side
      on national television to announce His decision
to kill Cleveland, which somebody, ESPN or
      one of The Chosen One’s “Team” or perhaps
The Chosen One Choosily Himself, named
      The Decision, with no irony at all, thus branding
a ready, snappy, definite-articled name to go
      alongside other such Cleveland catastrophes,
The Drive, The Fumble, The Shot, The Move,
      or in Rust Belt French, The LeBacle,
The Chosen One’s maddening subtraction
      of Himself from the Cavs’ historic, i.e. paralyzing,
Game 5 loss at home to the effing Boston Celtics
      in the 2010 Effing Conference Semifinals,
a team He hammered at home in the playoffs
      two years earlier with that massive dunk over KG’s head
that you helped author, when the Celtics
      were younger, fresher and eventual champions,
and The Chosen One had a far less supportive
      supporting cast. What happened to Him in Game 5?
He looked out of joint, to say the least, loitering
      outside the three-point line while the Celtics drew
further away and The Non-Chosen panicked,
      nonplussed as to why He wasn’t demanding the ball
and ramming it down Paul Pierce’s fatfish face.
      Only the most important game of the season
and, in retrospect, the history of the Cavs’ franchise,
      and there was The Chosen One touching you
instead of the basketball, as if petting His own tentativeness,
      saying it was okay. After the game, fresh from 
fuming on the subway ride home listening to too much
      Rage Against the Machine, feeling capable
of dismembering another person for the first time,
      specifically Rajon Rondo, I opened your Twitter page
and saw that you had checked to see if The Chosen
      Balls were still attached and could report that they were,
but “oddly singing showtunes.” This didn’t help,
      blaming His Balls instead of taking any
responsibility, just the fact that I was scouring
      your Twitter page shows how ridiculous everything
had become after we were all witnesses to no less
      than the withdrawal of a god followed by His press
conference afterward, at which He acted as if nothing strange
      had happened, saying you felt fine and that everyone
overreacted to one bad game because He “spoiled”
      people with His play. I wanted to see fury,
the same fury He unleashed on top of KG’s head
      now directed at Himself as He admitted His failure, 
how He Himself was to blame for the loss,
      not His teammates or coach; but of course
this would have been a staggering admission
      on His part, accepting sole blame for the first time
in His career, saying, Yes, I now have the players
      around Me to win a championship, but I came up
against the moment of My greatness and I failed.
      In fact, I took the moment off. I was in la la land.
“Every career has a tipping point when you have to pour
      cement on the foundation,” Bill Simmons says,
and The Chosen One was flinching under the first
      plops of that cement, coaxing open His own narrative
umbrella to shield Himself from the hardening
      of other men’s judgment: I of course was pouring
it on, saying there was no way He could leave
      Cleveland after this, that He’d never live down
the embarrassment of quitting on the Cavs
      in the playoffs only to quit the entire city;
but even as I thought this I knew it was false,
      of course He could leave, of course He could live
down the embarrassment, if he went on to win
      multiple championships somewhere else He’d be
remembered for those, not for His failures;
      He could re-write crapping out on Cleveland
as the inevitable discharge of crappy coaching
      and teammates; He could submit He’d taken
His hometown franchise as far as it could go
      before banging His elbow on the ceiling; yes, 
He could work you in there, slyly, after a couple
      of championships, sitting down with Jim Gray again 
propped by charity children, smiling and sipping
      from His vitaminwater and admitting that, yes,
you were bothering Him more than He let on,
      but let’s just leave it at that, Jim. I can see all this
playing out in His mind on the court as you went
      numb, feeding that slim fissure of doubt
into His feeling of invincibility, worming in
      the weft of the new narrative; perhaps there was
a twinge of regret as He felt something in Him
      diminished; but quickly that was buried
in His mind as He dug His new, wider foundation.
      And what did anyone expect? The “keenest
of human torments is to be judged without a law,”
      Camus writes in The Fall, and all of us (even you)
construct narratives to ease ourselves out
      of judgment, slip its prim stranglehold
on our identities; naturally, someone thinking of Himself
      as “The Chosen One” is not going to stand by
and be Prufrocked, “pinned and wriggling on the wall,”
      as everyone with a Twitter account (even you)
tells Him He is this or that but never going to be
      anything else, without maneuvering in whatever
way He can to spring Himself out of history
      into possibility again, even if that means giving up
His Chosen identity; after all, haven’t I moved
      to New York to spring free of certain 
judgments I now call “small-town,” haven’t I
      (along with my chorus from Cleveland) damned LeBron 
out of a desire to resurrect my own ruined narrative
      from the cement pour of His Last Judgment
aka The Decision? He’s stupid, he’s cruel, he’s breathtakingly
      narcissistic, lost, a coward, a quitter, all ways
of scooping up some of that cement and dumping it
      back on him. But while the war is still on
for LeBron James’s narrative, as he marshals his forces
      in Miami to shatter our attempts to set him,
the narrative for Cleveland has been cast,
      the city subsiding into its own cynicism again,
hardening into more poor history, this time
      through the masturbation of a television special;
and all I can do to feel free of that cast
      is to run my writing hands over its contours,
rub some feeling into me as LeBron tried
      to do with you, leave an imprint on how I’m being
shaped, showing I’m not completely useless, 
      that were an actual god to come along at the end
of the game and need me to raise His right
      hand, He wouldn’t have to switch to His left.

Instrument

The dog pulls at the wing of a dead sparrow
and she shoos him off, a small shovel in the other
hand already digging for the burial. Bless this mess
you have made, O Lord. 
                                 We’ve been practicing praying
lately at dinner, careful not to ask for things
(although we ask for things inside)—I’m trying
to be more thankful, more blesséd than beast,
I’m trying to come to terms with my place
in the world, my feet in the soil, the grass
of Tennessee rising up through my toes and I’m trying
not to show my disappointment that even here,
in the beautiful mountains, the wretched Bermuda grows.

It’s the smallest thing can send me off. The sound
of new birds, fresh and beautiful songs, the sound
of her voice in the morning singing hymns, parodies
of hymns, but always in the parody the recognition
of something wholly worth repeating in the original.

The dappled thing as a wing. Hope as that thing
with feathers. The surface and symbol and my reading
versus the “deeper” meaning, children, go 
where I send thee. 
                       She has dreams of flying at night,
as do many, probably you, my reader, but I can
recall no such dreams of my own. Recurring dreams include:
waking up with one leg longer than the other,
the inability to climb stairs, a fist swung in the direction
of some adversary at a pace so slow it thickens
to the last drop of sorghum as it comes off the spoon,
the biscuit right there, waiting. So when I awake
I pray to shake my fist and turn it into a wing.
I pray to pull the rabbit out of the hat, and with the small
shimmer of a purple handkerchief set it flying
in the form of two white doves. 
                                           Two bodies, one soul,
and the rabbit thus knows what we all know, what pangs
us as the shadow of some creature in the sky makes
passes. 
            Audubon gone down the river and in the morning
out to hunt the local wildlife. Once, in my younger days,
while goose hunting, a bird I shot came down straight
toward me, like a projectile from the sky, claiming revenge
or hoping for an embrace as it landed feet from me,
I’m not sure what it meant—I’ve thought out every possible symbol 
of that sign, I’ve wondered if it was some sort of omen.

In my last house a group of turkey vultures made a nest 
near the tree line at the edge of the field out back. 
The deer came, the raccoons came, the opossums 
and foxes and the crepuscular creatures that ate
while the dew was fresh. In the distance of the night,
the barn owl. In the day, the circling turkey vultures.
Months they flew daily, until I came to accept the fact
that death lingered at my doorstep, or near, it was breathing
something cold through summer’s old wire screen.

And they flew, just as the owls hooted, and when
I waved to my neighbor one day, to have one of our
conversations about weather and the future and family
in the middle of the street, she sat against her hoe and said:
Well, I guess my husband died today. And it was that simple,
and that inaccurate. That much of a stab at the fact,
sixty-five years of marriage and so when they’re gone
you can never be too sure, and shouldn’t, a guess being
the best gesture you can make, because death is biological
but also spiritual, or metaphorical, death is nothing
at all really, from a certain perspective. 
                                              I am not well, these days.
The world is much with me. And the rain comes now,
and in the back of my pick-up sits one of the last loads
of our move here getting wet. The weight bench: wet.
The turkey fryer: wet. The camping gear and the other small things
that take the longest to arrive. They travel so slowly
because they appear so inconsequential, so small, so slight
as a ticking on the wall in the other room, a starling
pushing hard against a great northern wind. Wet now,
as the birds sit in the trees wet, or sit wherever they go
when it rains, who knows where, it’s so rare
to see them in this weather, or hear them, as if they can
turn off the frequency of their beings at times, and disappear,
to return again as birds, or dead birds the dog finds,
empty vessels, set down by a soul that felt something
in the rain, something in a human, something in flight,
set down here for her to bury and remember 
that, at times, she too, has flown. 

Suppose You Were a Stingray

Your whole day was spent searching for a spicy cuttlefish snack. You were always the death of a party. Like a war god made of feathers. The way baby condors are fed by puppets in zoos—what is the crumple of feather—what does it sound like when a baby accidentally sees that puppet like a puddle on the floor?  I know that when you are gone I will always think of you when I eat an orange. All the oranges you forced on me when I visited you in Florida. I will surely cry into my orange. My orange, my orange.

We were so close we were matroyshka dolls, nestled into one another. I was inside you and the boy with the wild hair was the smallest one inside me, the only one whose insides were not scooped out, will never be scooped out. No scar-line drawn across his belly. He was the prize, the pearl firked out and oh, the applause.

 

While Riding an Elephant, I Think of Unicorns

Periyar National Park, India

The elephant takes me deeper into the bamboo forest
and I start to worry about what other animals 
might be hiding here. The stalks are so thick 
and clustered in tight walls of green, it makes me

wonder about the tiger preserve nearby and how 
this would make a lovely place to find 
a dinner date, if I was a disgruntled tiger. 
Or if I was a unicorn—and needed some peace

and privacy—this would definitely be the ideal spot. 
And when I daydream about unicorns, I can’t help
but think of that little frog in the right hand corner
of that famous medieval tapestry, “Unicorn

in Captivity.” That unicorn is fat and sassy—
almost smiling in repose—while it munches 
on the pomegranate seeds that must have fallen 
from the swollen tree under which is sits. The unicorn

seems oblivious to the wily frog in the lower 
right-hand corner who hides in a bed of violets. 
The lesson this frog teaches me here atop this elephant, 
deep in this bamboo—is to not panic. Even when

you are so clearly out of place and nothing seems 
familiar: enjoy the view. There will be plenty of time
for delicious and comfortable water-spots. 
That frog doesn’t know he will be part of

what will be history’s most memorable image 
of the unicorn. Instead, he just sits there, 
in his wee wool-warp, silk and gilt wefts, enjoying 
the view, grateful for the fields of flower finery.

 

Too Many Cooks Spoil the Broth

Too many needles spoil the cloth.
Too many parrots spoil the talk.
Too many chapped lips spoil the gloss.
Too many teasel burrs spoil the paw.
Too many bubbles spoil the froth.
Too many doorbells spoil the knock.
Too many seeds spoil the floss.
Too many feathers spoil the claw.
Too many light bulbs spoil the moth.
Too many holes spoil the sock.
Too many sunbeams spoil the moss.
Too many kisses spoil the jaw.
Too many wolves spoil the flock.
Too many necks spoil the block.

Attenuated dreams

expect surprises
expect water mains to bust, electrical wires to sag
expect what goes unquestioned
expect prices to rise
expect rape
expect disgust and dismay, schlock and awe
expect every sexual position
expect flat surfaces to bend
expect rocks to roll and rolls to mold
expect blood with birth, dirt with death
expect suspicion in whispers and formal reports
expect closed doors and widening avenues
expect deforestation and molestation
expect naked mole rats and hairy behemoths
expect mistakes will be made and mistakes unmade
           like your bed
like your questions
like microbes
like cement mixers
like undressing
like redressing
like hunts for unknown
           mistakes mistakenly expected

Bad Magic

This hour and the next will try to pull
me out of myself, scarf after
scarf, a trick called The Human Shell,
performed to canned laughter.

When all I want is to live
without that bad magic, without a gear
that turns the wheel that saws me in half,
or an ad that makes me disappear—

without the light breaking in like a fist
that slowly (drum roll!) unfolds
once I’ve guessed
what path, what possibility it holds,

only to show me what I’d hoped for
is held in another hand.
I only want each hour hinged like a door,
an invitation, a new route, the ampersand

that fends off the full-stop’s standstill;
a light like a chord that rings
the bell of itself, that trumpets its arrival,
spills its ballast of offerings.

It’s no easy thing, since the world 
expects to peer into its upturned top hat
and, voilà, find you there, curled,
the thimble-rig’s dependable rabbit.

I want that hat to go poof in self-fire;
the brutal centrifuge of the second hand
to go haywire
until it dangles, defunct.  A broken wand.

 

Poem with You on Its Mind

Spurned heart, bewildered one, why you should come to mind
this morning, with the whole house asleep and the birds
kicking up their day’s first ruckus outside,
is beyond me, surprises and pleases me—the way
I’ve been pleased and surprised since before I was your age
on finding that someone’s poem seemed to have me
on its mind.

Your ducks—and they were cute ducks, cuddly and young—
were all in a row, straight as the road your house
would sit back from, where you and your future husband
would raise the kids, have a little pond, maybe some
actual ducks.  And then he said no, your boyfriend; he
didn’t want that.  He’d changed his mind, you said,
as if you were telling me he’d grown wings, turned into a bird
from one of those stupid myths.

You said you prayed for hours, now, every day, trying
to understand, trying to believe in a universe that considers
our wishes, that knows we’re here and how badly we need.
Spurned one, boggled heart, this poem won’t offer
that belief, or much else—you can’t put your hair back
with it; it doesn’t have one outfit idea, one scrap
of relationship advice.  And perhaps it would only bewilder you
more to know I am writing it, to know that at this moment
the one thing in the universe with you on its mind
was a poem.

 

Ruins, with Giant

Admonishment occupies at least 
a choice position, if not chief,
on a giant’s menu of moods and modes:

You’ve been content to dither with pebbles,
no?, for instance, his loafing pose 
and open shirt casting allusions, aspersions,

as he stands beside a massive block 
of toppled stone.  And the sun seconds
that beef, spreading vast shadows, glaring.

If I had come to quarrel I might answer
pebble and pediment are mother’s bones,
both.  Life will spring from each.

But what beckons here bests the urge
to bicker.  I’d expected the rocky dirge
and dust—but this fall’s got a raucous feel.

To go by the rubble’s whiff, time 
is a fragrant thing, a giant’s cologne.  
Collapse is how it paints a town red.

Look: how the high delight that wrought this
outlives the naught that it came to,
haunts the mind, where it rises again.

What stood in this place proved too much 
to live up to.  Good.  If the terminus
be tumble-down, let it be from such heights,

like children perched on giant shoulders,
where we might survey awhile the reach 
of what is ours, and where it ends.

 

Song for St. Cecilia’s Day

Your martyrdom’s blade was no Roman henchman’s
as the hagiographers would have it,
but an f-sharp to the thalamus,
and off went your head, practically—
the cortex sung holy; it hung by a thread 
the day you were wed to Apollo.

            O, your angel flapped his flaming wings
            and gave you a crown of lilies, of lilies,
            and gave you a crown of lilies.

The divine lay’s G chord quickened your virgin womb.
Triad cum trinity hummed
in counterpoint out from your center,
over your loins;
it strummed your strung veins
and rose to be your throat’s low moan.

            O, your angel flapped his wings of fire
            to the diapason of your soul’s desire,
            and he gave you a crown of roses
            as the melody climbed higher, higher,
            as the melody climbed higher.

Lutes trickled their rivulets,
piccolos played the part of air,
fiddlestrings flickered over earthtones of oboes.
Such a harmony was struck up there
as holds this universe together;
it sang out on your marriage day,
it sprang like a myth from your body’s dysrhythmia.

            O, your angel flapped his wings of flame
            to the frequency eternal,
            as music shuddered through your frame
            and he gave you a crown of laurel, of laurel,
            and he gave you a crown of laurel.

The Orchard

Even in the dream he’s old, returning from his shed
with a bucket of grubs picked off the roses; like them,
dead already 20 years, though in my dream 
he moves steadily enough through the back field 
landscaped clear to the power lines 
that marched the length of Beacon Hill. 
My grandfather tended an apple orchard there, 
then set to making rows for sweet pea vines and tomatoes
though his wife complained of this cultivated Eden, 
worrying it looked too “country” to the neighbors.
In the winter my grandfather ordered seeds 
from a company out west, and all summer and partway 
through fall sprayed the fruit with a thick mist
the catalogues recommended until, years later,
small, berry-sized tumors grew in his pancreas
and his wife’s breasts. In the dream, 
he wears one of the thin t-shirts he favored, 
the raveled neck gone transparent at the seams,
below this a familiar pair of faded slacks—
“Mao-blue,” my uncles ruefully called them—
bought in Beijing during the Reagan era. 
He’d returned a final time to see his mother, 
and for gifts brought back Mao jackets 
and caps, Mao mailbags and figurines
my uncles and mother promptly buried 
inside closets and dressers. On the fireplace,
the last, framed photos of his mother before
the children packed them off, the woman’s shape 
shriveled with age, slim feet bound in black. 
She died twice that summer he visited, the first 
after a stroke from which she revived a day later
in the village’s burial hut. My grandfather was good, 
I remember, at fixing bicycles and making shelves, 
he could replace a car clutch and once 
devoted an entire basement wall to a series
of aquaria he’d built himself then stocked. 
None of these interests did he pass on to his children. 
He sat instead quietly through dinner, 
fingering his dish of salted plums, slipping each 
from its wrapper to suck the meat to a pulp 
that was full of the brined, tart juice of summer.
Though he wouldn’t have been able to tell this
towards the end: the pesticides, the chemo
having poisoned his taste buds, perhaps his tongue— 
For in the dream—as in my memories of him— 
he remains speechless, one thin figure working
in garden or basement, the neighbor’s 
hissed assessment of him filtered
through the juniper hedge he’d planted as a border 
to gate our garden: Such an odd man, 
he seems intelligent, though who can tell, 
him unable to speak a word of English— 
So that I was startled,  years later, coming upon 
his notebooks to find blazons of Chinese and English 
blooming alongside photos of Depression-era girlfriends  
clipped and pasted in satellite configurations 
on black paper filigreed with white paint. 
Curlicues of dragons’ tails, emperors, rose trellises—   
The English so carefully rendered, so perfectly phrased 
that now, besides his secret art, it is my lack 
of remembering this voice myself that most 
disappoints, his silence renewed
in imagination that renders me similarly dumb. 
In the dream, my grandfather holds out a box
filled with stamps torn off missives from Taiwan 
and Russia, Denmark, Sweden, each one faded 
yet folded carefully up, some in onionskin, 
their water stains and ancient postmarks 
like pressed flowers from a winter garden. 
Whose stamps were these he wanted me to see? 
Why did he believe such minutiae needed preserving? 
I take the box, ignoring his long face looming 
in a worry over my own, attracted by the sudden 
Steller’s jay that startles past his window. I look, 
and the box slips from my lap, spills 
its stamps like a spray of feathers from the bird 
that has begun feasting now on the apples  
in a corner of the orchard. I watch 
its dark head dart into the branches for the fruit, 
wings shuddering their streaks of blue
that fade into the darkness.

 

The History of Paisley

You who wrote this poem first, how Parvati’s 
footsteps rained down Zabarvan’s slopes 
as the goddess fled from Shiva, so enraged 
her heel-marks scorched teardrops
through Kashmir’s valleys until paisleys

burned on every hillside, through every mountain glade—
You for whom beauty submerged history, 
wove its violence through the fragile threads
until the Scottish town that made these footsteps 
famous vanished into myth, colonial shawls paid

for with blood, its guild of weavers, brawlers, poets
turned riot, shawls unraveled then lost, 
the tall looms burning to a lacework of smoke—
Would you have known Europe’s last 
recorded witch was hung here, and once I dozed

in a Glasgow movie theater, startling awake 
when the onscreen travel advert shrilled my name? 
“Paisley on the Beach,” it cried, at which I woke to see
the camera panning over a beach, a bikini’d
blonde with shoulders filigreed with sand winking

at her audience, Paisley become one 
of Britain’s slums, the ad a dig at its fallen fortunes, 
as the name, too, had become a 70's joke—
Even you, Shahid, laughed at it, asked if I knew 
its origin and laughed again when I recited your poem:

the consort’s tears, her gorgeous and immortal rage. 
Now two decades later, you’re gone:
cancer of the brain having sent you into a fog 
of amnesia, then death;  facts your friends and college 
colleagues mourned, hiring me at the end to take your vacant

post. Now I’m Shahid’s line at work, ten years after,
your presence something few had known, my nickname
capitalizing on both our chagrin and admiration, 
assuming I’m to assume your position 
and importance: to extend our works in one, ignoring

the complications of our individual ambitions: yours 
woven from the work of Faiz and Merrill, their fame 
blurring into yours, rushing mouth to mouth like a valley 
brushed with fire, the whole of Kashmir become a flame 
of light, a twisted tear of circling stars;

mine to sing again of Parvati who, in other versions,
didn’t run away but watched as Shiva
in his sulks rushed off, who wrestled him back 
into her arms, the strength of her love even
greater than the god’s. In this story, she is the one

with steadiness enough to hold him up 
or back, the one who anchors them in their fight,
even as her consort’s brilliance both highlights 
and erases her. When I began to recite your poem, 
you lobbed the phrases back, challenged my embroidery

with flourishes of your own until the text
became some strand of sense twisted between us, 
line by line unraveled to its parade of shadows, 
your face darkening as the sun began to fall— 
Write about me, you begged, but in what tale of exile

love or industry where the grieving goddess walks, waiting 
for her lover to forgive then find her, 
tear-marks always fresh upon her face? 
And if we write, will you return again to your mother, 
sister, brother, the lost post office, will Paisley’s

weavers begin another shawl in which
we’re bound, part of its ever-changing pattern, placed
on the edge and in the center of its frame, 
each slip of color throwing the rest into relief? 
At first, I thought it strange coincidence

both town and pattern shared a name, but of course 
industry overtook belief, gave
the Persian story a Glaswegian veil, overlay 
upon overlay, re-engraved the pattern already 
extending its reaches through every border

of the world.  What a terrifying inheritance we’ve carved 
for ourselves, each generation taking up then losing 
the imperatives of the next, the pathline of one’s obscurity 
traced through the obscurity of others, so that we die 
and die together anew, rise and rise together

anew, the pattern’s changeability both its beauty and its flaw. 
Write about me, you said. You, who at the last 
dedicated each poem to another, 
submerged your beauty in the history of others
till each tale became its elegy, and every tale dissolved.

My name is Paisley. Your name is Paisley as well.
The softened thunder sounds its distant footfalls.  
It is raining  in the vales of Kashmir, Scotland, Utah.
Beloved, let us watch, and get our faces wet. Come: 
let us sit together under this shawl. 

Ars Poetica as Tourist

It is bell weather.

The empty cobblestone streets 
ricochet bravado. 

On the doorstep at the Hall
of Expectations:
a fugue scribbled out
a heart floating above its leash
a canister of gasoline next to a lit match.

All the shop windows are winked
shut, shuttered to keep 
out a contagion of clouds. 

The mayor sits in the tower 
next to his Great Desire.

Sadly, the plum tree 
no longer bears fruit, having
been held up earlier. 

As instructed by the thief, the tree
slowly counted to one hundred, 
but days later it has yet to stop
reaching for the sky.

 

Inspector Ars Poetica

The sky’s gotten gutsy in its menu of operatives.  Gray baritone clouds are nailed to a fence. Wind is humping trees like a sultan in his harem.  This act will not beget more wind.  But it will blow 1886 into Istanbul.  The station chief has the water wheel pulled up, dripping for an hour while the brain goes clean as a minnow. Gone, the red moon staring open as an orchid behind a veil. Gone, the entire jungle of chirping instruments.  It is clear that the murderer carefully planned his getaway.  His boat disappeared in the river of sighs.  Every sigh rose up and took its place in air.

 

Ars poetica Does the Circus

How many peanuts does it take to anchor your stomach to the couch so you are forced to rustle up some words for the page and even the most powerful flatulence motor can’t hydroplane you off the sofa.  Sickies, planet of bad habits polluting your stream of consciousness with a clown juggling IRS form 8663s, the mad dervish of text twist that’s corrupted the unicyclist’s balance.  When you buy a trinket made of split ends, the tiny poodle ringmaster loses his voice. No amount of whip thwacking and heyheying, no hawing is gonna move your elephants.  No matter how big the peanut, how enticing the tutus, how ghoulish the famous cadaver at your feet. Don’t bother kicking it, it has absolutely nothing to say. Don’t bother putting pearl onions in its eye sockets like the Egyptians who mistook the brain for an extended case of snot.  Gypsum dunes can be hard as burnt bunt cake dropped from a trapeze.  In some country, but never the one you’re in, a snake spells out your future in wet cement outside a Grauman’s Chinese. It is too late.  All the popcorn is gone.

 

False Positives

All winter I leave the grass 
to its own devices.  Vines
inscribe the screen like curlicues
of barbed wire. The sun
is just a play thing for the cat.  Are 
the crows calling for aspirin?  Inequalities
drive the sufi wind. Some days
I hear the empty cicada shells 
try to rustle up meaning.  The
horizon isn’t strong enough
to hold up the sky, which 
is colluding with a flock of vowels
to down the light. Light so thin
that even shadows have left 
their shadows behind.

 

Growing Up

Somehow I missed the potato floating amid an asteroid
field in The Empire Strikes Back. I never once 
noticed that every single episode of Seinfield 
contains a reference to Superman, that Psycho’s
Bates Hotel was actually a 3/4 scale miniature 
and that Hitchcock traded blood for Bosco. It’s bad 
enough to learn that desks afford no protection
from nuclear holocaust, that I wasted hours waiting 
to go swimming after lunch, that Twinkies really do
have a shelf life and that Jello is made from hide 
and hoof. Hopefully not hide or hoof taken from 
a famous ruminant like Rudolf, the red-nosed reindeer, 
who was, by the way, a complete fabrication
of Montgomery Ward’s marketing department. Disney 
also fooled with Mother Nature, slandering masses
of lemmings as suicidal when in fact 
the filmmakers launched the unwilling rodents over 
a cliff for their flick White Wilderness. Bet the wilderness
wasn’t so white at the bottom of that cliff. My childhood 
would have been content riding the toboggan 
on Disneyland’s Matterhorn forever, without 
ever knowing that Mickey Mouse look-alikes 
were playing basketball within. What can you rely on 
as bedrock if the Panama hat, French fries, German 
chocolate cake and India ink didn’t come from 
those places? That the Bible never says Eve tempted 
Adam with an apple? That the cherry tree had nothing
to fear from young George Washington? As much as I 
would absolutely swear on George Washington’s 
(non-wood) dentures that Captain Kirk said, 
“Beam me up, Scotty,” he never actually did and 
Sherlock Holmes never uttered, “Elementary, 
my dear Watson.” Here are revelations that
really warp me: The Monkees’ Mike Nesmith’s mother 
invented White-Out, one of Roger Moore’s Bond 
girls by the pool had once been a guy, and blood 
from members of KISS was mixed with ink to print 
the group’s comic book. Seen through an adult lens, 
Mary Poppins seems cold and anal, Kennedy 
and King slip down a notch for their philandering,
C.S. Lewis for his sexual peccadilloes. I feel
like a 4-H kid at auction saying goodbye to his 
first clover-fed calf. Innocent me, never 
suspecting that I Dream of Jeanie’s bottle 
was a special Christmas Jim Beam liquor decanter
containing bourbon whiskey or that the Star Trek
theme has lyrics written by Gene Roddenberry,
who never used them in the show, but coined
them solely to worm in on the composer’s residuals. 
Oh mean heroes and cracks in the lead paint veneer, 
I see it now, my innocent days were all mirrors 
and second-hand smoke.

Everything That Draws Breath

Not just the king.
Queens and commoners. The poor 
stuffed with sand and buried in the ground.

The Apis bull, when his life on earth has ended,
is salted, wrapped, interred with ceremony

in the underground Serapeum.
His mother, the other mothers of sacred
bulls, have their cemetery.

What did they mummify? (What didn’t
they?)

           Jackal, ibis, ichneumon, ram.
Falcon and baboon. Cats in their temple.
Crocodiles in theirs.

Everything that draws breath. 
                                                 
                                             If the animals,
then, of course, the children.

They loved their children, shown naked, plump,
the heavy sidelock like a ponytail,

a finger in the mouth. Even the god-children
have a finger in their mouths.

With breath comes the ka, comes the ba, 
twin aspects of the soul, then a name.

Whosoever’s name is uttered, he then lives.

With a name, the chance of afterlife.
The body must be intact, name with it,
so the ba can find it after death.

At least if the undertaker doesn’t cheat,
stuff old bones into the bandages, conceal

them under the painted mask. Petrie
found a sham child, his parents robbed
for eternity of their baby’s soul.

But what of the stillborn, the miscarried?

Twice the King’s Great Wife sat on the bricks.
The first child, opener of the womb,

born with the twisted spine, high shoulder 
of Sprengel’s deformity. Born with soft hair.

Then the five-month fetus, who hadn’t yet
grown lashes or brows. Two girls
who never breathed.

Their skin is gray and brittle, their bones
show through. No tools were fine enough
to remove the organs of the smaller one.

No names for the ka and ba 
to cling to, but still made into mummies,

as if the wish might give them afterlife.
Their little golden nests of coffins deposited
with their father’s,

                            the generations
of Tutankhamun, who left no heirs. Whose
Great desperate Widow begged the Hittite king

to send her his son so she would not be
made to marry a servant—her, a god’s daughter,

whose own daughters each are labeled 
Osiris, meaning only the dead ones.


Note: Egyptian women gave birth sitting upright on a mud-brick
stool. “To sit on the bricks” is the metaphor for childbirth. The title
“Osiris,” when applied to a human being, indicates that the person
is dead.

 

Hatshepsut Orders Her Portrait 
as a Lion-Headed Sphinx

Welcome, my sweet daughter . . . Thou art
the Pharaoh, taking possession of the Two Lands.
                —words ascribed to the god Amun on Hatshepsut’s monuments

You have shown me, sculptor, as Pharaoh,
wearing the king’s kilt, the striped head-cloth,
the false beard all the kings must strap on.

            The carvers showed me once naked
            above the waist and breast-less, dancing before
            the gods at my Sed festival. 
                                                      When I was Regent,

                        you sculpted me slim and beautiful,
                        as I was. As I am. 
                                                    Today you must begin
to select the proper stone to show me

as a lion. I am a lion. Give me a mane.
As you chisel and shape my image, keep 
in mind the enemies I scattered, the rows

of captives cut into my walls. 
                                           Keep in mind
                        those walls, my obelisks and columns, my temple
                        like nothing else on earth. You can see it,

cliff-backed, from Karnak across the Nile. This figure will go
there, near the garden of frankincense trees
from Punt, below the colonnade called “the Sublime

of Sublimes.” 
                       Remember those things;
know, as you carve my broad feet
(lion-shaped, but give me five toes), you

are serving Amun, the invisible one, who 
names me his sweet daughter, his favorite. 
            Do you know the story of my birth?

            How Amun came to my mother in the form
            of the king her husband, how he placed
            an ankh beneath her nostrils and she conceived?

I was born in a lioness bed, plated with gold.
No!I was born in a lion’s den.
I am a lion. Remember that as you cut:

I am the Lion Goddess on earth.

 

Made Up

1. Made Up Her Face

Serious business, maquillage. On her curved
and gilded chair, the comtesse perches, head
raised, features immobile as a mask. The head

of Nefertiti hasn’t yet been unearthed, but her pose
repeats it. The maidservant labors with jars
and brushes, powder whitening her apron and the loose

sacque that protects her mistress’s gown.
Last, a beauty spot applied to call attention
to the catlike chin. Sacred cats, embodiments

of the Eye of Horus, wore earrings, beaded collars
like the noblewomen who deliberated
over their chests of unguents, jars of powdered

malachite, red ocher for lips, kohl to turn their eyes
into Horus-Eyes, as we, aping Liz Taylor
aping Cleopatra, slathered our eyes with liner,

mascara in coal-black. Layers of paint and centuries
make their faces into masks, as masks at other times
are worn to invite possession by the gods.


2. Made Up to Him

Perfected and released, the comtesse surveys
the assembly through jeweled eye-slits
in the mask she holds before her on its wand:

The gentlemen with their animal snouts,
monkey, goat, elephant. She will recognize the one
she seeks, will let him guess at her.

Shoulders or gloves will brush a little
too long, her scent will waft toward him.
Flirtation’s another serious business, craft

of the wink, raised eyebrow, mask serving
a dual purpose with the fan at her wrist. The frescoes
not yet found will show those earlier ladies

wielding fans of palm and ostrich plume, and she
will simper past her own plumage in tête-à-tête.
Candles cast shadows of the masks against

a wall, an ancient undreamed procession,
heads of falcon, jackal, ape, and crocodile.


3. Made Up Of (Composed)

She is belly here, brain somewhere else,
porcelain face discolored, breasts sprawled apart.
(The embalmer-priests deposited liver, lungs,

stomach, and gut in separate alabaster jars. Broken
down to parts for staving off decay.)  Her stratagems

and jewelry spill in a shiny avalanche. Her gown, 
collapsed like a silk balloon, still lies beneath
fallen sheets. If she had the strength, she’d rise

and tear seed pearls, satin rosettes from the sleeves.
His scent still rises with hers. His absence
breathes beside her in their tangle of parts and colors.

Her son (their son?) or grandson in another century
will read how Set tore his brother to pieces

and Isis reassembled him for one night of love,
one child begun, Horus, who trades his eye for revenge.
She would find no comfort in the story. The heart

must stay intact for weighing by the judges  
with ibis and jackal heads, but her chambers 
are ransacked, no sum to their throbbing parts.


4 . Made Up Her Mind, and More

Not flirtation. No Rosetta Stone, not even the name
of it, to translate this. Coup de foudre: Thunderbolt.

Still tangled in sheets, she makes puns with foutre:
sex as battery, love an assault, heart battering
her ribs. Smitten. Struck. And now, before gathering

her clothes, she’s gathering her resolve for pain
to come. No prospect of that light affaire.
She must make peace with the comte, entomb

herself for a dry afterlife. Or face down disgrace,
give up her comforts of silk and serving maids,
sell her jewels one by one—and find herself

in another tomb, another red desert. Could love
make up for so much loss? She imagines
no happy endlessness, no prayers in perpetuity,

gilded ornaments and carved attendants to make
a life out of death. Why should she expect them,
even in a tale made up out of whole cloth?

Visiting Dugan

c. 1981
Haze of chain-smoke & I’d come again to show you poems, 
           which I understood the first time 
was a dubious idea. The magnifying glass was necklaced to your chest. 
           Your trembling hand let it 
hover the page, syllables pulsing big as highway signs. Next month 
           they’d laser out the cataracts,

but now you were lens against lens, horn-rims bulging thick as Waterford Crystal;
           the magnifier hydrofoiled 
the turbulent page. Beyond, bright shining flakes of Truro snow 
           & beside your desk, 
the easel, paper poster-size, permitting you to draft your poems, every letter 
           leaden-heavy, half slashed though

with marker, the rest unreadable. Comment on Poem the First: 
           you used to write better than this. 
Poem the Second: I think I’m getting tired of your parents.  Poem Three: 
           Life is shit—always a credible subject—
though you remind me how hard it is to bring off.  I ask how your style 
           had changed over the years,

between Poems & the latest, which at that time  would have been 
           Poems 6. Writers don’t change; 
the notion that they do… is a capitalist conspiracy. You leave for coffee & a piss, 
           damning your fucking prostate, 
an organ whose function I had thus far failed to comprehend. 
           Cold in the studio,

& a draft is fluttering the easel sheets & the heaps of them
           Knee-high in the corner, 
letters massive as the brags that Xerxes hewed into his mountainsides.
           Shyly I rifle them, 
hoping to discern the process—one line all in caps per sheet, then thirty or more 
           assembled to a draft

that Judy can type up for you. GOD HELP THE FINGERNAILS   
           THEY ARE CURSED  
BY APATHY   AND ARE NO LONGER CLAWS. How you terrified me. 
           & the world, if it knew you 
one iota better than it did, would have trembled as well—the factory bosses 
           & the CEOS, the heads of PACs,

the radio hosts with their mouths oozing venom. O like the armies of Egypt 
           before Alexander, they’d have lain
down their spears & bows to you, heads pressed to the dirt. You’re back 
           with two mugs, the sheets
still a-flutter. I could only find instant; we’re drinking it black. Those were the days
           I sucked down attention like a long

stiff drink, wholly untutored in gratitude, in the trickeries, betrayals 
           & cruelties of the body,
how its provinces rebelled, as Auden who you hated said of Yeats. 
           Name a President, you ask, 
who was worse than Reagan. Nixon, I say. Grant, you answer—
           but the asshole could write.

On the desk you lay open a fat biography. Dying Grant: the cancer that has 
           strangled him prohibits speech,
his last words scrawled into a bedside notebook. The characters balloon 
           beneath your glass, headline-large 
against the failing light. I do not sleep, though sometimes I doze off a little. 
           If I am up I am talked to

and my efforts cause pain. The fact is I am a verb and not
           a personal pronoun. 
a verb is anything that signifies to be, to do, to suffer. I signify all three. 
           You let the magnifier dangle. 
Pinwheels of snow outside for me, movement occluded & stalled for you. 
           Don’t worry too much

about the poems, you say, someday they’re bound to get better.

 

Letter to Eadweard Muybridge           

“. . . the subject of the pictures was not the images per se, but the change from one to another, the change that represented time and motion . . .”
—Rebecca Solnit  

Whiteout, Eadweard. Even the driveway snowblind & within the letters 
           of the crawl beneath the screen we watch
the slithering cacophony you set in motion like a railroad baron’s thick 
           gold watch—school closings first, 
then the Buddha’s tooth  inside a chartered plane, en route to Sri Lanka, 
           a camera shaking to more tremors

from Haiti. Car bomb, drone unleashing missile & the doctor who medicated 
           the King of Pop to death 
is free on bail awaiting trial; he has been enjoined from sedating patients.
           Studies in Motion & before me 
the River James in February, bristle of ice-floes colliding against the always 
           recrudescent Confederacy.

Sleet rides the backs of generals & their Monument stallions, nostrils a-flare. 
           Jackson, Stuart, dead in battle, 
 charging northward still. & Lee, heart stopped in his sleep, 
           cantering forever South. 
Duration, movement, history’s blizzard, to which you may be said to lay claim.
           Camera Oscura, Magic Lantern.

Visionary cuckold, lugging your behemoth glass plates to Yosemite 
           in a Conestoga train.
You steady your tripod on an outcrop of El Capitan. You shoot 
           your wife’s lover point blank, 
a Colt revolver, the chamber clicking clockwise to permit a second shot. 
           Phenakistoscope, Zoopraxiscope.

Occident trots astride your phalanx of cameras, to prove that all four hooves 
           have left the ground at once. 
Bearded, naked, you yourself stride the camera gauntlet, a guileless 
           pilot in an NSA basement, steering a drone 
eight thousand miles away. Kandahar below. Coordinates found.
           High-pitched whine as the aircraft hovers.

Then release. Visibility at zero & in a book that asks to be a stream of light, 
           Ralph Waldo Emerson declares 
he is part and parcel with God. The crawl flashes only numbers. I set the book down. 
           Tell me of the crawl inside
the crawl, some low unpixelated shimmer to lay these eyes upon, 
           like a glimpse of ivory keys.

Zootrope, Faraday Wheel.  We are staying tuned, we have 42 widescreens
           on a gym wall to light our way.  
The treadmill beside me nattered on his cell to an AA friend. You’re a stupid 
           fucker if you think that, Frank. 
Was she as fucked-up too? Thaumatrope, Choreutoscope. World as chattel, 
           possessed of children

chewing khat & oiling submachine guns. We cannot step into 
           the same crawl twice:  
tolls sans punctuation, the numbers stagger  & exeunt. 
           Celebs become dead celebs, 
talking on flammable nitrate stock about being alive. A web site 
           arranges itself—the contents entire

of your Human Figure in Motion. Before us stands Robert Connolly, 
           The Living Clock, his arms 
for twenty-seven years compelled to mimic the minute hand, 
           the hour hand. You show him 
as eight o’clock, as nine ‘clock, as ten—O subtle minute hand 
           of bone & tendon,

of vascular cat’s cradle, of helpless command sputtering 
           evermore down the brainstem—
poor man, he “calibrates with uncanny accuracy.” Look: the time 
           is 11:55, inching 
toward 12—the Tai Chi pose of the hands does not 
           distinguish noon from midnight.

 

For Willy Deville

 (1949-2009)

To your tats that sprawled like continents, the cloud-compounded planet—
Cadmium, ultramarine—spied from 17,000 miles afar, 
To the sax yelping likewise High Celestial, the chords & strings

& choruses you lifted from Spector, Piaf, Muddy, The Wolf 
& Ben E. King, piano riffs Latino morphing Crescent City, influence
alchemized to dire conviction. & you with that voice—

volume lurching croon to baritone to snarl, coyote howl 
& aye-yah-yah & home most frequently your left inner arm, 
dappled red. & now you’ve at last outlived yourself,

reduced to your dwindled cultic fans, to Big in Europe 
& to my speakers on a winter morning, where your harp
caterwauls madly to “Just Your Friends,” the castanets & strings

conspiring to a mini-epic of obsessive love.
Fucked-up, fucked-up like us, though your gift survives us all. 
Earth, receive your honored guest. Le Chat Bleu

is laid to rest. Dazzling Stranger, let the saxes keen 
their long Big Easy funeral. This must be the niiiggghhht  
I can feel it in my FINger-tips. Maybe just around the CORner

someone’s waitin’ for me . . . You gave us more 
than we deserved, which is one means to factor
the radiant necessity of art, a pale cadaverous junkie

strumming a battered Martin just redeemed from pawn.
You give me a night a quarter-century forgotten, some club 
in Kentish Town or Camden where you wail

‘til morning—first to still the din of clinking  pints, 
the Woodbine fog, then to inhabit the soul’s bitter essence—
a voice so pleading that the room was shamanized.

Christopher was there & Lynda alive & black-bereted. 
You ate of our sins; you spit them out in a style of prayer. 
Second encore: “Heaven Stood Still.”  You’ve peeled off

the black silk shirt, mike stand in your fingers but you’re 
on your knees, the proper stance for a ballad so yearning,
the whispered  lyrics & your gold tooth shining forth.

The proper stance, Willy: your grave & supplicant moan unending

The Afterearth

I fall like yesterday’s laundry 
into the perforated life raft, among

the dead starlings, starfish,
brown kelp, cirrhosis. Plato said

Odysseus, in his second life, 
will mind his own business.

The ocean like so much parchment, 
we’re never our own right size.

We’re left with the murky waves 
of brains, skipping through centuries

like a thoroughbred in a glue vat. 
Our bad busted pens—their razing.

 

Empire
 
The purest meeting of cruelty & invention

In the backdrop of horse hooves on stonework

Never forced to turn its gaze inward 
          like a well that won’t stop dropping

The knee perpetually genuflected, 
          The old tongue’s smoldering books—

Past: extrapolation of nothing

Future: children on boats, cuffed & chained

The human leg does not “L” the chest 
          without the rope, the crowd applauding

A Coin-Operated Neighbor to the North

I am not such a good speaker. Nobody cares
about Canada, but I try not to believe it. Lightning,
and those cheap plastic boxes of rainbow sugar

that people try to win at roadside casinos.
A trip to Paris that ended up being the Paris
of the Midwest, only just a little higher on the map.

There may have been a bag over my head. I couldn’t
get the words quite right. You said something 
about loosening your load, or that black and white

scarves were required to eat indoors. They’d stone
around the trees so the deer wouldn’t get too
forward. And then it was ninety-one pages, not one

spoon in sight. I carried my typewriter under my arm
and collection of handkerchiefs tucked in back.
It was a real fire alarm, even if the devil was fake.

Up there, a KitKat was like a mobile orgasm in red.
I found myself scrambling up a street in leather pants
that weren’t mine, or clutching some old woman

on the electric train, hoping to find the right kind
of bodega. Only it wasn’t a bodega there. 
They called it a pitch-wallower. A mashhopper.

Told me to get my blind anklet out of their snare
before they had to call my widget. They could all go
to their walnut-crusted hell. Something was blowing

a classic freight train horn, but it was like a ghost
and not a bit more polite than the alternative.
Somebody was forcing me to eat my dinner

with a sore throat. I didn’t choose any of it.
My car was either in the impound lot, or stolen.
The hotel room rolled itself over all night long.

 

A Coin-Operated Gentrification Zone of the Heart

I could never find enough quarters. Even when I worked exclusively
for them, as a gypsy in a box. Even when they were the only thing
I could keep down. There was a violence in the heather. My city died
because we made it die, and then we loved it even more. Suddenly
we were authentic, and the stores started carrying our likenesses.
But nobody really liked us. They just wanted a piece, so to speak.
Once saw a man in a top hat and your old velour sweatshirt I burned
while you were drunk under the front porch. We were on a bus, so
the man just strolled on by with his pet hangover. It tugged him 
by a chain. In the photography studio they made you hold me down
behind a curtain. You whispered catastrophe, catastrophe, like
that would somehow get me going. I promise that there was an old
neighborhood. It was real, and it was full of wives. They bought 
that pink dish detergent because it was cheapest. Ironic how later
the alderman used it against them, like napalm. They didn’t 
even try to hose me out. I was blocks away, watering some dead 
begonias. Waiting on a bus for something called an oral history.
You told me I’d know it when I heard it. Our place too submissive
for a skyline. And all the time we should have been taking notes,
while a man and a woman on a bench took notes about us.
The police only wanted to know our favorite songs and haunts.

 

We Invent the Opposite of Vegas, Then Take it All Back

Nobody would sell us a map of Detroit. They gave me
loaves of bread, the signs off the walls, goats tied out back.

And so the blindfolds, the attempting. Knock me like a Pewabic
tile of the past century, so I’ll increase in value shortly

before leveling out to nothing. The way my mother and I
once devastated a coconut because we really wanted to get inside.

This town has none of the dazzle. Even the vacuums spill
just a little instead of really sucking. There’s no genuine mafia

on hand when I slide into the machine. Too many people trust
their underpinnings to a metal stranger full of holes.

 

A Coin-Operated Apple Pie

Because you hated everything. Even the homeless man
who held a sign that said PREMIUM. Even the rim of the sun.

The webs between my old dog’s toes, though she wasn’t
swimming anywhere, I will admit. The phantom lights I saw

every day on my dashboard, and said baby, this thing
won’t choke another mile. You hated both the Venus flytrap
 
and its intentions. They weren’t predatory enough, or set
a terrible example for everything else in the yard.

Next the stupid lawnmower would take pity on petunias,
or roll itself into the bed some night, like a scorpion.

You wanted everything to be authentically American,
even the suffering. We played a game where you create pies

on a screen. It was identical to the card catalogue, just
electronic. They made us bake it with the idea of warm hands.

Salt Water

The shattered volumes of it: walls of blue
fluming as fast as winds. The sheer corrosive
cleanse of it: how insistently it sleeks

down through the mind.
                                       Not even on the beach
but driving with dune grass at the roadside

these days when home’s gone relative (a room and
cellphone . . . passcodes)
                                         all that neural simmer
of wired voices
                        crying “money money money”
shreds to this bare shimmer of white fire:

“desire without an object of desire.”

And the world comes all at once. Me sitting here
pinching your picture
                                  while fireflies and 
cars and maple branches spill to the water’s

cycle of smash and pull. And still stand still.

 

Blood Brook

Glug then sluice for vowels.
Rock ladders for consonants.
Out of the mountain it curls
and glints
                past the mechanic shop
scrap heap then tennis courts

and widens to a band
of silver that suspends

brook trout no longer than a hand.

My center of the world.
Source and burial ground
and only what it is.

I would be a liar
to call them
                   shepherd voices
babbling.
               But they do:

crossing the concrete
under a trestle bridge
sprayed with graffiti and

ailanthus leaves
                           they call me

video boy        seed packet.

You who are not us and will be.

We who pour ourselves

out of ourselves forever.

 

Lines after Watching the Returns, 2010

So sleep. So dull occlusion under dirt.

So darkness broken only by a glint
of mica. And the spirit burrower in us

shrinks in. Until that afternoon he sees

trembling tent flaps of the hospital
open to autumn in the capital.

The sharpened air, and shouts, and chains of clouds

streaming above a cornice, could be gifts
of convalescence: such fine clarities.

Though he will soon bestride a horse again.

Soon join the needed, surgical, slow slice of
steel through the burning Wilderness toward Richmond.

And still the whitebeard male nurse writes to him:

I see the merge of me with you. I see
our clutch on clutch, our sinew under skin

as tensile and resilient as the roots

of fountain grass. I hope you will at last 
write back to me. And hope our bond upon

your quick return will carry each of us

together and apart, as our same nation
stands whole and new. But I am not fool.

Insomnia

Between yesterday and tomorrow
I ride
this mare that doesn’t belong
to me, a mare I don’t comb
or feed.
She’s a stranger to me,
from somewhere other than this city,
and we share no common memories,
but she’s kept me on her back by force
all the night that’s gone by
and the day not quite ready to come.
             The dream spat me out
             with vigor
             with venom
             the way you’d spit out a fruit pit
             or an unwanted child.
And I arrived here on this horse’s glossy back
where I slide
as if on mud
but don’t fall.
The night clings to me,
it’s a breeze with little teeth
that sink into my skin and remain there.
The pain’s mild, but it continues on and on.
My heels don’t yet stick in the asphalt,
the trams don’t slice the cold air,
tomorrow’s facts still are ripening,
they’re draped beneath big bed sheets,
exhibits that have never opened.

At night, salamis are removed from the shop window
and stored in a secret location.
At night, the world and its salami slices
are moved elsewhere.
The same with the pastries that are my soul.
I too have to be in another place
—my body—an empty carcass
a shop window emptied every evening,
a container no one
absolutely no one
wants to steal.

But the dream spat me out.
I’m here
between the day that was and the one still to come.
The dream spat me out
like a hard, bitter pit.
Let it be.
It was an ugly dream.
Or I was the ugly one.
Between yesterday and tomorrow is a narrow space
as between the dresser and the wall.
I stand with my back 
to yesterday’s sun,
to yesterday’s fear,
face to face with something that doesn’t yet want to open.
On this horse’s slick back until
the trams, the heels, the workers get a green light
and start going.

 

6 A.M.

Good morning, workers!
The factory whistles are summoning you. Your steps can be heard hurrying through the damp cold of the morning. The chill reminds you that you’re strong, so you’ve no desire to resist it. Your soft bodies, no longer saturated with the warmth of the bed, of the wife, your bodies obey you. How I’d like to tell you that you fall like dew on flowers! 
When you get to your factories—the worker belongs in the factory, that’s his true place—you regain your gravity slowly. The first of your gestures to rediscover the lathe, the drill press, the workbench, all these gestures are still full of sleep, similar to your movements at night: in a very brief moment of wakefulness, not knowing which side of the bed you’re on, you begin to grope blindly with your hands until you find the wife and fall back asleep, in a hurry to continue the dream. 
Here, before your workbench, you’re not allowed to fall asleep. Here you become heavier and heavier.
Good morning, workers!
The peasants have risen before you. The peasants are in the field much earlier to get ready for the spring plowing.

 

[Untitled]

On the green lawn of the workbench blooms a flower of intense green. 
It will humiliate you and whip you without mercy, for hours on end, until you fall to pieces and see its olive body, nearly gleaming, enticing, round, and very ripe.

 

One

For a long time sleep entered the same gate
into me and into her,
the same gate joy entered,
fear,
taste, smell, the softness of the cherries.
My heaviness was her heaviness,
my nails, her nails,
my air, her air.
The two of us dreamed the same dream,
we were one:
a woman who went through the streets
alone,
strolling, or by train, by bus.  

Life long 14 minute day
that is the kernel—
falling near noon
into supplice 
sans aveu—
of a 24 hour
dive in a Lethe
that is not a river but a word
impossible to recall
by the time the digital
clock reads 10,
all the PM hours of all 
time crowded into one zero
in an unlit corner of the present tense.

Ship of December
docked at the dwarf star
in her iris. MCMXLV
formations of bombers. V
flying south to mate
fire with fire. Did he say, 
can we reconcile?
the sexual tear with the ember.
She smiled, and the new year 
screamed from the sky,
and the docked ship went down 
to her benthic zone
to become a home
for extremophiles.

A man built a watch.
His children were quiet. 
A man built a chain reaction. 
                                             The quiet, 
blown open: gate to the room
of his thousand suns, our father, 
lost in a continued fraction, 
                                           burst at once into the sky,
incising mathematically into 
the solid white dark of the sound 
as it travels: he paces toward counterfeit dawn
on the burning, intestinal path
that, if drawn from the—room,
would extend to the end 
of the desert—wound, 
would empty him of a dark white fact.

The battery is set to charge: positive 
Disaster has come to the magnesium and negative antimony gate 
of Jerusalem. Daughters of Zion, ions 
dissolved in electrolyte. Electric
shave your heads! Into the valley,
current streams into the cell. 
Magnesium stones pour. Howling 
like the ions in electrolyte accrue 
electrons jackals, like wax 
before the fire, become magnesium
metal, which joins that which has reached the very gate 
of the molten magnesium electrode. 
Concurrently, my people, 
protection is taken from you. antimony 
ions give electrons up to form 
Transgressions of Israel, they are found 
in metal atoms at the opposite 
electrode. you, who make yourselves
as Metal forms; electrolyte diminishes;
bald as the vulture. I will go stripped 
and electrodes propagate. To discharge, 
the process naked, wailing 
like the dragon. is reversed: metal 
atoms again become ions.

Insomnia as Transfiguration

Because the night is a scattering of sounds—blunt
branches hurtling to the ground, a nest stir, a sigh
from someone beside me.  Because I am awake
and know that I am not on fire.  I am fine.  It’s August.

The scar on my neck, clarity—two curtains sewn.
A little door locked from the inside. 

Nothing wants anything tonight.  There are only stars 
and the usual animals.  Only the fallen apple’s wine-red crush. 

Rabbits hurtle through the dark.  Little missiles.  
Little fur blossoms hiding from owls.  Nothing wants
to be in this galaxy anymore.  Everything wants the afterlife. 

Dear afterlife, my body is lopped off.   My hands
are in the carport.  My legs, in the river.  My head, of course,
in the tree awaiting sunrise.   It dreams it is the owl,
a dark-winged habit.  Then, a rabbit’s dash 
to the apple, shining like nebulae.  Then the owl 
scissoring the air.  The heart pumps its box of inks.  

The river’s auscultations keep pace
with my lungs.  Blame the ear for its attention.  Blame
the body for not wanting to let go, but once a thing moves
it can’t help it.  There is only instinct, that living “yes.” 

 

Wolf  Boy

The moon dangles from its severe, black cord
and packets of dew thicken the grass tips.

Everything is blue—the meadow ripe with leaves
blown from the periphery. Instinct

threads the skin of the boy as he strips, the tufts of fur
splintering through his cotton T-shirt and the deer

are startled into their sinewy gait. Hollow sounds.
A cry from the chest where the hunger lives.

The boy will enter the new world through his eye
tonight, afraid of his flushed skin. The blood

rising like the cherry-red tip of a cigarette
pulled towards the mouth with each deep breath.

But he is even more afraid of the dark space of memory—
a flash of speed, wind on his face from some dream,

and the cooled, coppery taste pressed against
his tongue and the roof of his mouth.

The wild is fierce with memory. And his ears
tilt to the soft pad of his paws against the village cobbles

and the darkened cottages whose roofs blossom
with potential accident.  To be one with accident

as to be one with god. To be god is to love
the sudden solitude of night

when the sleeves of the once-body yields
to the muzzle’s soft kiss and the wet nap of a licked

burr, nestled into a muddy coat.  Oh, meadow, meadow.
How the moon’s beautiful swell nails everything into place:

the tooth’s glory plunged deep into the evening’s bruise.
The throat, heavy with a hound’s velvet “no.” 

Colorization (i)

          —after the Bollywood film Guide (1965)

Pious heroine, you will not give
up your rouged lips and kohled eyes,

though you no longer dance for men 
who once followed the slender glissandos

of your hips shifting beneath blue silk. 
Now, we watch you pull the long hem

of your white sari over your head to meet
your lover by a river veiled by the sun’s

descent. He does not ask you for more 
than you can offer: the quick flicker

of your eyelashes, a dark mouth pursed 
like a pomegranate. Once, we watched

you turn away from him in black and white—
now, painted over in crimson, ochre, cream,

he will wrap himself in bleached cotton, fast 
for days to keep hunger for you at bay. He will

reach for rotten bananas, thrown them back down. 
On his deathbed, you will appear only as a vision:

a slender woman knelt beside him, waiting 
for the directors to cue your sea-colored tears.

 

Colorization (ii)

          —after the Bollywood film Chori Chori (1956)

If the rich heroine does get 
          the last word—even now, alone

in her bedroom, while silken 
          drapes languish around her coiled

hair and bent head, when she lifts
          her eyes, finally, to sing, the dark

arabesques of the room’s furniture 
          will dissolve into panes of shadow

until only her profile remains, lit 
          by a candle cupped in crystal. How 
 
could she have known then what 
          she knows now? If a single white tear

contorts her cheek, then dusk will 
          close in while sitars cluck in unison.

Her lips grow redder now, even 
          in black and white. Note the open windows,

the trees, and the self-portrait trapped
          on the wall in its frame: both grieving

faces back-lit, lifted in perfect profile.

 

Colorization (iii)

          —after the Bollywood film Mughal-E-Azam (1960)

Slave girl heroine, you stamp your hennaed feet, 
prideful in the Hall of Mirrors, your arms curved,

your fingers splayed—the drummer’s hands stun 
the taut skins of the tabla into frantic song, while

the emperor begins to vibrate—he will not let his son 
have you, nor can he tear his eyes from your full lips,

the long braid just restrained. Soon enough, you will 
know how unworthy your foolish lover is of the blade

you lay at his father’s feet. But what of your long neck, 
once scalloped in black and white shadow, now painted

over in wide slashes of crimson and cream? Perhaps you 
do not care—I have loved, so what do I have to fear,

you continue to sing—the emperor and his son gaze 
at your swirling skirt, your outstretched arms, repeated

endlessly in thousands of glittering mirrors a poor Indian 
boy has glued onto the ornate set for one glimpse of your face.

 

Colorization (iv)

          —after the Bollywood film Deedar (1951)

The blind heroine doesn’t realize the surgeon 
is her childhood love until it is too late,

though the song they once sang as children 
is repeated each time they hunger for sun-split

guavas and each other: a young boy and a young
girl, alone on the horse trotting against a gliding

backdrop of rural India. When their small hands
slip from the reins, and the harmonica’s breathy

optimism lurches into the urgency of violins, 
we are relieved when she falls and throws

her arms across her face. But whose eyes 
do avert our eyes from first—the boy’s dark

ones, looking down to his beloved? Or hers, 
blinking, sudden and blind in black and white?

What Happens Next

What happens next is most important.
One of the cats dies and I’m the dad
who postponed the vet appointment. Two
doors open. I try not to believe
in both at once. What happens next is
revised. When we slid downhill on ice
I kept the wheel aimed at her hatchback
so we’d both be equally injured.
What happens next begs a question. I
wonder which of us will leave, who’ll last.

 

Shmuel’s Calculations Are 11 Minutes Off

Devotional. We climb the staircase
after groceries, seven years here.
Who knew there’s an ancient Hebrew Sun
Prayer sung just once every 28th
Equinox, the Birkat HaChamah.
Ritual. Every morning naked
with you in the half bath, taking turns.
Shmuel’s calculations are 11
minutes off. Every year I miss your
body less. Meaning I feel closer.

 

Satellites

Never learned chess. Gave up Hebrew too.
Grandma’s walls were stenciled with branches.
I ask my simple mind to explain:
how many languages do you know?
I like the smell of bacon. And you,
sharing my cologne after shower.
Satellites guide us through Steven’s Point.
All day I see fractals everywhere.
Back home among the pines, I like it
when our wildest parts are glistening.

 

Easter

I wake up each morning filled with blood
and a hankering for strong coffee.
There’s queers wandering the White House lawn
and a man held hostage by pirates.
Dear Baby Jesus, please do something.
It’s Sunday and the cats are crashed out.
It’s Easter and I’m sorting laundry.
I keep my prayers within my marrow,
arrive each day inside this body.
Here: some sunlight moves across the floor.

 

Days Within Days

Everybody owns this Kandinsky.
Squares with Concentric Rings. It’s music
he heard behind these pulsing colors.
A simple black frame, 12 more implied.
Seals killed the pirates. Three clean head shots.
Now Vermont: we could get married there.
I know you can't hear what I'm hearing.
I want to see this room differently.
Days within days, each ring imperfect.
I question the title's translation.

Hangover

A knife in the mind, a desert

in the throat.  Kaleidoscope
of bottles in the trash. 

Slowly is the only way

I can move into the yard, 
the morning gauzed in mist.

On the lawn, a paper plate

dotted with cake crumbs, 
a flurry of ants.  I think

through the throbbing

and the night spools back 
in scraps, the gaps in-between
 
large, deleted for good.

A little like death.  Or nowhere
near.  What dying will do

with memories I can only

speculate: crumbs 
left on a plate or carried 

one and one into the grass.

 

Self-Portrait with Baby Possum

That’s me halfway up the ladder,
crouched beneath the roofline. 

That’s me gloved.  Slanted on the shingles, 
that’s a paper plate, peanut butter

banged from a spoon.  Silence now
except for the wind chime pinging behind me,

the distant screams of schoolchildren
delivered by wind.  I’m listening

for the ratatat of claws
and here they come clicking over the roof. 

Here comes his pink nose, the rat tail
following his toddling.  My hand

in the air, my mind in the air, thinking 
Now, wait, now.  Such a sound

the animal makes in my grasp, 
a static-in-the-throat, both hiss

and breath.  Down the rungs I climb, 
the youngest of three.  The fourth

seeped through my mother’s fingers
at the foot of the stairs, at the end

of her descending.  Such a sound that went 
ripping through the house. 

The wind chime silently hangs.  
No bells in the blue sky.  That’s me

down from the ladder, holding the possum
up to my face, looking at his looking—

eyes puny, glassed over, rigid 
in their sockets, darker than mine.

 

Closer

My neighbor kneels
on his lawn,

a chainsaw wailing 
in his hands. 

The sky turns
a darker lilac, the saw

sings a higher howl
as the spinning chain
 
cuts a tree stump
leveled across

cinderblocks. 
He brings the blocks

closer, halves
the stump again.

Moves the blocks, 
halves the halves,

sawdust fountaining
down to the grass.

So a thing that grows
slowly in rings

is diminished in minutes.  
So a thing goes

as night charcoals 
toward the skyline

and the moon turns 
a brighter bone.

 

Little Wall Clock

It went kaput.  No matter 
which battery I put
in the battery slot, 
the hands would not 
sweep, stopped
forever at three-thirty.  
Mid-afternoon or 
insomnia hour,
it’s anyone’s guess 
when it ticked its final 
tick, told us in its own 
mechanical way, 
This second right
here is the last one
I’m tracking.  Cheap
little plastic thing 
we always ignored
anyway, a narrow 
band of dust 
along the topmost 
arc of its head—
dirt, dander, dead 
skin and pollen,
the miniscule husks 
of insects—all of it once 
airborne, floating 
around the bedroom
where our own hands
keep moving, twitch 
while dreaming, 
clutch in lust.

 

Cry Box (1987)
    
        after Ed Ruscha

It’s about yay big.      Heavy as God.      Built from six

panes of breath.      Depending on the light      it is clear

or opaque or      somewhere in between.      Silence is

a sibling.      Wind a cousin.      Without your singing

it flattens out.      All eight corners go.      Fill it if

you want to.      There is no right side up.      It’s all right.

Zen Video

It was matter of spirit in the end. The tapes turned
On the low shelf

So their titles bled into the run of musicals
And heartthrob romances

My mother adored:  The Sound of Music/
Caligula/Funny Girl/

That one woman
My father remembers,

In that one tape,
Who gave fabulous head.  At their age desire

A fine rush they carried the way a river
Carries the

Moon.  The wind lifting (I avert
My gaze),

Their bodies rendered:
Broken china,

Silk.
I remember once when I called him in May

I heard all this screwing
Through the wires.

He was partially deaf, he had the television up,
A sitar and tabla were playing low in

The background.
I thought:  so he could watch

And not feel dirtied.
This was education after all.

The artistry and angles of pleasure
(Though the girl

Was miked/
You could hear the moistness/

The spirit’s vow
To the spine

Broken down to root and oil).
I remember the magnolia outside my window

Was quivering
With the weight of blossom,

A tower right there
For all to see,

And me, later, crawling hands and knees
To my first wife.

Soundtrack:  doves, cicadas burning
their radio-

Active half-lives into the trees
While somebody turned over, yes

And more yes, somebody
Bared the teeth to . . .

The scene (mind and body soon to follow)
Fading to afterglow,

Eerie wash.
My father is dead, my

Mother dying,
The bruise of passion needle-driven

So they have to spread her
Toes to find a vein.

The new missionary position:  adoration
Of the feet.

The purr in her throat
The purr of valium.

There is a list here I keep forgetting to add,
A river and a moon.

My own form
Of human blindness,

Desire (of woman born).
I throw the moon away.  It comes back:

Cradle of
Whiteness.  Cool rib.

I call the river some
Crushed vein.  There, my body trespass.

I know the sparrow exploding from my chest is
Crowning this all

With meaninglessness.
Somebody has to protect our living,

Dying.
If there is a deer rotting in the wilderness

(Sense of this animal, my love, lying down
Inside us,

Sense of collapsing foreleg,
Heart and lung),

I will suffer
This change.  I will drench its corpse with flowers.

 

Shroud Study

                                   (Dickinson, Strand, Rilke)

                        Rare life—gross eyes—

I know that he exists.  Somewhere 
he has hidden—

in sky or water—this fresh silence.
The way he stood

shaving or leaned to sip his Ralston,
the smell of his

aftershave overwhelming
the kitchen.  Now

the impression of his body
given—flesh and bone—

to the collapsing air.  Was
the pain long?

A sparrow’s 
flight could not describe it.

When I touched him, he bled
a sea or garden.

Now I think some of the linen
must have marked him back

so he was cross-hatched where
pressure took him.  Flat

of the under-forearms,
their white bellies.  Humps

of the calves.  Crown of
the buttocks.  Scaled, etched,

embossed.  And now me
standing above the river-smell,

the washed linen, wildly
gathering memory

(his tongue still black
with it, pocked with words)

to store in the great golden hive
of the visible:  the boy

I was, the boy I thought I was,
the man he was,

the man I thought
he was:  a shadow-casting,

one sweeping length of
monofilament—no river—no

body—no shore.

 

Eruption Shield #3, 1998

                                            jarrah burl, acrylic paint, gold leaf—
                                                        Stephen Hughes and Margaret Salt

                        It is volcanic.  As if the burnished surface

of the eye had cradled briefly
one errant drop of lava,
and had seared then like paper, like flesh and paper,

to reveal the inner naked seeing thing.
A soul-wetness, birth-wetness.
Shell, husk, scale—

static.  Though when I move, it moves—swift running—
like Achilles over the hot sand.
The sculptural tendency

of sunlight and grief,
butchery and
grief.  The soul, the war in the soul,

a delicate egg-shape, trapped in a wound as potent
as gold and rock.
If I could drag myself through Crane, that rip-tooth of

the sky's acetylene,
if I could drag Stevens through the pristine
cages of Dickinson

—the auroras, the zero at the bone—
would I be any less
found than I am right now,

enthralled, the sleeve
of the spirit still only half itself,
like water through an open hand;

half again, it’s wood,
though it is the grain of my own looking
that cuts through,

shows where water has run.
Where blood has run.
Evidence of rills and gullies.  Now a wall of

heartwood, eucalyptus marginata,
hanging on a cliff of air.
At Angel’s Landing once I saw no angels

but let metamorphic rock re-hew me.
I was an allusion to death and
nature, death in nature—

I wore gravity like a beautiful skirt.
Now I have knives, an emptiness to carve.
I cut it wet.  I hold it under

and cut it wet.
I say its fiber is a living sponge in my hand.
A gear turning.

I paint it blue.
                        I add an edge
of heaven.  I expose and protect its rawness. 

Death and Petunias

A woman digs a hole for roots flowering purple
This is how Death begins

And of course The love poem which no one reads anymore The kind of poem which says yellow Says pink Says orange Says

I hate you

Hate cannot bare this when The love Poem throws up a sharp hue Hue is a word Death uses when talking about a typical day gathering The helix of purple flowers

In her arms Which are not flowers Are stop signs 
open eyed starry Are Neighbors Children just heard not seen

In time In Time

The woman would gather Latin in her arms but
Petunia is always petunia

Death knows this failure that lurks in botany So soothes her Death says darling Death says poem Death says Love We are The same

 

Stay

Once never said
Nor the next stammered

To you   the black bird calls a message across
The pine   To you   the creek is in a rush

Pity first sky spread thin
Pity next the water bottle crushed at the road

Diminish a grip on what 
What what

Drink an untapped gulp
Breathe carbon Breathe freeway

Forget within you a knife-rage
Forget a red storm wanting to


A little toughness, a little more aggression in the lunch line, visionary tax evasion, then white guilt run amok. Can we predict them backwards out of being? Rain riding in like the death of Fareless Square, him standing by the statue of Man with Umbrella, she striding past a non-anatomical bronze otter commissioned in Fiscal Year 1987. On the train he washes over her. A national brand of sham­poo, generic zinc-based version, but memory is olfac­tion and difficult to dislodge. Have we really given up on a deter­mina­tion of the good? Before a fact congeals in a crowd’s ear, let’s make our meetings longer-lasting. Let’s make our last meeting last the longest.

There was a pattern in the clouds, in the way they broke up into prefectures. Waiting on the porch for the heat index while these men in their Chacos, these careful salt-&-pepper Templetons. Or two thick-middled genders pausing on a morning jog or the ginger-bearded man beneath a blue baseball cap. His enormous calves. We said the clouds were burning off because, my God, one has to say something! and they were. A crow duet atop a fencepost. A white-haired couple sharing a muffin. One could dial back a century and call it quits, except: too many cats, too much animus among songbirds. Plus this thumb writ­ing epidemic and the worst traf­fic gesture by far remains the left-hand turn across a crosswalk. In terms of fatalities there was a pattern but we couldn’t discern it, isn’t that often the case?  Let the heat get off its high horse, I won’t crane my neck to be seen. Maybe one notices a puzzle the moment its too late to solve. Maybe one just waits this one out.

No high-speed cortège comes tearing through town. Elementary school speeds only. She at the dual glass panes weatherproofed above the sink. What is beauty but a two-tone El Camino idling at a three-way stop sign, rims still spinning? After having made offerings of coffee, after having Gone the Extra Mile. She standing at the screen earlier counting out her refund money I’ve done nothing wrong to nobody (anybody) and I have pic­tures to prove it. Gods in your sheet metal, goddesses wrapped in your non-load-bearing skins. The Parade Permit having been filed three months in advance meanwhile you’ve got this culture of the long, holy adoles­cence stretching out beneath the watchful eye of



We skipped deadlines / slept / separately / and late. Why (and only now) / note the format of Competitive Bidding / in TriMet construction as in / love? Never learned to / penetrate the / (that word) / flummery / of smear campaigns / all politics is (loco) / a man in a hooded sweatshirt / bored with / All of This / should be better / his (checklist) / Pounding up the steps of the / Courthouse / olive green yoga pants (abandoned) / in the hamper / yet / another Tom Petty soundtrack / hot beverage aficionado / it’s copasetic, dude / dude / seriously dude / Tom Petty? / he’s been inside of (us) / our whole / lives / though stone-washed jeans have come / and gone / (still) stalled in / committee / what were you (expecting) the / Mercy of a Phone / Call / thanks / that’s (helpful) / what I / miss most / is / the stupid stuff

A field, a fen, a promontory, a peak. The thing about need is it operates by zone. At first a toe-dip, quick trip to the strip mall strip club, then the tell-tale stillness in the kitchenette. Sing, cuckoo, you little winger. Dull stuff of paper­work and transfer signatures, tunneling our own disaster. I’ve grown taller than my tremor. It’s no surprise this council avoids what it’s in awe of: lean boys discovered in the yard. Dirty Pretty Words. A culture of pity aimed inward like a breath. She may be the cut-rate matron of recidivists, but this day was entrusted to me and I (at least) will not fail whomever.

Parenthood as One Version of the Afterlife

How you get here is how you get here.
                                                               Some arrive
silent, smug in the glow of an executed plan.
Others limp or shamble in, stunned as the occupants

of a wreck who, standing beside a car crumpled 
as tinfoil, cannot stop uttering half sentences:

the rain. Weak-as-water brakes. The tree.
But whether this is a well-crafted destination
or one more stop on calamity’s highway,

dwelling in this new landscape will not be
what we thought. So this unmapped terrain bestows

a rough equality over all its citizens,
paralyzed by the expectation that they must be
decisive as battlefield commanders, yet patient

as supplicants who wait to be taken through
the brassy lungs of heaven’s gates or cast

into the cloudy fires of hell. The life behind
claims no shadow, our unchilded beings
featureless as marble. Small details—

a shirt I once owned, a meal, a movie’s title—
belong to a past no longer completely mine.

Flickering through memory’s bland weather, the voice
of a neighbor who, after a glowing and swollen pregnancy,
whispered, “It’s really weird to have a kid.”

That kid would be almost grown now, 
a shadow-casting citizen of a world that started over

the first night our daughter was with us,
and I lay awake as they slept, trying to plan
each of the small and unknown eternities before us.

Lessons on Lessening

In the rigmarole of lucky living, you tire 
of the daily lessons: Sewing, Yoga, Captivity. 
Push the lesson inside the microwave.
Watch it plump and pop and grow larval

with losses. Watch it shrink like shrikes 
when they dodge out of this palatial
doom. On the sky’s torn hemline, this horizon,
make a wish on Buddha’s foot. How to halve,

but not to have—how to spare someone
of suffering, how to throw away the spare
key saved for a lover that you don’t 
have, save yourself from the burning turret

with the wind of your own smitten hip. 
Do you remember how girlhood was—a bore
born inside you, powerless? How you made
yourself winner by capturing grasshoppers

and skewering them? You washed a family 
of newts in the dry husked summer, wetted
them with cotton swabs before the vivisection.
That’s playing God: to spare or not to spare.

In the end you chose mercy, and dropped
each live body into the slime-dark moat. 
Today is a study in being a loser. The boyfriend 
you carved out of lard you left in the refrigerator

overnight between the milk and chicken breasts.
Butcher a bed, sleep in its wet suet for a night. 
Joke with a strumpet, save the watermelon 
rinds for the maids to fry in their hot saucepans.

Open your blouse and find the ladybugs
sleeping in your navel. Open your novel 
to the chapter where the floe cracks and kills
the cygnet. Study hard, refute your slayer.

 

My Aquarium Fantasy

Hot evening glut of jellyfish
In which we make love over and over
to the sounds of our own drowning.

In which awe drowns in hunger, 
in which a swordfish floods my hip 
and I beg one more for supper. Nyotaimori,

disgraceful as a delicacy, roe-cold 
and slimy as the suction cups fly
over us—empty platters, mutinies

of koi. In which the laughter 
of slaughter sauces our appetite
for abscess. In which I jack up

a circuit and dye my hair ultraviolet 
with murex. Kelp-snare with vesicles
growing on us like cysts or pink aster.

In which we build a tank big enough 
for blue whales to meet and mate.
In which we then construct a shore

to strand the whales, make illicit meats 
out of them, light the lamps of our beach 
with their blubbery, precious oils.

 

The Operation of Thunder


Sarcoma

The boiler room in chaos. Woman on a bed,
Looking at her hands. Photograph of child

Playing inside rock garden. Child praying, 
Making promises he would break.

Paper flower growing inside,
O, the blooming weed.


Sentience

Girl on a bed, inflamed. 
Temperature caps 102º.

She dreams of the wax museum, 
The red bellicose mouths

Of succubi, lobster quasar,
Blood flint tumbling into a vat.

Imagine her wrists, a pittance.
Her skull, purple apple,
A corona.


Excision

Eviscerated thunder. Scalpel cut
Its thigh, roiling belly. It moans,

Drug-fevered. Thick tissue
Unshakeable, unexplained.
Come, surgeon, undo the thing.

Let it jolt if it needs to.
The spider crawls across the mat.
O, the prodding hands.

 

Leviathan

I am not the purple of Murasaki’s kimonos,

nor the purple of larkspur teeth
                                    nor the purple of wisteria lolling 
bulbs like hung heads,
                                    nor quartz, nor amethyst,
nor discotheque, nor dance hall

I am the purple of driftwood,
                                    the dread of riots, I am the purple
of sinister soda machines,
                                    I drag the purple like a wounded unicorn
through reeds and mangrove, 
                                    cities drowned in dirty apricots
I squeeze the purple
                                    from murex—I dye my hands, my skirts          
with the secretions of sea 
                                    snails, smeared over thigh & hip,

How can I wring the purple from 
                                    the rag, how do I dream and drown
purple—I am an ogre, 
                                    grape leaves grow under my cuticles 
I am not wine that is to be tasted
                                    When fermenting, I was vomiting 
mackerel—O earthworm,

                                    I long to be green
I long to be the crayfish unhusking
                                    shell, let the weeds enter,
grow in my body, I am nothing

Heritage

It means I found a home where I was dropped.
The churlish heron
looming on the bridge, keeping stock—
Abandoned summer boats,
in dry docks. Nestled, hull

to hull. Like the sand-soft husks of a walnut.
When you die, I don’t think that I will go. Not even then.

He understands, & the night is infused with violets.

 

Ringlet

While you were busy
qualifying butterflies. Taking the liminal stretch

of each pinked wing. Fawn is a soundtrack for beauty. Wood nymphs,
meadow browns, ringlets. Jezebels, parchment, pins.

Outside: the sound of the sun
becoming more of what she was—

the velvet slug of their bodies (Nabokov

said they were girls).

But also, I wanted to tell you
there are winds that you won’t own.

There’s a file on you, somewhere—

Stiff corridor, this.

 

Altered

It’s like the hankering for land, before she touched it.
Balsam axis, where the length

of this occurs. A little stubborn weather
in her system (the perforated flowers,

half moon surge). Now, she stands in doorways,
willing gulls

to rise. Such a sorrow to their efforts. Gale
wings tithing. No

arrive.

 

Future Trees

Bracelet-ed in the ozone,
they are not here to entertain, 
disseminate 
leaves.

As if a man is speaking underwater. 
You’re owned,
and thus, you’re charmed.  
Quid pro quo. Ever think
for every bird

we’ve bred this terrifying syntax?

 

Fate Is the Hunter

Blind shoots and restrainer systems.  The procession
is curved, scientifically

proven to help keep your eyes on the rump
of the one in the front. Lest 
you have knowledge.

Here’s what I think about knowledge—
At night I take off my blush, 
which is pink as meat. 

Arrogance   

My village wasn’t slashed and burned today, 
            and since I don’t live in a village, 
            all I had was guilt 
            which seems to wash over the coast of Jersey 
            now and then like a red algae swarm 
            or the predicted high tides 
            said to imperil our future.                       I live on a cul-de-sac

            which seems like a French word for a circle 
            of homes, but there is no such word in French.

They have a coast, too, and I’m sure epidemics 
            of guilt, but today, there’s only the one I have 
            that these pills won’t assuage.               Some village 
            somewhere, that’s what the news says, 
            and next door, I hear screaming.            The neighbor’s 
            son is home from Iraq, 
            his teen girlfriend is pregnant, 
            and the mother in-law has Alzheimer’s.

None of this was on the news, 
            and my children are playing quietly, for once, with clay. 
One is making pizza; the other a princess crown.

I stand by the window watching the weather 
            creep in from across the bay.               Some foreign 
            smell is in it; 
            something I don’t care to know about; 
            something I wouldn’t dare to claim.

 

Lighter

The man in the car next to me was shaving, 
               and I wanted to yell 
               post-avant this, not at him, but at the camera 
               posted just over the traffic light 
               we were both sitting below. 
We know we’re being watched, but do our best 
               to live as if we’re not, but here, 
               on a bright autumn morning 
               I forgave him for his grooming, 
               applauded his time saving measures.

Maybe he’d spent the night with a new lover 
               (I liked this idea) or helped his kid 
               finish the science project (my sympathy grew)  
               or maybe he does this every day, 
               preferring all the sleep he can get 
               to a few dead minutes staring in a mirror 
               with a sharp blade. 
Who couldn’t love a man like that?

He was looking at himself in the rearview, 
               his neck exposed for me, voyeur 
               in the next lane, the eye in the sky 
               witness to what was in my face,
               how I hoped to hold on to whatever 
               this was for the rest of the day, 
               pay a little of it out, 
               keep most of it for myself.

 

Bob at the Corner Table in the Lincroft Inn

Champagne for me, beer for him, 
            and we talked carpentry, fine joinery, molding. 
Why children cry. Why we can’t. 
Later it was martinis and politics, 
            the oil spill in Louisiana, 
                        the car bomb in NYC;
                                    nothing about cancer
                                                or other betrayals.
 
Once in a Chinese restaurant, waiting for my dumplings, 
            I noticed the wallpaper was joined 
            at all the seams with staples. 
From the chair molding til the ceiling, a thousand staples,
            and not just next to my table, but, as I looked around, 
            I could see the glint where each panel met, 
            the tall line of staples every few feet 
            Who thought of that? 
And who had held a stapler open and flat to the wall, 
            moving it a millimeter at a time, 
            slamming the palm of a hand 
            against it to force the small metal 
            into the wall board? 
            Had gone around the room with a ladder, 
            the time, the patience, their fat red hand 
            when they were done, and why?

I thought of Bob,  
            of crawling around inside his poems 
            with a tool belt finding solutions to problems 
            or problems for solutions, 
            and then my dumplings came.

They were hot. 
            I slipped them whole 
                        into my mouth 
                                    one at a time. 
I ate them all.                                      I asked for more.

This was not fine dining,         not even the best dumplings I’ve ever had
            but suddenly,               I was crying. 
            (I don’t expect you to believe this.)     (I don’t care.)
            (I do;   I really do.       I really, really do.) 
            Will you forgive me?

 

Progenitors of the New Whale

“ . . . to enjoy bodily warmth, some small part of you must be cold, for there is no quality in this world that is not what it is merely by contrast. Nothing exists in itself.”  Melville, Moby Dick

Last night at the gym, 
               I took Bob into the sauna with me, 
               dragging him not kicking or screaming, 
               but smoldering into the heat 
               where I couldn’t break a sweat.

I was paralyzed and so was he, 
               peering out the glass door 
               as if someone would show 
               up any moment.                     I was reading Moby Dick 
               and Bob was reading the Bible backwards  — 
               oh, you thought I was reading Bob, 
               and the Melville comment threw you off, 
               but what is literal?                 What is figurative?

Bob was in the interstices, 
               between the molecules collected 
               on my skin from the exertion 
               of exercising my mind,            and now, I watched 
               him paging through the Bible, 
               looking for the lost narratives 
               under the meta-narrative, 
               the truth not in the word, but in the world,
               and I turned Moby Dick upside down,

and Bob said, cool, and laughed.           When we tried to leave, 
               the door was stuck, 
               and I started to panic. Bob said, be cool, 
               and now it wasn’t so funny, and he beckoned 
               below the benches to a man I hadn’t known 
               was there, and out crawled Rilke 
               who knelt 
               and let Bob climb on his shoulders.      He peeled 
               back the cedar lining the ceiling, 
               pushing up the tiles, 
               and that’s when I really started            to sweat, 
               a cold sweat that loosened my limbs
               and the shuttering of my heart 
               and when I left the gym, 
               I left alone and unafraid.

 

The Dog Is Lying On the Floor as I Write This

I hope you like dogs. 
            The dog will be a recurrent actor in this story. 
                        The story of I in relation.
                                    One of those relations is the dog.

I am not a dog person. 
            Some people are dog people. They proclaim 
                        this as if it indicates the club they belong to. 
                        It is almost a racial or religious declaration: 
                                    oh, yeah, I’m a dog person. 
                        No yellow star. No dark skin, but they are different.

I am not a dog person. 
            I have a cat, too, but I am not a cat person, either, 
                        and I resist the pressure to choose
                                    or to explain myself.

My dog is named Flannery. You know why 
            and you will either like me for that or snicker. 
                        I don’t care. She lays at my feet when I write, 
                                    not at yours. 
                                                You can go fuck yourself 
                                                            if you don’t like my dog’s name.

My dog is MY dog. 
            She is not the family dog, 
                        although she is the family’s dog.
Whether I am a good dog owner or bad, 
            Flannery has bonded with me.                         And I her. 
I don’t mind her vomit
            as much I have minded other dogs’ vomit. 
                        Or feces. I pick up her warm bowel movements in a bag. 
I am not alone in this.
It does not mark me as a good person—
            nor as a dog person—many people do this. 
                        It may even be the law in some places. 

I do sympathize with her brown eyes 
            that seem badly to want 
                        to understand 
                                    and surely wish to please.

And how she follows me around.                    How she is depressed
            when I am gone, 
                        how she needs those dog bones 
                                    and the chewing.         I empathize, even with that: 
                        how many vodkas? Bags of potato chips? 
                                    Other things it’s none of your business to know 
                                                I have consumed, used, interfaced with 
                                                            in the same desperate anxiousness?

Some people would save an animal before a human. 
            I am not that kind of person. 
                        I would eat an animal, 
                        no problem, to save myself. 
                        I would throw an animal 
                        over a bridge to save my child. 
                        I knew a girl once 
                        who was given a box of kittens 
                        by a nun at the convent 
                        a few blocks from my house, 
                        told to take it down to the creek 
                        by the library and put some rocks in the box 
                        and drop it off the bridge.

I don’t know who I would be 
            if someone had ever asked me 
                        to do something like that. 
I don’t know what that girl actually did. 
I did see a man cut the testicles off a young pig once. 
            I was holding the pig. 
                        He threw the testicles to the ground, 
                                    said the barn cats would get them. 
            We raised that pig, had it butchered, and ate it.          Bacon.

But dog? In “The Art of Living” by John Gardner 
            a cook kills a dog and makes a sumptuous meal. 
            It is an initiation story, a loss of innocence, 
            a boy becomes a man. Not through sex, 
            though there is a girl, but by seeing through time.

Dog time is my time.   It is child-time:            now.                Always now. 

Seeing the past and the future is how we suffer, 
            the bones we gnaw on, endlessly. 
            The smell of bacon always seducing us.
 
            And then the panic.

 

There Were Only Dandelions

And the boy.
And no one knew what the dog was chewing.
Everywhere, sound. Here: sirens. There: sirens.
And the crying

                        because her husband doesn’t love her anymore 
                        and wants to go to medical school, 
                        now, after so many years of lawyering;

                        because she woke up one day and said, I don’t think 
                        I ever want to sleep with you again, meaning sex,
                        and then he learned it meant not even the sleeping, 
                        the spooned, belly loose intimacy of Howler Monkey night;

                        because the dandelion blew into a million parachuting seeds.

Pre-dandelions floating everywhere, to every continent.
            There, too, the screaming, just like the sirens, 
            and everywhere in between, each anniversary of the living.

“My boy is in college now,” one says, “but that day 
            of the bombing, when they called, I stopped at the 7-11 
            to buy bags to bring the body parts home in. 
He was one of only four that survived.”

                        Whose baby, anonymous, in the trash heap?

                        Whose boys aiming, aiming, falling in love 
                        with the fear they won’t ever outrun?

                        Whose child that one, without the arm, a knife in the other?

They’re not all white faces, and this poem is not a public poem. 
This poem is not meant to entertain, like Jericho said, named 
            after that city by that river in the hot place so many people 
            have lived in, so many hostages been taken in, so many, 
            so many—whose offices I can’t name or know—no, not 
            entertain, but sing just the same, a polyphony of song 
            birds in the morning, snow geese aflight, guns rocketing, 
            rocketing, barrel out, sound through, the beating blood, 
            bleating animals, beseeching all those river gods 
            for some respite from this suffering.

                        Each a lawn weed having grown up in some crevice,
                        against the wall of each life, flowering heads all in all 
                        and each in one, this explosion on the seed headed-planet, 
                        fractal imagining, and this is my imagining, this declaimed I.

Though some of you—even though this is not a public poem—
            will say the I is dead; there is no self; no things but in ideas 
            dead, yet no ideas in things either; and then the accumulation 
            of linguistic artifacts heats up like a    like a    like a

                        Lava lamp
                        All Spencer’s Gift glow and thrift shore chic.

And you will not be warmed by it, 
            but       who is this you? Because if there is no I, 
            there can be no we, and I am not willing to surrender to that,

                        to no us-ness, to you not being one sole being on the other end 
                        of this this-ness, but only a part of some conglomerate, corporate 
                        entity called nothing we can comprehend. I am unwilling;
                        I am a dissenter.
                        I am.

Which renders the corporation something more than they, 
            which is almost always paralytic, or amoral, 
            certainly unsympathetic and unsympathizable,
            something approaching evil.

Just you.          And me.           Please.

First, I claim this I, that only has this 
            language(s),     technology(s),              space, 
                        time,    sex,      gender,             religion or lack thereof, 
                                    sensibility,       sense,   a body,             a body in time, 
                                                in sex, in faith and betrayal 
                                                            and reason and reasoning:

out of this great unsynthesized manifold, all penetration and penetrating,

                        Like a seed head blown apart, all pollination and flowering 
                        and dried and falling away and lifting and airborne and borne 
                        away from each other to land and germinate and survive 
                        in the meagerness of conditions, the little dying, the little survivals.

An image, Williams said;         an idea, said Stevens, 
            ancestors we think of: lion’s teeth leaves, prickly 
            and perseverance, no things but in ideas? 
So much depends upon this small boy 
            who doesn’t look any small boy you know; 
He is my small boy—the I of this this-ness—
            with small bones and wide dark eyes, 
            hair as straight and black as spun obsidian.
So much depends upon a child like this one I love, 
            sitting in calf high grass, so new-green, the edges 
            blaze white, and the dandelions all sprung over night, 
            one night in this boy’s newborn awareness, 
            as new as any child’s, burying his face in the common 
            and undervalued florets, eyes blazing with YELLOW!! 
            Mind cracking—everywhere this cracking—a portal 
            into a new way of being, the dancing around him, 
            the buzz of new insects, the spray of misting winds;

it is all so amazing, this world of wonder. 

unshriven

they say you must abolish your self. 

others burn their lack with bourbon, 
fall into the easy incandescence 
of the night.  they juggle their intoxication
and selves, a furious circus.
they scare off what they seek.

but you—you are here for me.

among my many selves
i keep you close to me—
a dazzling future tense,
a pastless, unrelenting be,
a footprint sandstorms disappear.  

some say forgetting is just another door.
tell me, dear one, tell me again,

just what was it i was looking for?

 

shrive

step over the threshold 
where i wait for you.  a tongue cleft from stone
am i that bled

when cut by a farmer’s scythe.  
cradled in his arms and fussed over 
like an only child,

my wounds stanched, 
they plied me with sweets, dressed me 
in cotton stained with my blood,

fed me their pain 
like milk as i devoured their years, 
feasted on their loss.

temple walls rose around me,
humans like flowers at my feet.
Sculpting the seashell’s hull to infinity

i am where monks astonish themselves—
am the truth from which you try to hide: 
you are your mother’s death.

yet you still come before me as if i were a key 
to the door—
your door.  your mother’s.

i am her last mouthful of breath,
her gasp, her moan 
i make into a hymn for you now:

the hum of skin 
sweating against skin. turn to me, next to you 
and tell me of yourself—

i want to hear, 
i’m one of the few—

don’t turn away. 

On the perilous effects of buried alien spacecraft

They told me, fetch the jawbreaker

They told me, take down the wash

They told me, any day now, any day

They told me, one book?—as good as another

They told me, ’til someone loses an eye

They told me, gravity is deafening

Nancy, they told me, Nancy with the laughing face 

They told me, just flour water and sea salt

They told me sometimes a rave

They told me sometimes a dove

They told me, they told me

They told me, blow skyward

They told me, stars across the knife

 

Graceful ghost rag

After his death he frittered 
His being in Bangor watching

Late-night TV.  At dusk he might 
Drink ale or laze across a bench

At Fish Pier boning up on stars.
Once a week he was required

To contact the people whose lives 
Had touched his chord.  He might

Leave a flea-bitten flyer 
Under their windshield wiper—

Have you seen my lost cat?  Or
He’d email, inviting them

To loan princely sums to a prince. 
Do you remember ascending, once,

And your elevator stopped but
No one got on or off?  That was him.

That was the one that got away.

To Love Well

is to place a hand
 on another’s chest and know
 that the heart only beats
 when locked in a cage
 of bone.

 

Departure

Dawn cracks: a lightning bolt
carving slowly through the clouds.

All night I listened to your breath.
Even tasted your lips
when the moon turned you pale
as a corpse.
I haven’t killed a thing

since the morning
we followed gunshots into a field
peppered with sparrows. Remember
how their necks twitched
beneath our thumbs? Before twisting,
I took some time to feel

the rage of wings against palm,
marveling at such fierce resistance
to mercy. Perhaps 
it was selfish—I couldn’t bear
the sound of wings
flying nowhere.

Darling, forgive me. When you wake
and begin to flutter in the emptiness
still warm from my whispers,
I will be too far
from this field
to wrap my hands around
that little bird
                       in your chest.

 

My Mother Remembers Her Mother

                 for Le Thi Lan (1941-2008)

My eyes close into a night
thickened with ash and jasmine,
mortar blasts lighting distance
into shocks of dawn.

In a room lit with light
from another house,
you lie alone
beneath a baby-faced G.I.
What you know as shame is forgotten
in the belly inside your belly.
                                                
Hunger neglects pride
the way fire neglects the cries
of what it burns.

Each soldier leaves you steeped
in what they cannot keep: liquor, salt
of lust, the pink dust
of shattered bodies.

There are men who carry dreams
over mountains, the dead
on their backs.
But only mothers
can walk with the weight
of a second beating heart.

Mẹ ơi When they ask me
where I’m from, I tell them
my song sleeps in the toothless mouth
of a war-woman, that a white man
rages in my veins, searching for his name.

I tell them I was born
because someone was starving.

 

In Defense of Poverty

Winter was closing in
on all sides of the city.
We held each other closer
before the oven’s mouth.

So much warmth flowed
across our bodies as we lay
for hours, listening to the rats
housed in the broken heater, their tails
tapping the night into music.

Darling, in that absolute darkness,
I studied the shape of your hollow
so to know a love without beauty.

Darling, in that absolute darkness,
why did you try to hide it when I knew,
by the way your finger curled
inside my palm, that you were smiling?

Your Father
on the Train of Ghosts

Your father steps on board the train of ghosts.
You watch him from the platform:

somehow, he doesn’t look as old
as you expected him to be.

You think this must have something to do
with the light, or maybe

how much bigger the train is.
It stretches down the track
a long way, as far as your eyes can make out.

It’s like a black bullet
that keeps speeding toward you,
you think, and then:

No, it’s like a very long train, that’s all.

Somewhere on board the train, your father
is choosing a seat.  Maybe

he’s already found one, has settled in,

picked up a magazine or newspaper
someone else left lying there,

is flipping through it, idly.
Maybe he’s looking out the window, for you
you would like to think, waving,

only you’ll never see it
because of the reflected glare.

Or maybe he’s not looking for you at all.
Maybe he’s watching the hot air balloons
that have just appeared

all over the sky, ribbed like airborne hearts
of the giants Jack killed.

In the stories, Jack has no father.
This would explain a lot, you are thinking

as the train begins to pull away:

his misplaced affections,
stealing the harp of gold that played
all by itself.  Around you,

men and women and children
are standing on the platform, shouting, waving,
hugging themselves.
The wind is cold; it must be March.

You would want that kind of music
if you were Jack, wouldn’t you?

 

Pharaoh’s Daughter
(Chagall Motion Study)

You’re going there.  And you know
there are ways to do it, because you’ve read
the newspapers, the travel advisories,
seen the timetables and the photographs.

It’s Portland or Eugene or else
some new form of German unforgetting.

In the pewter tenements nostalgia
is secretly forging all the celebrity careers
you won’t know about
until later, until it’s too late.

You’re just one of the stones in the capitol,
or in the alleys leading to the capitol.
The website says, “Remember,
not all animals needed to be full grown,
not every variation of every genus.”

The website says, “Consider all the facts,
and it makes a lot more sense than
the little 4-animal arks you see
in pictures and toys.”  1.5 million cubic
feet of space.  40,000 animals.
Special restrooms for the handicapped.

Because everything is still evolving.
Because here is your gold star.

New shops open in Czernowitz,
in Terezin:  a post office, a discotheque.
This is how we know the model’s
built to scale:  little Braille murders.

So much is water to the human body.
Think of all that beautiful jewelry.

 

On the Death of Andrew Wyeth

There’s a green place, you think,
& a river, from just inside the airliner
where the restaurant has just
touched down.  The captain is taking
a bow, the passengers are taking a bow,
waiters in evening wear lead them all
past the commemorative buffet.

The dancers are knocking
at the locked doors of the abandoned
warehouse.  They shiver in the cold.
Nobody answers, nobody lets them in.

The restaurant moves slowly,
either with or against the current.
The president appears as a holograph
on the backside of a dollar bill.

In the green place, you think,
scientists will deliver the evidence
to the people who need it most,
in holiday packaging:  the DNA
samples, the pharmaceutical trials,
confetti from the postal strike.

From the basements of courthouses,
their dingy walk-ups & coldwater flats,
the dancers will unpeel each piece
of evidence from every other
piece of evidence, examining closely
what it was we said we wanted,

or thought we wanted.  They will speak
calmly to the lawyers & TV
cameras.  They will move gracefully 
out of the doorways the survivors
keep making, they will keep bringing us
their beautiful, irrefutable names.


“To know that light falls and fills, often without our/ knowing”—Theodore Roethke

Stop blinking so loud,
winking with such perfect pitch.

It’s haunted, I think, to think
about how often you think about
how much thick warm blood
is awake or asleep
rapidly circuiting every inch 
of every certain second through your head.  

And head and body,
       body and head,

we are all smitten
with the same slavers:

same reason why I can’t stop
walking with anything but
my ten toes and two perfect feet,
why you refuse to grab
at the vast mountains of air,
ice and light with anything
but your only hands.

 

Our Alzheimer Years

In memoriam Lewis Wright

Glazed clean
little dollops of consciousness;
your foot’s asleep,
your right leg,
a precious pinky finger.

Waiting for what’s always
just about to happen
next, we sit here
and the glittery stars answer
only to the sun
answer only to the stars.
To the splitting floridity of the darkness
and to the twinkly stars.

Even looking half-amassed like that
your long perennial selves
are sure worth knowing
and smooching.

Let’s consider life strictly
on a participation point basis:  
No matter what you have to say
the more often you raise your hand
the better the chances
you’ll be called on.

And then—not lost,
not roaming, ever-mendacious,
brawling light of the mind, seared
 
what we miss                    instead

 

Black Diamond

Realizing that breaking every finite bone

          In your readily measurable body

                    Is a kind of insouciant attitude,          

An elaborately attentive, half-pliant pose,

          In midair he teaches himself

                    The idea of home, its always expected

Sensation, marked and rendered
            
          Comfort, calm. Wobbled knots                            

                    Of air but paused,

Then the fall,

          His still-definitive conclusion.

 

“Ongoing time stabbed by a dagger.”—Rene Magritte

A brain secretes thought as a liver secretes bile. Accidents aren’t the same thing as mistakes, but your ideas regarding the difference between the two just might be. From close range the French entomologist Jean-Henri Fabre once fired a cannon at a tree full of relentlessly chirping cicadas and not a note of their song was altered, not a beat missed. They were entirely undisturbed. This does not prove that cicadas are deaf; it only proves that they are not thinking while searching—singing—for a mate, and certainly not about cannon blasts. The massed brain secretes each and every thought as the liver secretes vacuous, guileful, greenish-orange bile. Even when absent, out of view, bile itself is a kind of thought; the liver, however, not as much. A white semicircle stapled to a piece of black construction paper and taped on the ceiling we painted a watery dull yellow, lots of unattributable wings floating around, I’ve been working on my idea for a map of the entire universe. In love with its own faultiness, it’s a work in progress, plangent thoughts inside plangent thought. 

 

It Is Only the Imagination That Can Resist the Imagination

Often I wonder what
my future husband’s voice                                
sounded like                                                          
before he went through puberty,
not the size of his tender, fox-throated lips
or the color of his sundried red hair.

Spruced mustache, his
impeccably attentive billy-goat-
beard cleanly divorcing
his face from his face;

so much that is of love
is not about it in any
relative form or manner.

Voice like a skinny kid’s cannonball
off the deep end diving board,

voice that housed acute memories   
of what had previously been said
before it ever spoke.

I am lying on my roommate’s couch,
watching trashy TV, waiting
for her to get home from work.

I hope she brings something good to eat
a large Blue Moon salad
or those vegan garlic chips.

Husband I haven’t met yet,
voice I won’t ever hear,

it is only the imagination
that can resist the imagination,

it is only the imagination
that can withstand, uphold,
subvert and resist
the imagination. 

Hysteria: A Requiem

            Kyrie

After the plague
            we put away our lamentation,
                                                             our children’s cradles,
                        and dance with all the required ecstasy.

The monks follow us with brooms, barefoot.
                        The doctors in the next room
                                                                       heal each other.

                        A woman in a mask leads the midwife
            by a leash through the rooms.
                                                             Behind her hood she warns,
                        A nation has ended, but the world continues,
                                                jubilant and unclean.

Outside, spring continues without us.

                                    We loved a god we didn’t believe in,               
                        and believed in a god we didn’t love,
                                                but neither let our children live.

                                                ________________________                     

Through cracks in the boarded windows, I see broken rocking horses in the streets. I hear nothing. Nothing. Not even the wind. I want to go through the houses and search for the living, but I am bound to the known. A sore rises on my scalp. I tell no one. The test of faith is not death, but fear.

 

            Dies Irae

            No one wants to remember
                                    how we found bodies in trees and left them
                        unburied in the sky.

On ruined carpets we wallow with pomegranates and sweet wine.  
            We want to forget the wayfarer we hung
                                    when he asked for food.         

                                                            The truffles and caviar are ours.
            And the figs.                The rosemary butter and ginger tea.
                        The killdeer singing in the wet grass.

We aren’t good with memories, but we are serious
                                    about pleasure.
            About arias and cinnamon.      
                                                             Harps and honey.

                                                ________________________

I met my love at the gallows where his father taught him to tie a noose. He lashed his wrists to mine. We tried to burn every cathedral in the country. Each time the stones bewildered us, so we traveled to the forest of the damned to baptize the trees. We wanted to become shadowless, like the sea, but the darkness that followed us shared our names.



            Offertory

The feral cats cry in estrous
                        followed by nurses with a cautious hope.

            They unearth the placentas under the stairs,
                                    but the kittens are born
                                                                         bathed in flame.
                        Their mothers eat their fevers
                                                as we intone our cold hallelujahs.

We want to believe laughter will return to us.
            We make our hearts
                                                hosts for immortal breath.
                                    Mortify our flesh,
                                                               we plead
                        to the whips in our hands.

The bread does not promise to transform us,
                        but the flaming sword above our heads
                                    threatens to forgive us.

                                                ________________________

I rode the sea as a child, learned the names of every monster that approached the ship, watched sharks feast on what remained of a whale while her calf circled. Sailors told me tales of animals who lived beyond the sun’s reach whose bodies manifested their own light.

 

            Sanctus 

We strip the midwife to prove her body is
            like ours.  
                                    At night we tie her to
beams in the ceiling.
                        Bent under her spirit’s arousal
                                    she accuses us
                                                even as we sever her tongue—

                        How can you say my prayers?

            How dare you say the dead child
                                                      in my room is your son?

                        This is my devotion to the returning dead.
            These are the ruins
                                    I mapped onto my body so I might always be lost.

                                                ________________________

I lived past the day I was told I would die. The earth didn’t rupture. The sky didn’t open. I am old enough now to know we only love what will die for us. I don’t want to be forgiven for the stories I told; I want to forget the bloodied yolk inside the broken egg. I am responsible to what I have witnessed. I have eaten the eyes of the enemy, and I am the enemy.



            Agnus Dei

We steal an hour from the future and burn
                        all the books so history begins with us.

            We write:
                                    In the beginning light begat shadow,
                        flowers begat fruit,
                                                     but stars were fatherless.
                        The wheat, radiant and unkind.

            We grow bored with paradise  
                        and take down the old commandments,
                                    but can’t write new ones.

We sell each other stories of happiness           
                                                   but the pages are blank.

                                    The starling starts to charge for its song,
                        its nest heavy with copper coins.

                                                ________________________

I know nothing of my father’s myths, but my mother’s parables are sewn into my skirt. She gave me tarnished idols and her long shadow. I come from a line of obedient women who want me to believe only the strong lie under the stones they’re given, but I am not buried under the cairn. I am smearing blood on the lintels even though the angel already passed over.



            Lux aeterna

Now, in the last world, we bury nightingales
                        beneath the floor.
            Trackers with their ears to the ground listen
                                    for angels approaching.

Where is the saint,                   mortally torn and wearing a hood of stars,
            bearing her own redemption—
                        a heart of thorns          and a stone book?

                        Rumors make women rush
                                    with tributes of roasted songbirds
                                                                                   to the fallen temples,
                                                but the epidemic continues.
                                                            We remain empty.

Before they left
                                    priests tied laws to our wrists that said:
            Grief is a slow animal
                                                bearing an imperfect hope.

                                                ________________________

I try to name this feeling. This terrible lightness others call peace. I felt it once, watching bare trees, waiting for wary deer to approach the salt. Nothing sang. Bears gave birth in their sleep, and the cubs crawled out to admire their indigo shadows in the snow.

 

            Libera me

The doctors name our malady—
                                    Hysteria: suffering of the womb.

We want to be healed,
                                      relieved of our burden,  
            so we remake our children       with clay, sing them
                        lullabies and offer our breasts
            with the hesitation of new brides.

            We let waves
                                    rock them past the shoals,
                                                set fire to our dresses
                                                                        to transform ourselves
                        into the ashes that pursue them across the sea.

                       ________________________

I gave birth to a daughter, denied her three times, and when I found her at the ocean’s edge, I wrapped her in a winding sheet and offered her to the man who walked toward me on the water.

Morning Puzzle

out—the bougainvillea untied in the grass  late January sun                  browning everything       my mustache    skin      memory      I’ve collected the paper-mache
oranges from under the tree today and put them in the desk-drawer so that 
                                                                                                                tomorrow
I can put them back exactly where they had fallen
                                                                        so I can see your face again clearly

Spring has constructed these connect-the-dots for us      and I’m sure it will work soon to make me less lonely
                                                                things will be less conditional tomorrow!

let’s play cards tonight                                  I’ve discovered a grammar of games that will not be written down                              no matter how many times I ask

will not linger in the rationality of the sentence 

                                                                             and suddenly today I know you
as I have never known a photograph copy of you! or a gerund or the symbols for houses

                                         I think I’m in love with the white surface of the sunlight imaginary
                                   traced blue in the sky                                and the sidewalk
lined with all you know and love
you who hated driving and morning and winter hats made of plastic
                                                                          but now you love me I’m sure of it 
let’s play
              sitting-on-the-couch-near-the-fire together 
                                                                                  and pull the stars down for us
because I’ve run out of candles

and when I kiss you please remember       you’re so beautiful like a weeping tree
looking upward

we may never see another color night
                                                                                                maybe never—

 

The Empirical

keeps phoning and phoning                           interrupts me writing my great epic  take into account                        I have become a very young country
                                                                                                 an America of sorts filled with gnats—
                           really worried about the fact that we only have six billion years ‘til the sun conks out                   so much to do!
                                                                                    All these absurd facts
laugh at my absurd longing and still
                                                            I deplore the hollowness of  laughter.

there                no    there—    my irony flares
            peculiar pathos            peculiar loss                          what a confrontation! 

take into account                     that art makes the artist
                                                                              or that there is some third thing so full of thingy-ness                 which we could call
                                                            Eros or sky or experimental methodology—
yet       extinguishable             all of it. 

do I need a parking permit for this space       wink
                 because I want something huge and handsome to happen between us
so it will disappear.                                                                         I’d rather drink
on the way to the horizon while everyone slowly evaporates all around me

I am the Washington Monument        let me get the door for you
                                                                                                         at the bottom
I am something else                not a thing at all
                                                                 
                                                              but it’s lovely to watch sensation cascade
down from the soft sky across all these well-behaved objects 
                                                               love how it pools up inside me as I cease 
and      either way       talking or not talking
                                                                                                     I am dissolving
                                                                                                               my love.

 

from a Cereal Box: Lullaby

I am manipulating the distance between you & I
                                                                                         dear reader       dear love
and I think I’m certainly too close                                                             one step
and maybe this is becoming the reflection there                                       look up!
                                                                                    in the mirror                     
But nothing has happened yet
                                                                 I’m approaching the kingdom of dullness out is space 
                                 and it’s turning me upsidedown so that I can see your knees
how beautiful               like seagulls    

                                                                                                                        smile
and look away             smile at least and please
please start your next sentence with dearest
                                                                                     or call me something to eat
I promise no one will read it                promise to fold it                  with you inside
and put it in a book                 next to Yeats so no one will ever see it
and I’ll tell people instead about our trip to a foreign country  how I wore a turban
the whole time and stood always with the sun behind me so you’d only see a 
                                                                                                                 silhouette

And how unreal this is            all words                                                  silhouettes
and no demonstration
so         here is a salad   oranges    and rum
and here is a fork made out of wood           and here is a willow that is also wood 
at its heart                                                                                           to sit next to
here is the color of your embarrassment           put it on
I’ve made it for you.

VI.

Suddenly only darkness, 
my hands no longer 
the buck knife 
of whiskey kisses, 
matches teething 
tears, a dance 
through motel walls 
eating everyone 
in the end.
Suddenly I have nothing to do with us, 
with each windowpane 
framing rotted roses.  
Thorns stabbing our bodies 
nearly to death and leaving 
us touching fingertips 
crushed under lust. 
Suffuse every line; 
dress them in warm clothes; 
risk obsession: grab an end 
and pull hard.
I am only scenery, a happy ending, 
a paralyzed headlight improvising 
savagely and insatiable.  
Tell me an unrepeatable secret; say, 
“Hello darling, welcome home!” 
and tear the rug burn 
off your knees franticly, 
as if to say: 
              “There is no one else, 
                            I love only you.”
It fends off time and loss 
to say that narrators 
live a comprehensive strategy, 
prolonged heartbreak,
an animal struggle.

VII.

Forget that you are among the most beautiful 
and deserving of punishment 
and that not every love 
operates this way, 
to quote everything in one 
crucial utterance, 
to say the window is closed 
tightly against our dreams.
Everyone suddenly sees darkness, 
the part in the film where police 
radios sing like mockingbirds
and imagine surrender, 
but we know better, 
you and I, 
we know that every filthy
kiss beckons torrential rain.
You wanted happiness, an eclectic fence and
windows painted shut.
You wanted to be a sweetheart, 
not the stabbing death 
of every dirty volume 
of my deranged
etiquette.
You wanted oatmeal crusted to your soul.
You wanted to fill each orifice with domestic devices.
You wanted to say, “Let it be the right one.”  
I imagine you falling away, but you
are here, you are here,
you are still right here,
in a safe place and nobody moves;
my neck is your neck and  
your tongue draws 
a trail of letters 
inside my cheek
until saliva 
tastes of copper.
I wanted to take you home, 
struggling in sleep,
dreaming of water lilies 
dubbing another
expired overture.
Someone once told me 
that everything 
that was going 
to happen 
has happened.
I want to confess everything 
without having to 
tell you this story. 

The Driftless Diary

I
When the time came to leave, I turned my feet East, into a dirty-blue
twilight.
                                                  The musked moon, so close,
I took a bite, then threw it back over my shoulder,
the sweet of it stickying my mouth and chin.

This is how destiny starts, thinking we’re free to decide.

II
Off the Colorado Plateau, in a long skid down to tablelands, I felt
the curved slide

                                                  level at the Kansas border,
a flat plain stretching out before me like a waiting bed.
I kept on going, into dry storms blowing grit,

lazy small towns where circuses and holy rollers raised tents,

 

where, in the gold-tooth light of campfires, gypsies danced and slow
cattle eased down on locust husks.

In the evening of the even-ing land, I grew wide and wide open.

III
When I crossed the unscoured hills of home, I found the deep
well, dropped a stone in,

                                                  and heard it hit water below.
Sometimes the wild grass is singing. Sometimes
there’s just a cool dark

rushing at me from deeper than I think I can go.

IV
Always, there is the hard hour before dawn,
and the hunger I bow to,

                                        the pure and the not-so.

I carry my old delicious burdens.

 

Long Summer Nights in the Midwest

                                                for Diane Wakoski

Cornfields wade deep into silence
fuzz in the burnt light

no wind no moon

this is about the usefulness of what is not
this is about the space where there is nothing

but the steady shring of crickets
but a soft hoot in those far-off woods

 

In Defense of Moonlight

Midnight oil
burning its low ohm
in the trees. Who hasn’t been lit
by it, and who hasn’t wanted to omit
it from their loom
of words, thinking they might
find less sentimental glint
elsewhere, in gin-gloom
or the bent tin of street lingo.
Still, it calls us always in, its lion,
its loon, its hoot.

 

A Different God for City Girls

When my friend said she had seen God’s face,
I wondered if it was an old man’s,
backlit by a playground’s night-game lights,
wondered if it was a woman’s,
fan of silver pins glittering between her lips
as she knelt on cold linoleum
turning up dress hems for money.
My friend said you can only see God’s face askance.
She said it terrified her
like the sleek and planet-eyed sea lion
whose yawn reveals a cavern of sharp teeth.
I prayed for a glimpse, but only saw
what God wanted me to see, a scarped skyline,
hard angles spangled with small panes of light.

 

The Fracture of Yearning

                                                from the letters of S. Maria Celeste to her father, Galileo
                                                San Matteo

                                                19th day of December 1625

the citron you commanded me
to make into candy
the fruit was not fresh enough

I am sending you two baked pears
enclose a rose

accept the thorns

and also its green leaves
after the brevity and darkness of winter

 

                                                  6th of September 1629

the ampule of oil with scorpions
freshly made cinnamon water

the cold weather approaching

we await cloth
for the collars and the handkerchief

you promised

it is already late

 

                                                  19th of February 1630

all about my woes
these winter nights

the clock that traveled back and forth between us

 

                                                  17th day of September 1633

unexpectedly on that distant doorstep

the wine casks, the saffron
perfection at two lire per ounce,
the linen at 20 crazie per pound

spin it very fine

I send you golden pills
the round ones

morsels at the bottom
save the box it is not mine

tolerate remoteness
time evaporates

vanish these days or weeks

 

                                                  5th of November 1633

fathom my soul and its longings

 Intense traffic dehydrates 
                 more  than                   overtime. 
           The husband                          won’t go 
         into the city                                 unless it’s 
      a ball game.                                        Spearing 
      boyhood?                                            Not to 
        prove  a                                      corpulent 
         skeleton. All                        converge to 
             maximize the            dollop given. 
                Interior sugar’s  redemptive 
            venue—her                    next stop.
          Drying last                              season, re
      vived today.                                     Please max
  imize  the                                                    dollop. How 
will  you                                                               occupy the 
generously                                                               sized  pre
 cincts? I only                                                      paid for the 
  one oneness.                                                The one we’d 
   like to install                                          ourselves. Hope 
     they put in plenty                        of what if. Triggers 
        to borrow?  But           you’d best be extra care
              ful when the sun clause rides into effect.

 

Jigsaw Hubbub 8

                      You resound with 
                 doves. I                 prefer 
             unnatural                       light. We 
          can blow                                   it up to 
        poster size.                                       Snaring 
         a vacuum                                         from a 
          broad-based                               array of 
              product, perhaps            acrawl with
                     inner booty &  maximum ass
                room. Insightful,          if inaccurate, 
            or even fict                               itious. When 
        the name                                               rang its bell, 
     I appro                                                                 priated. Pro
  fessional                                                                     insects preach: 
“In software                                                                begins respon
   sibilities.” How’s                                                 it their province 
      to rein in the every                                        day busting of 
               my confines? Real                   pollution is  measur
                            able, greasy. You can tag its aroma.

 

Dented Reprise 12

When I find myself    

in slimy rubble  
or sodden prairies’ glum decree,

farther than frenzy,    
wiping the hurt from my glands   
as I balk the depraved,  

something in the bay that blues   
contracts me like no other bother. 
There’s recession to be churned with this,   
and it’s churning out to hell.

Forget a thin-hoped                 
heirloom sheen’s intense mist. 
Think it’s time we          
shop; hey, what’s that mound? 
Everybody book the underground.

 

Dented Reprise 13

Crack bird winging in the dread of white.

Shaken drunken thighs, 
infirm of knee.

Bubbles ahead, 
stubble behind. 
So many different

peepholes to free. 
Can’t you grow a potion,
just toss my line?
Help me get my wheat back from the

pound.
You were only chafing 
for this foment to revise.
And the chorus will snigger
like rafters.

White Tiger

Not the white tiger,
but the stable heart flying
over the cities of yesterday.

Not the white butterfly,
but the luminous rock
decorating the path.

Not the white flag,
but the dead Army youth
lying down for his country.

Not the white marbles
of childhood, but bones
lined up to win the game.

Not the white tiger,
but the heart escaping through
the hidden valleys of the great city.

 

The Wolf Table

The garden of shame grows two trees—
one a yellow thing that bristles with tears,

the second a willow from the river.
When the man falls in love,

the black Madonna enters the country
to give him a child who never plants

gardens, but lives under the trees, ignoring
the willow until its branches grow higher.

This proves the eagle on the forehead
is stronger than the wolf under the table

because the child will grow into a man
holding an unshaved flower to present

to his mother on her beautifully
scented deathbed.

 

Nomadic Drifts through Zones of Page

The operative semantics are copulating because it is a study of organic and synthetic variation and a linking of isolated units preserving their molecular independency to reveal how this plays out between the social and lingual in terms of a double assault: on page per se and on the vector of reference in terms of meaning making and purchasing a new pair of shoes.  There is no place in the work because there is no incantation, only energy exchange that reaches the conclusion that there is no purpose to that work because the attributes of the project deal with syntactical textures, ear wax,  Max Jacob’s beret, anesthesia, and kinesics—gestures of being that lead to local composition, an investigation of grammatical space with concerns that have to do with transcribing the myriad registers of an ecosystem body/mind/toe/eyelash and the consecutive invention on the plane of the signifier that wants to get away without revealing a geometrical space for ego and room for dirty socks worn to the trial.

History/gender/notebooks/Grateful Dead outtakes/sexuality/race/Kleenex/
class/empire/politic.  This process of reading becomes a muscular activity toward orgasm, though the mind is operating in tension through disjunction and an attempt to make connections between compartmentalized subjects and spaces that open as aborted vectors or women taking violin lessons, non-purposive contexts that lead to the topography of the disjunctive, supporting the integral violence of transformation that leaves a crushed flower behind, though the open process is participatory, inter-relational and porous as it fills the glass jar with a purple fluid.  Such a paradox describes the horizontal identity of the signifier whose dissonance is a chain of query worn around the starving stomach whose violent instability can be located in any molecular aggregate of thought and, sometimes, extracted from the idea of “word.” 

This allows the line to identify the syntax as a horizontal honeycomb which is joined to the theory of  poetic drift mistaken for the infinite capacity to absorb all breaks in casualty and still have the ability to sweep the trimmed toenails off the floor while stealing this text.  The whirling fragment of cultural detritus is lodged on one single page where the zone of attention is the mark of a fiction intended to function as a historic sub-function that is listed in the grammatical history that creates guilt in witnessing a graphed pattern of place supported in the huge and triumphant zone of the human head.

 

Renew It

When a flea jumps, the rate of acceleration is 20 times that of the space shuttle during launch, but I can’t renew this fact because frogs dropped out of the sky in several cities during the last century and I can’t renew my love for crickets dipped in peanut butter, this delicacy revealed here because the last one I swallowed beats inside my heart.

Row upon row of stacked saxophones can be found in the closet of the dressing room in the abandoned night club.  The instruments belong to jazzmen that played the club over the generations, the shiny line of horns a renewable myth that will be proven in two years when the building is razed and the ghost sax player is heard in the produce aisle of the new supermarket.

I can’t renew the fact my twin brother had six toes on one foot, his disappearance at age 28 an unsolved mystery that haunts me each time I pause to give thanks for having four toes on each foot. When the naked woman appeared in the trees, the two boys playing in the forest thought it was a miracle and they dropped the bat and ball to stare, the beauty of nature renewable until the boys grow older and visit the local brothel.

When the one-armed man rode the tricycle he stole from a playground and tried to cross the street, he was smashed by a pick-up truck, the grinding of metal searing the asphalt with a renewable spirit that will haunt the driver forever.

While mowing the lawn, I felt something buzz my face.  In the motion of shooing it away, I opened my mouth and swallowed it.  I spit in the grass, but it was too late.  Whatever flew down my throat renewed the cricket in my heart and it became a tiny, white spider crawling across my office floor.

 

Six Faces of Admittance

The first face is inside the window of your head, guiding you toward confession and taking your last walking cane.  The second face hangs outside your nose, weeps water that spins your head and lets you feel the wrinkled skin of loss.  The third face reflects off the glass with unknown words you need to repeat, their meaning hidden in the age of composition.   The fourth face belongs to a god who says you cannot be born again without multiple faces, so he sends you to the fifth one that is the stranger who removed your baby face by giving you a chance to be included in the family picture frame. 

Waiting for the sixth face allows the first face to return by slapping you once.  As you stagger in surprise, the second face comforts you by growing a beard as you are now someone else’s hairy face.  This signals the third face to come back, but it is overlooked when the fourth face lies about what everyone sees, the godly look kept hidden from you when the fifth face is the profile of a dying, old man you have never seen before.  This face doesn’t fit your skull that has tried to resemble everyone involved.  You pause to catch your breath and this makes room for the missing person, the sixth face that is out there somewhere.  You wait and the silence calms your cheekbones and dims the light.  You sit back in your favorite chair, your face falling asleep as you doze off, wondering when the sixth face will arrive and who it will look like.

The Unquiet

My impression 
of the grilled cheese was that it 
thought it was a grilled 
cheese, but it seemed to dislike 
itself, like its parents

had been fat-free 
or something, so 
it was loathing its fat-free parents 
for the spirit 
it lacked to properly melt.  My

impression of the grilled cheese 
was that it seemed dis-
enfranchised.  Its bread 
lacked voice, it wasn’t 
grateful, didn’t

embrace fully 
its toasted golden brown 
mission.   Was it more 
civilized than 
buttered toast?  Sure.  Big deal. 

Yet it seemed the grilled cheese 
had been tragically betrayed 
by impossible cooking conditions: 
a cheap, extremely non- 
nonstick pan for example. 

I guess then you could say 
I didn’t quite believe 
in the grilled cheese.  Yet I 
admired it.  The fatalistic 
way it waited on its plate.  Its silent

understanding 
with my appetite.  The faith 
it had I would eat it 
no matter what, even though 
I wasn’t hungry.

 

Initiation

The manager sticking 
                                                his hand in the breading.  The manager

            sticking his breaded hand

                                                in the frialator just long enough

so when he pulls it out 
a frequently a nightmare-looking thing encrusted

                                                in sudden crust emerges.  Then the manager 
says to the new busboy 
                                                the new busboy who’s standing there blinking

horrified not knowing what
the manager 
                        says 
                                                Don’t mess with me.

                                            ~

                        But gradually that same manager

            will act all friendly 
                        toward the new busboy

                                                asking if he remembers

blowing bubbles when he was a kid?
& when the new busboy says Sure

            I remember blowing bubbles when I was a kid
            the manager will say Well he’s on the phone now

asking for you. 

 

Upside-Down Crates

I would get these assertions 
like a bucket of eels.  These serious 
denials like seagulls 
screaming in the fog 
of your parents’ love life.  Like the butt-
head tourist kid on the dock pitching

alka seltzers to the screaming gulls.
Maybe it was when the chowder cook 
said he downshifted 
into third & took the dirt road home 
on his date with the waitress.  
The middle-aged middle school teacher 
waitress.  The middle-aged waitress

who could have been my middle school 
teacher back in the day!  Who somehow enjoyed 
waitressing in the summer 
which is the opposite of 
summer, in order to keep busy! 

I would be sitting

alone on the upside-
down crates anticipating the un-
certainty between 
the last party of the night & dragging 
my ass back to work 
the next morning.  Sitting on the upside-down 
crates searching for the meaning 
of sitting on the upside-down

crates considering what 
it means for the crates to be upside-down.
Stunned at the possibility 
that downshifting 
into third with the chowder cook 
in the cab of his truck was somehow

a middle-school teacher’s idea 
of keeping busy.

 

Epic

the clam roll 
                                    pissing lemon juice
                                                down the French 
            fries’ 
                                    crinkled leg

woke the manager—

                                    (that’s what started the war)

 

Picking Up the 7-10 Split

I never met a mascot that I
didn’t want to punch 
in the face.
A terrible fact I 
live with like how Bibles sleep in 
drawers next to beds in motels.
My uncle . . .
the one & only time we met 
he said people 
could just catch on fire.  It’s called 
spontaneous combustion.  
We were at the bar sharing 
a pitcher of Schlitz & 
a corned-beef.  
I was barely 10 years old.  It’s what 
you call 
a formative experience.


Law

Like him, like our son is now, we were each 
already on the brink of something, 
and terrified.  That’s why we fell in love again 
after our veering journeys, quick and stubborn, then long.

It was purely coincidence. It was luck. It was love.
We were falling anyway, which we felt by the speed 
of our weight. We couldn’t see the distance down 
speeding towards us, but we were sure that we were gone.

Then there was a space of a certain shape.
And that shape was the one that wasn’t fear, wasn’t stupidity.
We didn’t have time for further discernment.

We seemed tame to one another, 
as important to grab as a branch.

 

27 October. Dreary.

When it finally stops out there with the fog and drizzle
towards the end of the week, the beauty will be over,
most of the leaves having fallen with their bright sides 
smacked to the mud. And when one day of sun
peels them apart and sends them off with the least 
suggestion of the air, where can they turn then, but back
upon themselves and back to ground, their vibrancies leaching,
their canvases swissed, then laced, then skeletalized 
under the traffic of squirrels and shoes and tires?

We will come inside for color: the warm yellow of the lamp,
the beef-colored beef au jus-ing on the once
white platter, the squash with its sliding pat of butter,
the bright kernels of corn, burgundy disks of beets.
This is the season for deciding to marry.
The outside world has abandoned us.
We can feel it growing colder, and we know about
the landscape to come, abstract and simplified by ice.
It’s another kind of beauty, a perfect kind of beauty.
It can’t quite include us.

 

Early Cinematography

                            The cinema is an invention without a future.                                           
                                                        —Louis Lumière
         
An elm by the side of the road.

An elm by the side of the road.

Was that a slight breeze 
Lifting some of the leaves?

A wagon, pulled by a horse,
Appears, but there’s been 
No approach to speak of;

A wagon has entered the picture
without a sound to signal it.
Nor can there be

Departure into distance
—O we have the will, 
But not a way to follow it.

Our focus is fixed.
An elm by the side of the road.
A disturbance in the leaves . . .

Is this on a loop, have we
Seen the whole thing?

Possibility is constant.

Wives of the Poets

Last week I told my class how Elinor Frost never forgave Robert
for little Elliot’s death. She thought he didn’t alert medics fast enough.
“Maybe he took the road with too much traffic,”
cracked a bearded, bespectacled young man,
“or got lost in the beauty of the woods.”
“How can you joke about them losing a child?”
accused a young woman with long earrings and boots,
and we launched into “Home Burial.”

Flip a shiny quarter and it’s either an eagle
flying away as fast as it can or a dead president
trying to look dignified despite the worms
under his wig. This week I tell them
Wallace Stevens said “A poet looks at the world
the way a man looks at a woman,” but he
and his wife, Elsie, lived in separate sections of their house
and he never wrote her a love poem.
“Thirteen ways of looking at a jackass,”
murmurs the young woman, arms and brows crossed,
and the young man replies, “I’ll bet he got tired of her
getting on his case when he just wanted to unwind
with a little Guitar Hero,” and I say, “We don’t know
much about his life, but . . .”

It’s fall semester and as the trees bare themselves, the students
cover up and take back all the promises of spring
as the hot kisses they’ve planted on each other
ice over, and I know that next week when I tell them about
Williams Carlos Williams cheating on his wife, Flossie, these two
will say, “So much depend upon you flirting with my roommate,”
and “Not ideas about the cheapskate but the cheapskate himself.”

Today you broke the garage door and said “I’m sorry.”
You let the laundry pile up, and you’re sorry.
Here I am airing our dirty laundry. I’m sorry,
you married a writer. All day I’ve planned my classes
and now I’m far away from you, lost in the woods of this poem,
which isn’t great or maybe even good, and I’m sorry
that literary biographers and classrooms in the future
probably won’t be discussing our marriage.
We’re a sorry couple and no longer young,
but flip a coin a hundred times, and fifty times you’ll forgive me,
and fifty times I’ll tell you there’s nothing to forgive.

 

Elegy/Litany

If I describe the wind as pickpocket subtle
or as a ghost running naked through our yard,
that’s called anemographia, but knowing this
won’t fill my pockets or scare off the ghosts
that haunt me when the hum of our refrigerator
wakes me up.  Having my office computer stolen
woke me up to the need to always back up
files but I’d rather move forward.  In the foreword
to a book on the Mayans, I read that our superstition
of tossing pennies into wells for good luck
has its origins in the Mayan custom of wedding virgins
to the spirit of the Well of Sacrifice.  Well.
At least I’m not a lost virgin ghost, unveiled
for some ugly well-spirit.  Last week at a $27/night hotel,
I stared at the “continental breakfast,”
one banana muffin covered by a cloud of gnats.
I grimaced and another hotel guest ate it, saying
“These bugs won’t hurt you.”  All week,
his bearded bug-eating face has haunted me.  
The fear of beards is called pogonophobia.
Knowing this won’t bring my laptop back
or make you love me any more.   This is an elegy
for my lost computer, but it’s also an ode
to the way you can mend me with a smile or a kiss.  
At Sewanee, I heard Robert Hass say all poems are either
laments, songs about ways to escape a power that can kill us,
or litanies, prayers to a power that can make us feel more alive,
and at the time I thought that was way too reductive,
but this poem is both, don’t you see?  It’s impossible
to put out a fire before it’s been set, impossible
to scan the hard drive of my mind and eliminate
the virus that threatens to kill my memory,
impossible to save those sacrificed Mayan virgins
or say the right thing every time.
Now I can shop for a new computer.  I can
become a Luddite.  I can toss myself down a well.
But all I want to do is tell you that every love song,
every romantic movie, makes me think of you,
and no matter which way the wind blows,
it will always carry me back to you.

 

At the Afterlife Bar and Grill

A glass falls and fills the clouds with shards,
a broken window with that old blue and green marble
on the other side, magnified so we almost think
we can go back. A kitten mewing in a woodpile.
A child lost on the street. A mother, panicked
at the police station, her lucky penny tossed
down the wrong well. We can’t do anything
but watch and maybe, finally, get to know
our neighbors. The world was Eden after all,
but after dark, before fire. We never could see
the great Godzilla, but something smelled awful
and our friends kept getting stepped on.
Over a drink, we remember cold nights that froze
our beards. Over another, we recall how sharing
a cigarette was the closest we got most nights to sharing
each other’s breath. The silliness of believing
that sleep and wakefulness were different states.
That I love you and fuck off were antonyms.
Our talk flows like the mighty Mississippi.
Alive, we could never find the right words,
blind dates who said they’d come right back but didn’t.
The barmaid’s an angel, and the low yowl of Mozart
and Mingus’s latest jam rises from the juke box
like a body from a tomb. Alive, I was a radio
that lost reception, I say. There were miracles
everywhere, I say, on earth as it is in heaven,
but my eyes were union workers on their lunch break.
These hot wings are miracles, but everything’s a miracle.
You say, let me tell you something in confidence.
Your voice climbs onto some ledge
that my ears can’t walk you off of.
You say I can’t handle all these miracles.
You drink until you fall down because
it’s way too much for your to stand.

 

(from) Annoyed Grunt

(Edna Krabappel)

Am I the worst teacher ever?
I will not waste chalk.

If I have the guts to leave the teaching profession and open that muffin store,
I will finish what I sta

What if the substitute is smarter and prettier than I am?
I will not yell “She’s Dead” during roll call.

If my husband had been a better husband or our marriage counselor had been a                                                                                                                          better
           marriage counselor or the two of them weren’t so cute together,
Cursive writing does not mean what I think it does.

What if I wrote letters to their doctors asking to excuse them from checkups?
I will not prescribe medication.

If I wear a short skirt to work, Will Seymour want to see more?
I will not conduct my own fire drills.

If Bryn Mawr College mostly just taught me to fake it in bed and in the classroom,
I will not belch the National Anthem.

Can’t they get their sex education at home?
I will not do that thing with my tongue.

What can I do for the child with bruises on his psyche but none on his arms?
I was not touched “there” by an angel.

If I smell chalk everywhere I go,
I am not Charlie Brown on acid.

If the students grow up to cheat on their taxes and their spouses the way they do                                                                                                               on their tests,
I will only provide a urine sample when asked.

Will they realize how under fire I feel, how one against thirty?
Over forty and single is not funny.

If I secretly root for the boy with ADD and against the twin girls with all the answers,
“March Madness” is not an excuse for missing school.

Do my students know how little I make?
I will not charge admission to the bathroom.

If I can write the perfect ending to the Never-Ending Story,
the world may end in 2012 but this show won’t.


(Italicized parts written on the blackboard by Bart Simpson at the beginning of various episodes)

 

(from) Annoyed Grunt

“Jihadist Homer,” an episode Fox was too chicken to air

(Lisa)

As the opening credits roll, Osama Bin Laden hides
behind our couch, his big eyeballs zig-zagging
like flies wary of the swatter.  Then I’m the fly
and Ralph Wiggum and Milhouse are the swatters.
It’s Valentine’s Day at Springfield Elementary,
and first Ralph stacks the Hallmarks on my desk,
“I choo-choo-choose you” superimposed on a train, for one.
Then the bell rings, and I run from Ralph right into Milhouse,
his lips cherry-chapsticked and puckered into a heart shape.

I run right past the school bus and Otto Mann’s “Catcha later
little chica” and duck into the new Springfield Islamic Center.
The women and men in there sit on opposite sides of the room
just like the kids on the school bus, but thse men
aren’t making obnoxious offers of chocolate and roses.
I buy a hijab and a Koran, thinking modesty will turn off
those pesky boys.  “I’ll be in my room,” I tell the family,
and when Dad comes up to summon me to dinner,

the holy book falls open to Surah 8, Verse 60
as reading glasses appear suddenly on his face:
“Prepare for them whatever force and cavalry you are capable of gathering
to strike terror
to strike terror into the hearts of the enemies of Allah and your enemies.”
I tell him that “Islam” means “Peace” and most American Muslims are good,
moderate, taxpaying citizens, but Dad says “Woo hoo” and something
about getting a Ramadan holiday from his job at the nuclear power plant
and he runs out to join a radical-bearded sect.  “Hmmm,” says Mom

when Dad’s new friends refuse the BLTs she offers
and put Dad up to offering her a chador as a Valentine’s Day present.
After dinner, Nelson taps on my bedroom window, and I let him in
because he reminds me of James Dean and because he’s carrying
a three-foot-tall stuffed Cupid.  He strips off my hijab, says “haw haw,”
and tickles me on my bed.  After one of Dad’s new friends happens by,
looking for “The Men’s Room,” they decide to stone me!
“Eat my shorts,” says Bart, and pulls down his pants,
revealing a Danish Mohammed cartoon stenciled on his boxers.

Dad strikes a deal:  we get spared and he agrees to suicide-bomb
Mayor Quimby’s office.  In the closing scene, Dad’s in the afterlife
with his fifty-seven virgins, and he sees why they’re still virgins.
It’s Crazy Cat Lady, our chain-smoking Aunt Selma, Lunchlady Doris,
Comic Book Guy’s twin sister, Ms. Albright the frigid Sunday School teacher,
and a bunch of others you don’t even want to know about.  Dad’s annoyed grunt
reverberates all over heaven and earth and the closing credits. 

Hedonism and Salt

Off to the side of
Things, all around the
Nimbus of the sun,

The vapor in your eyes
Called knowledge,
A containment—the body—

Undulating, drinking
A birth out of mud
Puddles, cutting things

Up with a knife, your
Many many glances,
The zipper preceding

These words, the fabric
Of tasting your skin,
Consciousness like a

Flashlight or pivot,
Breaking the stems, eating
In the direction

Of all vanishing
Points . . . You find yourself
Triangulating

Choice. The whipping winds
Are a slut. Thoughts spill
All over the body.

The gate bangs the neighbor-
Hood awake. Two, and one,
That back and forth (and

Forth), and two, then the one—
the sweat bees
Of arousal—glints of blond body

Hair—she smells like a burning
Sparkler . . . the narrative of
Feeling; the senses, the senses; the face.

 

North Carolina

For years the pine,
The sycamore,
Swayed over my

Right shoulder. The
Afterlife, leaves
Rustling, a bell

Someone near there
Kept ringing for
Dinner. First it

Thundered, then came
Smoke, boiling tunnels
Of white . . . It was

Because they burned
Those trees that ashes
Fell in summer

Once for over
A week. As they
Are again today.

It’s as if they’ve
Never stopped—ashes
Through the snowy

Season and on
Into spring. But this
Isn’t childhood.

 

Revival

The outdoors jags along—it shifts its idea
   of itself
Over the dishes, the stacks of books, interposes

With the fluidity of music, and consciousness—
    are you undressing
Before God, and country?

Furnishings, different in type, litter two porches.
   What’s most true
Won’t even sit, or watch; it’s devising a strategy

For decomposing your knees. Aesthetics is
   the invisible way the door’s
Pushed open, the air that constitutes everything

Rivering your skin—it’s also alive without asking . . .

 

“The Artistic Process”

The lard waits in its bucket. The cow.

I know . . .

Where you lived, where you drained from the valley.

One person at a time, like separating molars . . .

2 plus 2 is           [NOT] Five.

But you should see your face when the mountains start squeaking.

The sunlight. The frame the ponds make.

The many many buckets of milk.

You, with your identification with what the others can’t keep believing . . .

Crawling naked toward the open window

I swear your mind is a plastic adapter.

Komodo dragons, or memory, slips over and through the loose sand

(a last chicken flops around on the sidewalk)

Not founding, not stamping.

Pearls spilling, like groundwater dripping into a cave.

The table is set. It’s been that way for a year.

Her blood makes a halo of scales.

How white her white skin is in such night!

Now ignite the cut flowers.

 

The Bar

You know that small
Dome, cigarettes—
The church in heaven

Will be serving
Breakfast, with plenty
Of meat products.

Windex, double
Your bliss. Out the
Bay window. Your

Daughter is going
Into the military.
Jet engines clutter

Your sleep. A candle
Might burn all that mud.
Birds breeding on rocks, too

many mosquitoes. A few
Poems might do the
trick, written on

Paper, and torn,
Before and after
The wine, last summer . . .

Tropes for the Unsayable
               or
Shop of Lost Hopes
              or
Scent of Lilies—or Magnolias                   

the sparkle of thought
before it makes itself available

path of river on the map
of how it is between us

shreddy-edged uneven rectangle
                 white lace
no bigger than a handkerchief

love’s bloody straits
gone dry and stiff

the permanent denial 
of the boy Isaac

certainty’s dazzling embrace: 
closed systems’ glitter

                                                            —after Clarice Lispector

 

Great-Grandmother Comes to Me in a Dream

carrying sprigs of white and yellow wildflowers trailing
leaves                she is  perhaps eighteen      sunlight streams

onto hair fine red-brown     a few curls falling from blue ribbons 
trimmed with white             strides wide fields   years

before her  limbs open        bring out seven children
some of whom won’t grow             Lithe   light   

small bony feet restrained              by little boots made                         
            extravagance!              for this visit               Invitation
            
an undreamed of ornament                        So she comes 
            more than one-hundred-fifty versts       by train      farthest

she will ever be from Moscow       to this house             outside Tula      
Sofia Andreyevna’s house where  —  voices crossing one another 

laughing   —    they picked the flowers she is holding
Sofia Andreyevna                her mother’s friend seen last

before my ancestor’s womanhood came on                          wife now 
to an older man        he  writes books!          she cannot read        Russian         

At a table set out under trees         cucumbers in sour cream 
with crusty bread and cheese              borscht a chilled delicious

pleasure on the summer day         and ah  her friend’s fine welcome 
great house and pretty children                The man walking

with his secretary          book in hand        stops  breath             
she’d thought a writer   would be polished       

            like a city-man                      Though rough 
in countenance    he comes to greet her gently  and with warmth      

Servants bring the samovar            sweet tea as light fades
in the corner of the drawing room Sofia Andreyevna

favors             Flowers tumble from a blue enamel vase 
its edge a braid of gold                   and table dressed

with patterned cloth from far away  — the East      on the walls
            faces  distract            Her people          do not permit     

images               Sofia Andreyevna  has begun work
in a new science       making pictures she calls photographs      shows

children and Lev Nicolaevich on the steps of the house           
            and you can see the orchards  —  points —

weren’t yet  fully grown           In all directions  dark 
beyond tall windows           endless wood cut by paths

her husband likes to  walk with his dogs she says
glad of solitude and trees               birdcall          scents

of earth and growing things               Light  a pale smear 
on the sky      they show her  a bed under the vaults    

She lies alone in greeny light      In years to come 
she’ll dream the older couple’s marriage    its ease      

and golden plates and serving people      beautiful children
vast reaches of forest           ponds with reedy edges

fine for bathing         green wood a comforting enclosure    
Winter nights she will remember              Sofia Andreyevna

and her man in summer evening light          hips touching
on the red silk sofa          his fine eyes      her eloquence

in French and Russian                     words in German
an accomplishment       She will lie in bed

and hope for plenty             if not riches like her friend’s
a good man to share her bed          though she can’t know

how men and women are together           how daily lives  burn
and brim with grief and laughter     Simple girl    she has no idea                 

what love is               One day she will make milk for babies 
she has given birth to and for orphaned others       she                        

imagines none of this          and cannot imagine             me       
in a faraway country                        at ease in my difficult language

centuries having turned                  and turned again
nor does she understand    how germ cells      wrapped in helical embraces

bearing gait and eye-shape        hers and mine         will spill
       down and down and down through unimagined time

 

Forgiveness, an Abstract

suffering wrong

 

          suffering

wrong

 

                                      atonement

 

                   moral anger
resentment

          vengefulness

 

                                      hurt

          rage

 

trust
          distrust                           mistrust

 

forgiveness
          unilateral
          unconditional
          conditional
          partial

 

                   dismay
                   diminishment

fury
         

 

despair

 

          dejection
discouragement
disheartenment

                             disillusion
                   dissolution

 

loss of heart
loss of hope

 

                             loss

          wounds

 

over time
          feelings over time like water
                             feelings over time
          like water

 

                                      
                                      accident

          attack
          misuse
          abuse
          injury

 

                                      wounds

apology
forgiveness



                   forgiveness

 

          reciprocity
          reconciliation
          reparation
          repentance
          responsibility
          restitution
          reconsideration
          reconstitution
          restoration

                             retribution

 

                   burden

 

          sympathy
          imaginative indwelling

 

apology

 

          truth
                   trust

 

ressentiment

 

          offerings

                   amends

 

moral transformation
          
                   moral weight

 

          burden

 

burden

          GUILT

 

violation

                             INTENTION

         

          degradation
          depredation

 

wrongdoing

 

          acceptance   
                   apology 

  alteration

 

         

              redemption

                                                        Much of the language is from “A Sorry Business,”
                                                        Charles L. Griswold’s Review of Resentment’s Virtue,                                                         Thomas Brudholm, I Was Wrong, Nick Smith, and 
                                                        Making Amends,  Linda Radzik TLS  (January 7, 2011,                                                         28)                                               

                                                        [ressentiment: undoing of the past: the translation is                                                         Griswold’s]

 

Souk, Akko

As roads in all the world are torqued and bent 
by the terrain and habits of the living 
the souk descends from markets under scanty trees, 
shelter from the desert, cool and windless, 
and enclosed.  Stone-lined avenues meander west,
drawn toward the inland sea, or east to Mecca.
Heaps of apricots and dates on trays 
of hammered copper, woven cotton draped
from lines and folded, complex patterns
and geometries like antiphon to the abayah.  
Drifts of scent lift from piles of oranges and figs,
pomegranates, dates, bananas.  Flourishes 
of local stone stud silver ornament 
and hand-worked gold.  Sharp as circumflex 
a turn before the mosque's façade: stones wet 
with the day's scrubbing, and narrow streets 
beyond choked here and there by bales of hay, 
sacks of pistachios, arrays of fresh-caught fish. 
Time’s harmonics tremble in the souk’s dry air
that moves like a river, gathering the living, traces
of the sacred and profane, and in the wake, shapes,
oxbows and arabesques, wide and slow and flexed.

Requiem for the Girl with Sparrow Wings for a Heart

What was taken from her then 
was a treasure heart-shaped 
with a pulse slowing to stillness. 

Her grief was a scythe swung hard
by a seasoned reaper.  All the green 
things mown down months ahead

of the harvest moon, all the bright 
songbirds chased from her garden.  
It’s true she wallowed then,

there in the stubble and the ruin,
until she stumbled on the sparrow’s wings, 
sliced thin from the blade-struck body.

She feasted on feather and brittle bone, 
her new and well-protected plunder,
and she learned to love her place,

scratching through piles of leaves 
and twigs outside the windows 
of a home that once belonged to her. 

 

This is Not my Body, This Body That Refuses

If I say the cage was gilded,
is that too much to believe?

            It’s true, she kept a court
            of candied angels with her there.

Halos of honey gone to crystals,
they burned my tongue.

            She spoke with a feathery voice,
            a throat full of tacks gone tarnished.

My keeper fed me nectar
spiked with drowsing drugs.

            It’s true, she drank with the thirst
            of a deer in a drought month.

If I say the chimes were hypnotic,
is that too meek of me?

            The chimes were of silver laced
            through with venom and dew.

My body, my traitor, turned 
to the sound and crumbled.

            Truly, it wasn’t her mind that faltered,
            but only her crooked spine that refused.

 

The Wife Who Wanders Explains Her Actions

Fear not, my love,
when I wander
from the comfort
of our warm bed.

I have only gone
to the garden’s edge
where the icy river meets
the crumbling wall.

I go there to build
a makeshift shrine
to the moon lighting
the splintered ruins.

See, I’ve taken
the peacock feather
and the glass umbrella,
your father’s weathered

fishing lures, the paper
moth, your watch.
We must protect
what we have built

from freeze and flood,
the fire yet to come. 
My duty and my right, 
this worry, this looking after.

Opening the dark

Darkness of earth covered by concrete for sixty years, old rebar
rusting where its fiery molecules had been exposed,

ringlets of dried algae on the top side where the stream ran,
sparkling as water does, even where rains flush oily streets.

Water will sparkle in this ditch again when the project’s done,
centering down its valley new-engineered to cut the flood threat.

Square by square they pour the new concrete bed, form new brick-textured walls;
alternate universe be damned, the old stone-and-block stream-wall’s gone.

Music muddles construction clunk, though earplugs would do more.
Nosing its open jaw around the rubble, the power shovel

clatters against chunks of old slab, stabbing them, its mouth-fist prepping 
rows of mixed debris for the line of dump trucks waiting to back in.

Flickering in its first light in years, the blind dirt quivers, thrashes,
bellows as loudly as it can, Free at last!—then thuds where it goes.

 

Red Sea Resort

Lording it over waiters and staff can come easy if you are
bold and guilt-free. In a way, they expect it, since you’re here and can
afford it, which is impossible for them, who are luckily 
old hands by now at answering strangers’ becks and calls. If they had
sought other work, they didn’t get it, or didn’t keep it. Had you
gone to any hotel in this string of resorts, you’d see the same
bought labor toughing it out in the heat, which after all is theirs:
possession impossible to ignore! In this, their women give
birth, in this they wave and joke, their boys play ball, in this they pray. These
resorts exist because of demand; wealth comes here to swim or for
courtly-style honeymoons, decadence so soothing, young couples all
mirthful, mostly ignoring the old marrieds whose depression we 
spied as soon as we walked in the dining room. For some their love has
died, which you hate to see, because they bark at the staff so harshly.

El Gouna, 2010

 

Night

Love as multiple-choice quiz: it’s all the above, choose D.
Shoreline inexact? Nothing’s indistinct about slapping surf,
shoving worse than in high school’s hallways, clipboards clutched like shields,
more impolite than that, yanking you, throwing you down,
sand in your swimsuit, hair, bouncing you on waiting bedrock,
near enough drowning you you might resolve to not come back.
Handsome and tall as you, you try again anyway. Still D.
Hearing echoes you step with a lighter tread, hope for what you want.
Black, some shade of black, around her eyes draws you to them, that’s her plan.
Snuggling smears it, a quote-catastrophe (wasn’t a disaster).
Back at your place you craft a mood to prime her so she’ll set her spell.
Ruggedly handsome, check. Suave odor, check. The tide’s coming your way,
face-first, and those lips, my god, have you ever seen such lips as these?
Place everything on red. The spinning earth’s wheel’s slowing. D. 


Dolphins, the Scientists are Discussing Your Enormous Brains

They break out champagne in the break room, in the lab, in the streets
they are talking you up at all the parties. 

But, I’ve never seen you 
in the library after hours when I am shuffling through the awful cement maze,

never witnessed a dolphin tending the wounded at an accident.
Bring me the one you call, Dr. Dolphin. 

Outside my childhood home was a decrepit barn 
where the floor rotted in and all our rain corralled there. 

In the grotto, you could see yourself, the barn 
all upside down, broken in. 

This is my world to you—
vandalized, nails jutting one odd direction or another? 

A child points to the horizon where one of your kind clears a fiery ring  
while Johnny Cash plays his best despite being entombed in a small town in Tennessee.

At the great conferences of the world, the scientists have forgotten themselves
in furious debate over your frontal cortex. 

They worry you will come to worship data as we do 
while your beak’s stuck in some plastic bottling.

Meaning, in the heat of love, we may forget to love.  
There are reasons to fear what is tender.

 

Epistle Written in the Shadow of a Metal-Mache Horse

The poems discolored my life also, Frank.  Honest.  And now 
these friends, this scrap iron horse is all I have to show.  
I’m proud, Frank.  Tired, Frank.  My father’s house is a frame 
whose functions I hear but can’t accurately interpret.  
Sarah dated a skinny goat by your same name then broke his heart—
banging a fifty-year-old plumber while he
passed out on a pile of coats.  He was one of the good ones, Frank 
so buy him a scotch at the next convention.  
Sarah was beautiful in a way that’s hard to forget
which was all I asked for for my birthday and got it
buried myself in another woman in Maine.  Then the poems
dissipated all that into an afternoon of dusks, and it was 2007.
I had tape on my fingers and glue in my hair.  Mangled innards
of a shoe.  Many hopeful impressions of you.  Let’s go back
to your image of a mesa and your unwritten novel of Sancho Panza’s
exploration of the Mexican West.  Why did you bring me here?
Sancho asks.  To have a heart is to risk it.  To forge ahead, to live alone.  
To go up as fire you must be frightfully burdened
and more human than anything.

 

Poem for My Thirty-Seven Mistresses

Poor, dirty, and wretched, living in a city full of crumbling ceilings
is no way to spend your early twenties.  
I’m prepared to test an ordinary existence.  To grow basil or sage.  
To cultivate hobbies into age the way a sailor might carry 
a compass even after it shatters.  You arrived at this earlier.
Brewed sweet tea, baked biscuits while I shaved my head 
in pursuit of black-haired dervishes.  Lean, angular women fit for wit 
and worship, not Sunday afternoon at the store
and so I spent it by myself writing bizarre fanfiction where Pikachu suffers from pica
and the whole crew learns a valuable lesson about the dangers of ingesting 
                                                                                                       paint chips.
I keep my soap in a bag, my books in boxes; hide in the bathroom 
and run water just to blot out my thoughts.  Skin stained 
from washing, a halo of epidermal products above, and I conceived all I wanted 
was Illinois.  Like my cousins who marry young 
separate old and behind the high school the wind blows 
new women into town.  But, Robert, I’m a fool 
for the stars who go down.  My pillow’s a face 
I don’t remember.  You’re looking at the last Soviet superman
eating a bowl of granola. 

RIP

This white cotton shirt
Needs a needle

Two teeth in my jaw
Need
Some novocaine

Three thoughts
Up in a corner 
Of my skull
Need a day or two of sleep

Four
Of my friends
Are in jail
Their scribbled letters keep repeating
I need drugs

Someone is lying
But my lie works best
Stare out the window
And count the thorns
On the frozen rose bush

That’s
The exact number 
Of rose blossoms
To appear 
In the entire month of May
Keep waiting

 

Same Light

Same 
Day

Made the dog
Jump at the hearse

Made 
The holy water 
Hiss
As it boiled against the incense

Made the letters
On the granite tablet
Identical to my name 
Blind
Both my brown eyes

 

Drinking

Apple wine
From a peanut butter jar

I watch a gust
Of apple blossom petals
Pink to red

Flutter into
Brown furrows
Of a small field
I just roto-tilled

I don’t usually 
Think about
Or see much
Of the interior
Of my skull

Here’s a good photo
Of the inside
Of my brain
With its furrows
With its pink & red colors
With its worms crawling just below the surface

 

My Father Had Just Showed Me

a handmade mud-stained string rosary
 he found at a work site

for the new house he was building
 in South Omaha

and my mother had just snipped off 
 a Betty Crocker coupon

from a box of Bisquick for
 “A new set of silver”   I looked

for the first time at my birthday present
 a shaky Boy Scout compass

which I carried to each room on
 both floors of that house

looking out every window
 to learn Saint Cecilia’s Cathedral

lay to the east and the University
 to the west   Since I loved puzzles

I turned the compass over slowly
 to see what was on the other side

 

This Black & White Photo

Of me as an 8-year old child gnawing 
  on  a lemon rind

I remember it well because I stole
  the drink from a table

with that lemon slice inside of it
  Vodka or Gin

A wedding Reception at the Sokol
  In South Omaha

I remember how my knees buckled
  And my head spun

But I didn’t say a word or even look
  Right or left

I had more silence inside me
  Than ever before

I sat calmly in a chair and looked
  At the pretty girls

I was getting ready for high school
  All I needed

Was an indecipherable calculus book
  And the phone numbers

Of several beautiful accomplices
  All with blonde hair

And nothing to do on Friday nights

Watching the Live Fort Hood Memorial at Aspen Dental

Among the poorly hung TV, the drab pastels and wrapped gauze
            inside our mouths, all of us watch: boots strung together
on each pedestal, horns playing as Taps disintegrates into memory,
            while backgrounds and collective thoughts dissipate like hums
of drills and machines, finally clicking off down the halls. I have never
            fired a real gun, but plugged seven white rabbits with pellets 
and blew heads off robins near the birdfeeder years ago, tied legs 
            and flung each mass into woods behind the birch trees. 
I’ve been here an hour already. The waiting room reeks of unwashed hair
            and unbathed children, while the cold, unrelenting, attacks skin,
the spreading, splotched red on my face. I know when it gets worse 
            they’ll stare even more, wide-eyed kids sucking crayons 
and fingers, unblinking. But I had fluoride when I was young, a mother
            who chose sugarless gum, and still can picture Wade Whitehouse
in Affliction, finally wrenching his tooth out with pliers. All of us
            surrounded by teeth, X-rays of cavities and inflamed gums, 
of gleaming white. There’s beauty in the commercial of a bullet
            entering a glass bottle’s lip before it shatters the bottom
like a thousand stars, unlike the round through our teeth—fragments
            we hope identify us someday—undaunted by the care we took.

 

Dear Sickness

            Thomas Mortimer IV Left Note at Crime Scene . . .

Before Thomas Mortimer stabs and bludgeons 
            his family, we watch Saw, Irreversible, Traces of Death—
                        a concocted horror trilogy back-to-back—

effects magic and makeup, poorly lit scenes, 
            delayed head-splits and body-sized, gunshot gashes, 
                        and we stare, rewind, stuff popcorn

into our mouths before cautiously nearing the end
            of the bag, knowing our enamel gets weaker every day, 
                        that one thick kernel can split a molar, strike its nerve.

My nightmare lately has been of myself as a boy 
            in my father’s car, stopped to help Mortimer’s 
                        white jeep, staring at the jack inching up the frame,

my father twisting the lug wrench, fingers tapping
            as Mortimer watches, wonders if my father recognizes
                        his face, the license plate. I am looking—face pressed

against back-seat glass, breath fogging—wiping away
            to see him tighten the last. It ends with images of you, 
                        his daughter—as he covers her eyes before the slice

with a kitchen knife—and luckily those, your eyes, 
            are masked while you sleep now, blurring into his daughter
                        by the end, with my eyes, a boy’s eyes, imagining

you already gone, the white jeep before we drive off, 
            my father saying nothing, and right before I wake, 
                        I pray for white light ahead not to burn us alive.

 

Come Home to Me

After the kiss on my cheek each morning, 
            I haven’t told you I can’t fall asleep

when it’s over—always some problem 
            with my imagination. Come home to me.

It could be the woman who has a stroke 
            in the middle of her craniotomy,

her left hand shooting up to wrench 
            your neck, your footing lost, back

of your head slammed against the cold floor. 
            Come home to me. The construction constant

around our city: operator drunk, you singing 
            God-awful music from a disc I burned you

earlier, excavator’s claw bound to smash 
            the windshield, sweep across your body.

Too many movies, and more being made, 
            of lost love, old men regretting their lives

of mistreatment and alcohol abuse. Always
            those components. Always an ending

with no redemption. Come home to me. 
            And the scene in a liquor store: our fingers

tapping wine bottles before his ski mask 
            and bat in hand. My nightmare in this world

is bound to happen. I rush him and scream 
            for you to run. The last thing I see is the back

of your head, slow-motion curls bouncing 
            for one utopian second—Come home to me—

before the bat hits my skull, as I remember
            every detail, and never fall asleep again. 

Shadow Ode

My boys holler from the Pensacola sands—I spy
a dragon, a ninja, a t-rex with a chain saw!
It's not cloud shapes they see, but blobs of oil,
staining tar balls stuck like toothpaste
to their feet. Our first vacation day, I swear,
it rained oil—the van, the floor mats stained. 
But we didn't cancel. We arrived, and stayed dry,
and curbed our expectations. We stormed 
the beach with inflatable sharks and pirate's life
boogie boards, pioneers smaller than our shadows.
We ate the oysters and worried later, keeping watch
on the oil spill live-streaming while engineers 
wagered with their snake oil fixes. In the background,
a counter tallying gallons spilled—enough
to fill ten Superdomes and umpteen city blocks. 
Another Katrina, a split-screen catastrophe—oil,
and the two-toned grasses of Plaquemines, 
or shrimp boats towing boom instead of nets.
The clean up crews point out dolphins 
but aren't allowed to speak to us. At dawn 
the sand is sand again. Sand raked with tire tracks.
I keep quiet about what I spy, dead fish and shadows
in the surf, one scoop with the plastic shovel
that reveals oil in layers, like the rings of a tree.
News trucks and camera crews hunt photo ops
up and down the beach. They never leave.
I won't look their way, but another mother runs
after her baby in a ruffled suit kicking toes
in the greasy surf. Their splashing brings to mind
oiled birds thrashing, waiting for relief,
and oiled turtles recuperating at Audubon Zoo.
After Katrina we lined up there on reopening day,
camera ready, and shadowed by the press. 
It was the day after Thanksgiving, and me still numb,
grieving like an animal with eyes that looked 
nowhere. My boys were toddlers in a wagon then,
clapping their arms open and shut to make alligator shadows. 

 

Foosball, Shania, and Thou

Honey, call me bear and I’ll climb you
in the shelter of the walking oak, booze you
with blueberry wine stewed summerlong
in the crawlspace beneath the porch.
Hand fishing summer, summer of perfecting
carnival strength so to win a monster teddy
at the fair. Stalled van with the sofa seats,
bells and blue glass chimes in the trees—please.
Sit by me on a milk crate bench
like at the drive-in, our movie the moon
shrouded in fog, or grackles that trespass
autumn grasses like a scene from a Chinatown fan.
My old life torched in the burn pile, baby,
that’s how much I’ll mend my ways.
Them hawks above the stinking ditch,
stray dragging muddy teats—safe.
I don’t shoot because of you. Look at me—
off my game, writing a poem a day. I won’t ask 
anymore for you to scout while I drag race.

 

Joy Ride on the Gretna Ferry

In summer we are all alike—
storm wary and reckless for a breeze.

Bikes and cars on the lower decks, pedestrians above.

A procession of the good people of my world, 
murder capital of the world.

Mismatched office ladies who will scatter
into the mirrored office buildings downtown, 
waiters trailing apron strings, street dancers
stomping bottle cap taps in their shoes.

My sons follow suit, beg me down to the lower deck, 
and so we go, and they go straight to the edge.

They could fall in. They could chip a tooth,
but rather they offer gum wrappers 
from the bottom of my purse to the water, to the wind.

Dizzy when the boat moves—looking forward, 
pulled back to school days I made this trip with my mother
not for a joy ride, but because we missed the bus.

She’d get us as far as Jackson Avenue then transfer
and leave us as wards of a bus driver who could care less.

I smeared my name, circled it with a heart 
in the grease spot on the window, mistrustful of street signs
and others’ directions, and thus eternally disoriented
by landmarks creeping up over the wrong shoulder.

The levees rimming the Mississippi hide everything—
of churches, only the steeples remain.
City of crosses and skulls, of teddy bears and bouquets
along fences to remind that some have fallen, some floated away.

I think I hear cathedral bells, or sirens, or else my sons
in their musical shoes. Life jackets everywhere, 
a bright orange wall of bricks.

 

Raw Oysters with My Rock Star Husband

Last call unless you’re with the band, 
and since I sometimes write his songs
there’s room for me at the bar,
an extra chair for the guitar. 

Oil spill on the news, forecast of the flow.  
A growing list of fishing places closed.
An oysterman’s lament—one last day 
in the boat for a goodbye to the Gulf Coast. 

Our long goodbye begins with what could be 
the last taste for years. We get to work. 
One dozen on the half shell with two beers.
We tap the shells together. Cheers.

Post

                from London with 103 fever to my father, 
                APO HE 09342, Baghdad

All the Kurdistan honey you sent me—
I drizzled into sour-mash whiskey, suspending
mid-glass in viscous curls. A girl 
from Tennessee drinks Tennessee 
whiskey, the pubtender quibs, unfolding
a white napkin before me. 
                                           —Do you like your country

                                    ~

music, too? Fever, self-medication: four shots 
& then sprawled in my hotel bed, watching crime
shows, Scotland Yard murder while dozing 
in & out. A hive of dreams: the fire like honey
clinging. It doesn’t burn that way, you say. 
It overruns everything. Pneumonia: the diagnosis. 
Why didn’t I go sooner?—the doctor muses,

Your American insurance

                                    ~

I’m obliged to trouble with? I take the pills,
swallow them whole: pink
bullets. Sometimes, you hear explosions,

you say, as far away it seems as stars, 
                                                               & as bantam. 
You’re asked to know a country 
by its fingerprints & therefore, its criminal action
only. In the lab, the a/c smells sweet,
the coolant resists dissolution,

                                    ~

dripping. On the television, the boom & sibilance 
of the old year on Trafalgar receding—
into the dream of you as the faceless keeper 
approaching with fire, the smoke to lull
the bees that fall soundlessly 
                                                having eaten

from all fruits, following the design—

 

Automaton: The Flute Player, 1738

            Jacques de Vaucauson, inventor

Twelve songs to prove his faculty, nine
            bellows to create & three pipes
                        to carry wind to the oral cavity

where a thin tongue controls
            the release across the riser, enlivening
                        the shaft with vibration while the fingers,

padded in leather, piston their combinations 
            on the keys—the rhythm, perfunctory—
                        & the notes unwavering in intonation

remain unblemished by innervation, 
            even as the lips, smooth & wooden, 
                        narrow toward a higher pitch.

 

Automaton: Francine, 1649

                allegedly created & named by Descartes
                after his deceased daughter

Uncarved, the fingers. Their delineation 
in simple brushstrokes, black.

                                                Her mouth
open. Her name, Francine. Daughter. With creation 
always the chagrin from imperfection—

effigy’s insensate rigor. Descartes, traveling
for the last time to Sweden, lugs the heavy box 
aboard. 
              Inside the girl sleeps & does not

sleep, as the dead do. In months, his lungs
will bellow fluid & collapse. The ship rocks.

The head swivels, ball in socket. Endemic 
or given, the mind winds down, clockwork ticking.

 

Bertillon: Three Measurements

                In 1883, Alphonse Bertillon devised a system for criminal 
                identification called “Bertillonage.” In total, ten measurements
                of the suspect’s body were recorded at the time of incarceration.

      Bust

not heads or genitalia legs or hands
but more torsos survive
from classical architecture so much
defending a territory
& drawing the opposite sex
in the lek arena depends on chest
puffing one’s appearance of being larger than
     the self some men

                        ~

breathe in to fool the measurements
mistaking hollowness
for girth they are one the statues
of sturdy marble solid muscle
of stone & permanent grace even
in pieces abdomen joining back
buttocks & pectoralis with organs
& heart the achene uncarved
inside the dormant germ still surviving
fugitive sharing the body
     of our ideals

 

     Length and width of the head

a bowl which we carry with no hands
a dark wine

of thought rippling with each step
some men spill

stain some men overflow 
the acts of men are difficult  to understand

the bread entering us becoming body
in the mind

the wine the blood the deed transfiguring
into guilt

other men have no faith
in the law some men act

on passion
the larger the brain

the more intelligent the animal
some need proof

of their humanity
through punishment 

Cumberland Gap

I first realized I was evaporating
when I was twelve, having heard

for the first time the word embarcadero,
from some boy leafing through a battered copy

of a triple A road atlas tucked onto a shelf,
one volume in the series of books of maps

that had for a long time comprised
the section of the library devoted to geography.

It was a place, but not in any real sense
except the one I’d guessed at, the exotic newness

of a word that finished with a vowel, and if I,
in the library of a worn-out-already rural school,

created in my mind a picture that could be called
a fair approximation of the place as it existed,

the long line of the esplanade falling off
into the distances, perhaps the fine grey of

the Pacific reaching through the uncertainty of fog,
and then at night, the book of maps now left

open on a table, I could create the bustle
of a group of stars that never were. I’d be called

lucky, or just dead wrong, and for a moment,
motionless, I’d be clearly drawn to scale upon the page

with just the clarity that I had hoped for, not knowing
the fruitlessness of having clarity among one’s hopes.

When the librarian called my name my name
was made into a kind of spell, dispersing everything

I could identify or claim as being part
of one certain, undisputed me, the long walk

down the hall as she held my hand, deferring
every question I might ask until a later time,

and I remember the bright red dust of dried-up clay
that swung in liquid looking rivulets as I sat

in the parking lot and waited for my father’s Chevy to appear,
knowing only that someone was dying, thinking only

of the word embarcadero, any place other than the place
I was forced to occupy in time and space, any name

of any town that’s weight could be abandoned
with enough repeating, and giving up at last, the last

of the other children gone, hearing in my father’s voice
his philosophy of living, always buy a Chevy, son,

those goddamn Fords are designed for obsolescence,
the plan, see, is in five years it’ll break down

and you’ll have to buy another, and I asked if it was like
the broken bicycle he’d bought for me that we’d repaired

one piece at a time until it worked, how when
we screwed the last bolt onto the new sprocket

the old bike was no longer there, everything replaced,
the broken pieces set aside and what did it mean,

and his face, which I remember over everything, lined
with a map-like certainty of shame because he had no answer,

offered none, and then the tracks of the Chevy’s tires
turned up the dust again, the pine trees bright and luminous

with their late spring blanketing of pollen underneath
the unreal quality of light in which we lived, until I climbed

into the seat beside him, that rag he had
by then begun to cough into
already resting on his knee.

 

Songs in Planck Time

I rank first among all things
the new pine board

my father and I nailed
into the half collapsing dock

that lurched out back then
when I was young

into the brackish end of the Mattaponi.
I seem to recall something obvious

about the way that one board
was devoid of natural qualities, was

out of place and undeveloped in time, was
as yet unweathered as was I, the reverse

of which is mere endurance, an impotent
going on; so add it to the list

of things that I am not, if something must
be done with it:

not the prince of any
even minor island. Not

and won’t be the hero of anybody’s story
but my own, if that. Not

the ripple moving outward, not
the flat of the oar that slapped the water,

not the sound it made that drove
every bird from every branch at once, not

the sky they darkened with
their flight. Not

my memory of you still on that long
walk to the end of the dock,

jumping over every missing timber
as if it might make a bit of difference when

you spread out your arms and paused, then
finally fell into the water. Not

even briefly any father’s son, not any
song we haven’t heard before.

 

The Torch and Pitchfork Blues

Whoever picks up the last of the thrown jacks
while the ball still bounces off the pavement
and hangs suspended in the kicked up playground dust
must also retrieve the history of the ground
where it will land. There are rules. Tell us,
boy, called out on eenie, if you
have guessed them yet. Before there was
brushed nickel there was iron, before
Tommy Dunlap was pushed idly from the bus
into that busy intersection, there was
a plenitude of grief already. Measured
against all that, a single incident recedes
into no biggie, just a memory that will help
to make his fourth grade classmates cautious,
for a time at least, until they can no longer take
the weight of that third and fourth look down the street
when crossing into any kind of danger.
It doesn’t matter, can’t, and even if the impact
of that moment could be measured, we cannot say
with any certainty that Sara Albertson,
ten years after, could have resisted
making dainty track-marks in the crook
of her elbow, between her toes, and I have heard,
when it was at its worst, into her eyes.

Who could have known, of the children
gathered in a circle, picking for a game of jacks,
that the ground on which they walked
had once been furrowed by a group of,
well, you know whos. Who among them
could have known? Well, really, any,
had they been even half aware in class,
had they opened up their textbooks once,
had they heard their fathers say, if them
niggers keep comin’ we’re leavin’.

Without the plans for the school, now buried
in the county zoning office basement,
or some historical artifact that would give
the layout of the old plantation, it would be difficult
to say for sure if the fence they crawled under to escape
had been over by the baseball field
or by the lower meadow where the kindergarteners
played that game in gym with a parachute and tennis ball,
the children’s arms just barely strong enough
to send it lofting into the blue sky, and them too young
to know not to look directly at it, yellow and hanging
as if by magic, blinding as it reached the apex
of its flight. By Christmas break they would perfect
their method, the whole game now brought indoors,
the children trained to never look again.
You might say they failed to learn the only lesson
any one of them would have ever needed since: that if
anything on earth has earned the right to be observed
it is a thing of beauty while in flight.
You might say. You might say. You might.

 

The Abhorrence of Coincidence

Look, out there
that goddamned lame horse
kicks up just the most recent of
the newly dusted snow,

which forms into a pattern,
a small ellipsis underneath
the lightening-split dogwood tree
you tried to mend
with wood glue, bandages,
and a spool of rusty bailing wire,

the end result of which
was nothing more than a dead tree
adorned with the trappings
of some god-awful human injury.

You are out back by the barn now,
hammering nails into
eighty dollars worth of shoes
for that damn horse
you said we shouldn’t kill,

and I tap my finger on the window,
and see myself mirrored in
the nails you drove already,
and in the manner of the impertinent roan
who ran in circles in the snow
this afternoon and made
the dirt turn up, who turned
the snow a little brown, the one
you always lectured me about
never trying to ride.

I remember when we had
no horse, no pasture
in which it could trample earth
into a name, or if not a name
something which would instigate
my thinking on the time
I said your name

over and over again
as if it might be made
into a kind of destiny,
a destiny of saying, and being
said, and by me, as if
a pale ellipsis could of its own accord
resist its being covered
by a lame horse turning up
the dirt a little more,

and so I write your name now
in the breath I’ve left against
the glass, the need for tapping
gone, the surprise long passed
from your saying in the night
not names but something else,
not destiny but, Hell, if I was anywhere
but here I’d be just as much in love
with someone else,

and so I breathe again
and cover up
your name,
for I am not anywhere,
and I am not else.

Ode to Moving Targets

He drinks milk when it’s offered. He sleeps enclosed
by wood. The couch and stairs and water are not yet those

things. They are blur and want-to-touch. He always thought the way
stars know us was wrong and that raccoon always scurried

onto someone else’s roof, but this morning the bees draw
his attention. They buzz and you buzz. He sees

the handsome beads of jade, a cup on a counter edge,
a quarter coming to rest after spinning. He sees a monument

or hands that reach deep into the future’s neck 
to pull out vein and cord. Sixty years ago sparrows built

under this bridge, their muddy  nests clinging to the timbers. 
The bellows of wings pried open the wind and in the stagnant

water below, a blur of brown baskets. A reflection can never be 
precise enough to make decisions by: one whorl transferring

energy from the center throws the whole thing out of whack, 
but we depend on likeness all the same. If there is certainty

in the chambered nautilus or the armadillo, it’s lost
to constant renderings. Believe the outlines you can feel,

the margins that slip against the fingertips, not the signs
that vanish when you choose to close your eyes.

It’s like imagining disease: coal dust settles densely
in a young man’s lungs, time-bombs, disruptions

marking him invisibly from the inside, corrosion starting
from the center out, so that only more injury can reveal

that damage has already been done. His job now is to stand 
utterly still, absorb shock, and pretend

he might catch up with decay’s head start. He’s been drinking 
the milk. He’s been sleeping. He is already dying meat.

 

On Decorum

I was taught to arrive at consequences 
from the underside, ready to pay the

toll price piper cost.

There was to be no nicotine

sullying staining haunting ruining

the jacket’s lining, 
and the rest of the afternoon 
was to be smooth with the muscle 
of iridescent fish

flopping shivering shining dying

across the butcher’s ice tray, 
while a graveyard

yawned beckoned lay

in the distance, its stones
like teeth—elegant but useless
as a debutante’s organza gown
or her hapless pearls. Know

understand believe trust

each throat closes in the presence
of the dead.

 

Meditation on the Elements: Simultaneity

                                                           These days are a great blessing to men on earth; but                                                      the rest are changeable, luckless, and bring nothing.                                                      Everyone praises a different day but few know their nature.
                                                                                              –Hesiod, Works and Days

                        <Au>

Don’t ask how the gods and mortal men sprang 
from one source, because there are school buses
and lemon sharks and bananas, all gold enough
to blind you. You walk through a field of daffodils
on that cool day that feels warm after months
of ice, of thick mittens and hats that muffle sound.
With all the layers, we refuse to yield. No sign
is bright enough to warn: something’s crossing
against the amber light, and let it be cowardice,
or a reign of bees, or the feel of fresh butter
in your mouth. Turn back: And they lived like gods
without sorrow of heart, remote and free from toil 
and grief, if that’s possible, though it must be.
Somewhere. Not here. Here’s a marigold flaming
from the ground like a rivet. Here’s a reflection
of the sun magnified in an ordinary puddle,
the kind a kid jumps across wearing a slicker
and boots after a quick storm. Here’s an omelet
sputtering on the stove, and ears of corn pushing
against the wind. Across the street, a hearse idles.
The mourners glance down to check their watches.
If only things were simple. When they died,
it was as though they were overcome with sleep, 
and they had all good things; for the fruitful earth
unforced bare them fruit abundantly and without stint.
Simplicity’s for angels and dogs, not some schmuck 
running for a taxi, cheese sandwich spoiling
in his briefcase. Not much is easy and even less
makes sense. We can’t explain our system of error
and compromise. We know what turns the skin
gold and we can fix flats and prices, then sell high,

                        <Ag>

though it’s less noble by far. It was like the golden race 
neither in body nor in spirit. A child was brought up
at his good mother's side an hundred years, an utter 
simpleton, playing childishly with Botox, latex,
the substances of pleasure bought on credit. Many 
pregnant mares urinated to soften the effects 
of time. We can replace other kinds of plumbing
with plastics, shiny chrome fixtures that turn
on a dime, and on the bulletin board signs appear:
Lost Keys! Lost Cat! Lost youth is not so far
behind, when the brain tells you there are ways
to ease from behind the wheel of a trip no one wants
to take. You could arrive to find a friend 
in his own home.  But when they were full grown 
and were come to the full measure of their prime, 
they lived only a little time in sorrow because of their
foolishness, unless the story’s end is its beginning,
a commencement attended by dolphins and whales,
things with tails and fins, sleek grey shapes
whittling through time against a backdrop of tongues.
There’s not enough time in the world to make up
for what’s been missed, but we try and try: for 
they could not keep from sinning and from wronging
one another, nor would they serve the immortals, nor
sacrifice on the holy altars of the blessed ones
as it is right for men to do wherever they dwell,
unless they dwell too long on surfaces, the glittery
locket holding a hank of drying hair. The proof
of faith is a dainty chain tethering what’s most 
precious to the wattle of her neck. Turn back: the sky

                        <Cu+Sn>

blushed toward the hour, and it was terrible and strong.  
They loved the lamentable works of Ares and deeds 
of violence; they ate no bread, but were hard of heart,
unlike the doughy peacocks prancing in Brioni 
and Kiton. If all this sounds terribly sad, it is, 
but not because the shells fell to the earth, dulling
the sense of time or space, and not because there hung
in many homes a brown haze that obscured the sun
so the shine on weapons dimmed. They took up arms
against themselves. They misinterpreted sculpture,
the way a criminal tries to guess what answer
may suit best, or makes him look less like himself.
Great was their strength and unconquerable the arms 
which grew from their shoulders on their strong limbs.  
Their armour was of bronze, and their houses of bronze, 
and of bronze were their implements: there was no 
black iron, unless you count droplets of blood that 
dried into the dirt. A favorite pastime, that. 
We loved to count, and taught others to count, too:
one, two, buckle my shoe, three, four, shut the door,
but already the vapors had slipped across the rings
where the matador challenged the bull. Go back:
grim war and dread battle destroyed a part of them,

                        <Fx>

but to the others father Zeus the son of Cronos gave a
living and an abode apart from men, and made them dwell 
at the ends of earth.  And they live untouched except
for the internet, which zigged across the planet as 
nothing ever had before. The possibilities invade
every cell of every hero—appear here and there at once,
save everything you can, and more, because not only
can you be in many places at once, you are more you
than ever before. Your reputation precedes you
and it follows you, and you follow all your hero friends
on Twitter. You friend other heroes’ friends and so on,
and so on, until you reach a certain limit and the 
game warden has to pull you aside and remind you 
what is meant by sorrow in the islands
of the blessed along the shore of deep swirling Ocean, 
happy heroes for whom the grain-giving earth 
bears honey-sweet fruit flourishing thrice a year, far 
from the deathless gods and their potted biographies.
Sure, everyone will suspect you are not the child
of your father, and everyone will try to spirit you away
with candied plums and secret missives smuggled
into the palace of your life. Everyone will suppose 
your death was not as mundane as it seemed—crash
of metal, crash of rhinos, crash-landing landing 
you in some mysterious swamp no one knows 
the name of. You are not here now, and no one

                        <Fe>

succeeds you. For now truly is a race of iron, and men 
never rest from labour and sorrow by day, 
and from perishing by night; and the gods shall lay 
sore trouble upon them, in the form of technical glitches
that send a whole city into darkness at noon, the bit
of idle time chomped and spat to the ground.
If we can’t load this page or that, we die or think
we will—the speed of quitting’s picking up.
Go back again: discover there will be no favour 
for the man who keeps his oath or for the just 
or for the good; but rather men will praise
the evil-doer and his violent dealing. Much like
faux news or the town gossip’s shriveled tongue
curling around the old lies: if only things were 
simple again. The world twists on its axis,
a figure skater tightening her scratch spin
who wants nothing but to go faster without losing
the details we enjoy. Go forth and season
your skillets with reason and peace, the myths
brought down, when strength will be right 
and reverence will cease to be; and the wicked 
will hurt the worthy man, speaking false 
words against him, and will swear an oath upon them. 
Oh, maybe that was all right when there were matters
that mattered, but now, it’s all the same to everyone
who can buy portable media storage, spin 
a drive to protect the data and make backups.
Let’s secrete them here, there, everywhere,
in the resurrection plants and in the water bear.
We can return to them when it’s time, but not
now, when bitter sorrows will be left for mortal men, 
and there will be no help against evil. I’m ironing
the last of the shirts from the basement, trying to
de-crease the fabric so that it hangs smooth. 
Everything that’s happened can happen again.
We still refuse to yield. At the edge of our vision: 
the gates across the street, swung open to admit faith.

 

Inquisition

They asked her about geometry
and she replied with a description 
of the discovery of penicillin. They asked
her about the guillotine and she told them
about beignets and Baba au rhum. 
They asked her about phobias. She told
them about religion, about love 
that happens offstage. They asked 
her about Galileo, and she mended
the hems of their maps. They inquired
how to make a fortune and she alluded
to Darwin. They wondered when 
the earth began and she clicked
her stopwatch, her heels, her pen.
They asked why we made streets
and she took off her shoe. They asked
her about etiquette and she gave a lecture
on the constellations. They wondered
why photographs feel so believable
and she bought them tickets
to Spain. They asked about
exposition. She handed them puppets.

perilously liquified in so liquid an era

with the limitless thirst of the present,
they drink liquid modernity.
fading waitresses haunt their table
with unstable, opaque cocktails,
fateful glasses of precarious uncertainty.
post-panoptical modern nomads, 
vengeful fluid druids who dissolve stonehenge,
on the ledge of a binge, they hesitate 
at the pale glint of precipitate,
witness the faint hiss of dissolution.
taken aback by the lack of traction,
the absence of visible solid edge
and tangible shape in the modern age,
the gestalt of their debts,
they must settle into the unsettled
life of a miraculous alcoholic:
exiled, exterritorial, l’insolite.

 

with a universe of galaxies all elixir

they’d ride widening gyres,
revolve in whirlpool and spiral, however dire.
blasted as rocketships,
sportive in vortex,
they’d drink dark energy
and slam down the white of the spinning moon,
bloom into vacuum, sublime
on the brink of explosion, like supernova.
they’d drink enigma 
and nebula.  they’d sip implosion.
they’d drink from big dipper
and drink the whole zodiac,
drink the yawn and hiss
of sun and moon caving in,
of comet trail, of planet 
and meteor forming,
drink bloodred jovian storm
and saturnalian ring,
drink time and space 
from black holes,
drink singularity
from the unknown’s jaws
with impossible straws,
drink big bang and pre-existing abyss,
then drink the universe back into place.

 

song of satyrnalian mirth

the miraculous alcoholics turn pub crawl into maul ball,
those sallow louts who brawl longer than law allows.
surely they carouse with such blush-faced gusto
god cannot bless these thuggish drunks any less
than he blesses young amish ruffians, 
stomping at barn hops during rumspringa,
or jack mormons, wide-eyed on LSD instead of LDS.
irrationality makes sense.  slaves invert 
aristocratic worlds forever into carnivalesque.
as satyrs sow wild oats, half drunken man,
half bowled-over goat,
these winos fly to dionysian heights,
soar over castle moats,
caper, then leap clean 
over every last pastoral shepherd’s fence.

 

a great deal of kicking up one’s heels

lacking dance partners, the miraculous alcoholics 
skip the prom and gallivant with their bad habits, 
plastered, blasted, tripping lights fantastic.
barroom rather than ballroom ballerinas,
they lean and twirl like elixirs aswirl
as their hips spin like stirred and shaken gin and tonics.
something between a mashed potato and a human torpedo
is born on dancefloors of their own intoxication.
they drink until they sink all ships asail
in tall, icy glasses, until their kossack kicks
thaw white russian siberias.
what moves might bust loose, 
what strange dances might transpire, bouncer, 
bartender, and police have no idea.
the limes they bite lead inevitably to more tequila.

 

miracle everglades

when you think they may just sink
they drink swamp things
and accidentally drain the everglades,
until crocodilian white bellies
and mangrove roots show through.
even hemingway’s keys may have been moved
like a piano’s the way they kayak drained shallows
of sandfly island, and okefonokee,
wallow like walruses in what’s left of smooth lagoon.
sold bad swampland in the ten thousand islands
by shysters in barroom booths,
drinking money ostensibly whisked away,
they prove to slyly buy unknown paradise.
these risky kings kick back to sip 
ponce de leon’s floridian
lost fountain of youth.

Sam

you are a new 
kind of eulogy 
you never say anything 
I’m sorry about the world I say 
I’m sorry we have a language 
that’s really an atmosphere 
I will build our future house 
inside your belly 
there will be one room 
devoted entirely to dancing 
our ghosts will have sex 
with each other 
this will have already taken place 
one hundred years ago 
I’m sorry I have started to forget 
your face

 

Sam

you are a new 
kind of weapon 
one-half rifle & one-half grizzly bear 
you are one-half capable 
of killing yourself 
death is a microfiche of life 
& terribly boring
why don’t you live with me 
in a tent inside my parents’ house 
it’s the sleepiest boy/girl place I know 
we will have walkie-talkies 
we will have of new names 
to call each other by 
in a more perfect world 
we would not be this lonely


Sam

you are a new 
kind of motel 
you make love 
like a vibrating bed 
I’m not saying that’s a bad thing 
just familiar 
familiar can be nice sometimes 
think Budweiser
or french fries 
our first night together 
in your parents’ house 
my face is my face 
no matter where we are 
every winter your legs 
drive me sad & sweetly 
they are beautiful 
new snow tires


Sam

you are a new 
kind of habeas corpus 
I don’t even know 
what you mean anymore 
I used to know I want you 
you were a kangaroo  
I thought we both 
felt prairie fire 
my dark eyes met 
your dark eyes 
we were a hearse 
now I don’t know 
I haven’t slept in three days 
I am alone 
I want to sleep 
with someone  
we used to be utterly goddamn 
now I want someone 
to grind me into canola oil



Sam

you are a new 
kind of monster
you sure do look awful 
good when you’re naked 
I dare you to hide 
underneath my bed 
I dare you to follow me 
home from the bus stop 
late at night 
until we get to my front door 
& you reach your monster hand 
into my chest 
rip out my heart
& replace it with a hummingbird 
I think that’s the most romantic thing 
a monster could do

 

Sam

you are a new 
kind of power pop 
I love how sweet 
& shimmering your stomp box is
the starriest wah-wah 
in a science fair diorama 
I am the teenage fanclub 
you’ve been looking for 
I would go all 
the way with you 
rip my headphones off 
we could take ecstasy 
anything to make you 
go supernova 
at least twice 
while I play with your tremolo



Sam

you are a new 
kind of periscope 
when I suck your toes 
I can see Alaska
when we come 
together we are 
a nuclear submarine 
I can stay down 
practically forever 
until you tell me to surface 
I make tiny waves 
in the perpetual wake 
of your waterbed 
I have declared 
your face to be my 
favorite desert island

War Story #160:  The Books I Brought to Read While Flying Home from Iraq

Leaving Iraq for good,
we lined our ruck sacks by the chopper pad,
awaited the Chinooks. 

In mine, atop the uniforms and extra boots
I tucked two books   
for the transatlantic trip:
Digges’ Vesper Sparrows,
Behn’s Paper Bird.

I needed them.

Gulf Air flights only aired two flicks:
The Sands of Iwo Jima
and Jarhead.
We weren’t even Marines.

So when the Chinooks arrived 
and hovered above the pad,
the rucks tipped and tore open.

I watched my books
flap and catch and rise
on the rotor wash,
then explode in twin turbine back blast—

flushed doves wheeling
before their white feathers 
burst on the wind.

 

War Story #119:  Kings

It’s good to be kings.

We enter a dining hall.
Ugandan guards check our I.D.s.
Their English is perfect.

They have degrees,
fathers with connections.
In Uganda, this is punk work.
Here, it’s crazy-money.

Bangladeshis serve pork chops,
mop our spills, heave trash.

More rice, sir?

They dream periodic tables,
wipe Formica white.

In their lands these men are sons 
of privilege.  Kings.

Here, issued hairnet crowns,
their scepters metal ladles, 
bomb detection wands.

Sonnet

Would lightning do?  Would a new watch?
There aren’t going to be any plums, red
ones or green ones.  My white shirt is dirty.
The sunflower is done with flowering.
In each picture, you look like a penguin,
impossible not to like.  More and more
I feel like a church, empty as a kettle
but larger.  Would a river do?  Would it go
backwards if asked?  If I lost you once,
I can lose you twice.  My hand should be
put in a cast.  I should stop making
artichokes out of words.  The weather
is ready to scold the house.  The sunflower
has died.  The last pencil has been eaten.

 

Question Arising while Listening to
a Lecture on the Nature of Metaphor

Why does it mean
anything that the girl

sitting beside me,
her hair cropped

punk-close on the
sides, long and gelled

stiff at top, her
legs in camouflage

leggings, her boots
black as crude oil,

the odor coming from
her a mixture of

incense and some 
kind of bitter and

rocky herb, that
this smell is exactly

the smell of my
grandfather’s sickbed

brew, the last-resort
swamp liquid

a Chinatown-alley
herbalist prescribed

for him on that
summer at the end,

the black water
of the profane

cupfuls meeting the
black waters that

were rising inside?

 

Tacoma Lyric

Because I was equipped with memory,
the cane fields are still burning somewhere,
the smoke boiling gold and gray.
Before this the workers cut down the high stalks,
and then the fire, like a large animal,
was made to graze away the stubble.
How sweet everything is, 
                                         even though I am
on a humid city street, holding pencils
bought from the drugstore.  On my block
there is an Irish bar, a lawnmower repair shop,
and an assisted-living facility.  All this
seems insistently American, like a sky drunk

with fireworks.  To my grandfather the fields
meant one kind of money,  to the workers
they meant another.  I was six years old
and royal, standing on the rusty hood of a Jeep.
At some point my grandfather lost
everything.  
                     How insistent memory is,
so that even now I can still remember
the shoe store that is now a cupcake place,
the nail salon where there is now a coffee shop.
One winter killed the magnolia sapling
we planted in the yard, another killed
the hydrangea bush that was supposed to light up
with pink flowers.  
                              When my grandfather
was old, he never said anything
about what we left behind.  He loved gambling
and baseball.  He died of cancer in 1996.

Sometimes we hear people roaring
out of the bar, and sometimes the screaming
from assisted-living makes the fire-trucks visit.
The things we look at keep changing:
one day’s sun or another day’s rain; early poppies
one day, late tomatoes another.
                                                     As though
each day was trying to say something,
with a voice that isn’t coming from any throat.

The Wayback Machine

We are immortal now, the swift brushed watercolors,
the poems spoken line by line in the mind
on a morning run, scanned and pasted into blogs—
for now the eyes of the search engines have caught us 
in their sights in their slow crawl, and month
by archived month of work we are swallowed up, 
and day by day, swallowed again in the snapshot 
that archives this day on the Internet and stores it away 
in the Memory of Everything—we are digits
and bits, shadows and light, a million colors, broken
fragments of words and gesture that in some chance future
you, viewer, will call up, your heart and eye the place
where we briefly reassemble, offer what we can of time.

 

The Train Station

              —for Peter Balkwill’s Theatre Workshop

The lights come up (we must imagine this)
on a tableau far back from us—travelers bent
to the task of lifting a suitcase,
shouldering a backpack.

And then they advance 
with deliberate step,
one opening a red umbrella, 
one cradling a package like a baby,

and in their faces, every thought—
we see the green shores left,
a new love to be met,
a transformed self, an old life lost.

Midway they pause, uncertain,
look toward the face of the stranger beside them
as if to find an answer there,
then look back at the track.

Now the whistle signals the train
that pulls up as their faces turn
to watch the cars roll past—
and in that instant some change their minds,

turn back to home, 
an old love, perhaps,
baggage left for someone else,
looking back just once.

And the train we watch—this is the train
that arrives, not departs,
red umbrella 
furled on the platform beside its tracks.

 

On Reading Gregory Orr

                            From such heaviness
                            what could rise? — G. Orr

In the library’s winged-back chair
I have allowed the poems
to fall from my hand
and my eyes to close
and my head to rest
on one winged shoulder.

I have let go his words
that roll away the boulder of years
to show how his child’s hands
held his empty gun and fired,
leaving his brother dead beside the deer.

I have leaned into the rough wool
of sleep to ease such grief,
and startled awake
to the sound of my own weeping.

 

Old Clothes

Reality TV has brought the cleaning of closets
into my insomniac view, reminding me
of all the down jackets, t-shirts, wool dresses,
boots for back-country skiing, galoshes, 
dance skirts, jeans, boas, vests, fedoras,
and the pom-pom hat I knitted for my mom
in fifth grade and she saved that still reside
in mine, and at 4 a.m. in another country
I’m seized, at last, by the vision of bagging
every piece I no longer need, carrying the lot
to Goodwill—though the next program
explains that I’ll need supervision and a budget
of at least $5000 to replace what I’ve tossed,
some of it irreplaceable.

 

Walking Home

I see, in the cars rushing by,
           people tuning their radios,
                      brushing their teeth,

talking on cell phones,
           writing their shopping lists,
                      honking their horns—

and here I am
           putting one foot
                      in front of the other

in a slow
           meandering return
                      from part-time work,

tuning in 
           the white-throated sparrow,
                      craning my neck

to find the red
           of the cardinal,
                      the red of wild strawberries,

scribbling words, recording,
           high over the marsh,
                      the cry of some sea-haunted bird.

Is it enough,  
           to step out
                      into the world that’s here?

Self Portrait As a Drowning Man

Dieter Roth painted himself
and cut the painting into bits. 
Some cutters cut

to see blood flow, to feel 
light-headed and alive.
Cutting, for such people

is constructive. They shape
who they are as a child
from construction paper makes

a paper doll. Some people
feel an arm or leg
doesn’t belong to them.

They get fifth or sixth
opinions until a physician
agrees to cut it off. Dieter

Roth cut himself
into pieces to fit
inside a suitcase. To

make a drowning man,
take all his fragments
and add water.

 

Premium, Dusk

My mother paid six cents 
for every jar of fireflies.

She paid an extra cent 
for every hole drilled in the lid.

But the highest fee went
to the empty jar, the jar

around which the fireflies
flashed their ecstasies,

around which we’d sit
and sing as if

around a campfire.
You could only sit

so close, given 
the glow, given

the sparks, which, 
given, fever this cheek still.

 

The Care and Feeding of One-Way Mirrors

Do not overfeed either
side of the mirror. Do not
assume that the man brought in

for questioning does not
intuit you observing. 
At regular intervals, the observer

and the observed, also known
as the suspect and the one
who suspects him, should

trade places. All cases
involving one-way mirrors
require this balance, which

appears foolish only until a bare
bulb dangles above you, until
staring long enough at yourself

in the glass, even you
doubt the airtight alibi
you keep repeating. 

Preferred Customer Lines

I dream into a vector en route a transparency
feigned to defer pain to the realm of animal
this is the trick of the language machine
consecrating the tree the water
pan American in any case

should the rainbow section them off too
not even the questionables would ebb 
me a rare moment calls to 
to nest the odds

                                      preferred customer
                           will you wander with me?

I tend to animating flashimators 
real world complicity I don’t get
mineral composition of will 
all stone pishi kaka

         a nobler tone of whether
                  secretingly seamless

     secretively

in that mother is telling me how they all left for coffee 
when father was about to fire up his decibels  
my misery is in forgetting he willed it
in forgetting the future is 
what lack produces

a relationship with trust or faith 
                  noble composition

                           my misery stationary

while she visits (we talk till morning 
then she leaves and I am divorcing 
moving etc etc) then she’s back 
but stays at grandma’s

         the sum of whites between lines

a life or that which can be whatever 
cranked up or down for legato
doubted vowel behind icons

                           secreting composition

will from code creates then
once-upon-a-how
come

                  Akh Tamar Tamar!

humbled and promiscuous within 
a living room and the Silk Road

I give up the transparency
the oracle I’ve consulted 
elsewhere & temporary

Akhtamar

         secretly enthused flashimator 
                           tweening flower

nymphed by and where twigs yearn for leaves 
a cavity burns on this side of desire

     monastic and mineral

the word’s means into consciousness
the geriatric fashionable virtual
more genus than species

daughtered eyes and a wooden leg 
multicolor and inlaid  
burning cicada

an adult will soon lay its eggs 
a few bends then beware 
the corrosive confirm 
underground

removed from eyes that perceived loss 
to will intent by how lack holds
order of lines across a sonata 
someone will want me then

forestalled as natural flash
mother’s and father’s
I live and long for

                  protrusions

the return is hardware 
there at the instant

      Akhtamar postponed composition

suddenly quills arching tweens
an eye for tomorrow instructs
some mountain pass too
very tired from long ago

look away and closely 
I come sure-footed

guaranteed but short of 
a minor person’s alibi
flashing light

              Babylonian male 
how up there you left me

thinking I would pick up speed 
the disguise of an under-math  
street and destiny humbled

         feathers are weeping for posters

the dead and the other in my stomach
aced of club acting out the club 
as the wheel of narrative turns

why didn’t you

                  animate justice

a sky framed flower orchestral in monotype
what to do with the clubbed decibels 
what to do with Tashmit’s hair
Gula Gula please

exorcise yourself

rising and falling the detour spreads
as when memory narrates
in and out of line father
dispossessing son
mother

or was that all about the mud on our feet
leaving all behind except for lines 
having had to cross Euphrates

lines for the Chaldean female
pushing for direction 
Oannes for wisdom
for how come
                           Ea for luck

here’s Tamar and map to the altar we call heart
choked over the hiss a God has uttered
looking further into a nobler law
first person plural-dot-how
the motherland jilt 
a song of never

           Akh Tamar Tamar

neither Phoenician nor Turk  
preferred customer damar 
between power points  
justice willed away 
protrusion

the mantle extravaganza has a lid for 
for eyes bulleted for love
the song that labels all
sacrificed versus dead 
myth/system/trap

the fear of resolve
spit and chatter.

 

Traffic

After such landscape has colored desire
the body embers in the small of a forest
someone is finally merciful
remembering

words are not enough
stars are not enough
light reminds me

cursive over my parts
mimetic verbs wed

            flowered gods
                  sweetheart whimsy

hint at my favorite parts or meet me there 
the right elegy nails shut 
a divination’s alibi

the rain has begun to pretend
panels of spread flesh 
theory and inability

                        moments

give them a proper name
grid collecting cloud 
things about

Narcissus bites for a theme 
that’s emeth backwards
I have no pose in
aleph erased

good and bad embers in the small of the forest
soul on the solid wall across
breathing roots into meth

            I have some

sharp as ever green 
it’s hard to believe

the donor was grand-fathered
candelabrum out of order
pointed at carnelian

the wasteland 
twig by twig 
fuming

    doubt pales induction

certain things spell betrayal
the heart behaves then
mind a bloody thing 
dammed up

Southern borders are crumbling
knots of suppose and between
life and non-life crossings

       throat outside the oeuvres 
              all I’ve held so far

                            sedations

to seek to have seems unplugged
returns of the very same 
sun-stripped thought

flashing away the blue notes 
where light stretches mercy
bottoms out  
                           seeking

thing somehow absurdly world 
collared bough thing

grass is redeemed then

shell blue embers
prowess tilted
cultural

meanwhile and because of the charge 
a precious heart meets your shape
an eye away by the kitchen stove 
the heat brightens the blue
wished for 
                        loss calls
            half a dally away

someone scarcer than me is missing
lesser and lesser in the hallway
we repair the grid and pleats
carnelian and bird. 

How to Do the Cha Cha

Stay alert in red rolling light. Focus premium-like in 4/4 time.  Go into debt with arms held in minor jezebel pose.  Small sidestep about the star specks on the floor. Chin up during the landside.  Sexy bend, sexy bend!  Practice—

Perfect understanding of where your partner is coming from.   Your partner is coming from the same revolutionary party you came from.  Don’t go about this the wrong way again.  Or the next gala will find you cowering under a punch bowl, strained cheek rogued up in-

Panic-rose.

Boys and girls in panic rows. Roadkill of the Rodeo, toeing the party line on one side of the faultline, quaking. Which side are you on, lead or follow-fallow?

Push; no, pull. Adjust your slippery straps and swaddle sandals in bandages: it’s open season on open-toed slip-ons. Lesson: don’t leave cha to chance. Change into a tux and bind yourself into a seamless Mister. Move her, Master Manipulator.

Sway the small of her back with your small, gloved hand.

 

How to Cheat at Poker

Paint your toenails in the shade of mirror.  Wear open-ended shoes.  Glint with the best of them.  Move to Kansas City.  Pop out of a cake.  Wearing thirteen flavors of frosting.  Your hair teased all heiress-like.

Vouch for the jacks.  When you know someone who knows someone with chips.  Substitute an accent; exaggerate a cough.  Get high and mighty up in the prescription medicines aisle.  Stay in your long sleeves and multiple pockets.  Fold prettily.  An origami made into luck.

Wear photos of strange children in a locket that dangles off-angle. Lean into stranger danger. Take wrong ones to bed. Mornings, demand a pastry case wheeled into your room by a bevy of showgirls. Hide kings and aces in plumes and pasties. Burn anything evidence. Bury the key.

Leave no luck to chance. Change cities and dogs. Tiptoe down stairways and listen, rouged rogue. Get caught up with red hands. Learn faint-sway. Learn slipknot and slideknot. Learn a different lesson from the one they try and teach you.  Make bank.

 

How to Climb a Ladder Safely

Here we are at skybottom, wearing house slippers outside the house because it is already so summer that we can get away with anything.

Here we are at a palm tree, staring up at one black and six-toed cat, waiting for the fire department to show up and coax because this is what always happened on Saturday morning TV.

Here we are taking the long way around the ladder because avoidance actually cures superstition.

Here we are, three rungs up, flashing back to Florida. 
 
Here we are, changing places. I’m up top and you’re below. 
When we get to the middle, one of us dangles.

Undress me on a ladder and my legs look longer.

Rats are clever ladder-makers. They climb vines, sills, and  pipes to reach rooftops and shimmy through shingles.

Here we are, peering out at the wreckage. Mourning those we knew and those we didn’t.

Here I am and here you are, “we” dissolving on the slow climb down. Violet twilight, bruising light.

You saw off the top rung.

Here we are, tossing coins to make decisions.

Dear Diode,

I’m glad you’re not called Rheostat 
or Cathode Ray Tube or Bertrand, no one 
should be named Bertrand, not even 
and especially Bertrand Russell, 
who henceforth and retroactively 
is Billy, Billy Russell is famous 
for not being Wittgenstein, who is famous 
for not being languagey, who is not eager 
for a water slide, raise your hand

and leave this poem, this life, this anniversary 
will last a year, when it’ll be time 
for another, you’ll be six, 
you’ll look back on five and wonder 
what happened to your skates, 
if you should start dating 
that pogo stick again, it’s great 
to be a child, a kangaroo, a literary magazine

in the morning, before your nap, 
before your mortgage, when you look up 
and there’s a mountain and everyone 
points out how many fingers you’ll lose 
to frostbite if you climb it 
and plant the flag that announces 
to the world, here is a flag, but you climb anyway 
and look down and wave 
whatever’s left of the left hand
of your diligence, when the hard work 
is done and you can smoke 
the sky if you want to


Rumination with roots in ruin

The day a tornado half whisked half shattered 
her house away, I was smelling 
mown grass as you might the wood 
of the confessional, if you believe 
in telling a man in robes the thoughts 
you’ve had of the neighbor’s daughter
in detail, so he might picture her 
bending over as well. Or is that you
not you? And my friend was picking 
a dildo from the embarrassment of rubble 
when I spoke to her. Or her lover 
stood in his underwear, in what had been
the road, holding a survivor, a bottle 
of Jim Beam in his arms. Or ants 
were the first to reach the child’s body 
in the tree. Please excuse my imagining 
less powerfully than a tornado 
poetically imagines us into pieces.
Like the start of something, the grass, 
each time I smell it, the farmer 
going by and by, row upon row 
of such slight and screaming 
decapitations, a combo of the French 
and industrial revolutions 
that finds my olfactory bulb 
and switches on the word spring, the word 
sweet, the word ______ (here I tire of language 
invoking its kin). And you, does that happen 
to you? Your mouth is open 
but you don’t want to fill it, 
you want to reside within the moment 
of all possible sounds, all necessary 
shelters? In the one for-real picture 
she cell-phone sent, a chunk only 
of blue sky, like a bonnet 
upon the end-times, as she looked up 
from drywall and crib sprawl 
into absence of all but a certain 
wavelength of light. Do you find that 
lovely too? And since you 
have been no one or anyone 
in this poem, will you be God now, the eyes 
I feel upon my brain, the churning hand 
behind all of this, what we can’t know, 
can’t speak, the it and the who and the how 
of the sweet smell and the train 
bearing-down sound people say 
explodes their thoughts just before time 
is deconstructed into before 
and never more the same? God, 
upon whose shadow I will lay 
such whispers as are 
and possess my soul, and say 
of the storm, the storm
has passed, and say of the storm, 
I am the storm.

 

Ode with t.p.

What did they do 
before toilet paper? 
Let me look that up. 
O. It’s as one would suppose,
ate bread, loved the children 
who didn’t die 
in childbirth or of cholera 
or were crushed 
when ignorance fell upon them. 
My favorite use of snow 
is not what Eskimos 
did or do with it, since they don’t
have corn cobs or pebbles 
and typhoid killed 
a lot of children too. Americans 
invented a softer 
Sears catalog to carry 
to rural homes all the things 
one could dream of 
wiping one’s ass with. 
This body is the only place 
that will have my soul
so far, until it shits me out 
and I go to pieces 
on an adventure I won’t get 
to write poems about. If I knew
I’d have other chances
to walk around town
carrying the mast of a ship, I’d wait 
to look like a misguided pirate 
but I don’t know
which stars I was born of
so I call them all 
my parents, the dead ones 
and the living, the bright 
and the shy and your garden
and hers are also elegant 
prescriptions of light. Let’s say 
looking up at the night sky
is like writing a letter home 
or there are over five thousand 
companies producing toilet paper, how
can I be sad or want to hang myself
in the company of spoons 
or wear a fog colored shirt
to a rain colored party
and not ask the prettiest girl
what she thinks happens next?
There are even estimates 
of what percentage of people 
wipe from front to back, I’ll admit
I’m one of those
who feels the mouth is a disguise
of the ocean, that we are all
beautiful surfers 
catching beautiful waves 
and crashing at the end, brushing
skulls and knuckles 
against rocks and popping up
bloody and eager to enter 
once more the white foam 
that refuses to hold us, 
and to which our blood 
is the simple singing, please.

 

Fascination

On her finger, 
ten or twenty 
blackheads, 
death.

 

Epic tale 

I married a shooting
star, a widower before 
“I do.”

 

Building a church  

In a few hours, the praising of God 
will roll across the country, east to west 
as hymns, with not one 
firecracker or bottle rocket 
lit, or boulder lifted 
by a thousand tongues, say 
you’re God (you’re God), would you listen 
to this mumbling or go bowling, a bear 
beside you throwing strikes, sharing berries, 
boysen, what’s that mean, that would be 
one Rudolph Boysen, who convinced 
loganberries and blackberries and raspberries 
to have sex, there’s a sweet faith 
for you, the Church of Juicy 
Hybridization, succulent, something was 
under the black and white tepees 
nuns wore, once 
upon a time, though now 
it’s dawn and a horse 
is doing the rosary of grass 
with her lips

 

The human body is seventy percent Sargasso Sea

            (a reduction)   

Because we don’t think
of drinking water
as cannibalism or swimming
as incest, I gather
my agespots into a semaphore
and signal rain 
to come love my skin 
again, everything
I do is an affair
with water, go to Paris,
the Musée D’Orsay, 
where the art 
is boring but trains 
once came and went, 
see that, how fluid 
dynamics govern travel 
and poetry, or the mind 
cutting the course 
of its flow with liquid 
teeth

Because think of water
as swimming, as gather,
my semaphore and rain 
to skin again, everything
I affair with Paris, 
the D’Orsay, where art 
is trains once went, see,
fluid dynamics 
travel, and mind 
cutting course of liquid 
teeth

Because water
as gather,
my rain
to everything
I Paris,
the art is see,
fluid dynamics
travel mind,
cutting liquid
teeth

 

This is the title

One year babies grew 
in a field, row upon row 
of our replacements, wet nurses 
walking all night 
among the dream of their crying, who slept 
easily that season, no one I know, no one 
I heard of, there was this girl
I liked at the time, I was twelve, she was thin
as tuberculosis, lonely as the day 
after Christmas, one night 
she gathered a bunch of the babies 
into a pile and set them on fire, she alone
knew they weren’t babies, they were casings
around seeds that needed fire 
to begin their lives, whatever 
they were, they were diaphanous 
and had wings and away 
they went, one after another, and for the rest 
of my days, I remembered her hair 
smelled like it had been lost 
at sea, and no one 
touched that field again, brought hoe 
or plow against its sex, and that girl 
wrote the town a letter once, from Madrid 
or Majorca, just to remind us 
we weren’t forgiven 

 

Another holiday has come and gone

It’s shoot an arrow 
into your ceiling day, I’m out of arrows, 
I go to the neighbors 
to borrow a cup of arrows, they’re making love 
on the floor doggy style, in that 
she barks then he barks 
at her barking, then its over 
and they circle in front of the door 
to be let out, we’re trapped, 
I tell my lover later 
on the phone, do you mean us, she asks, I lie 
and tell her no, I mean every other person 
but us, we are free, we 
are entirely wings and little bits 
of fog and the open windows 
of speeding cars and Carmen 
at the end, when the performers 
take their bows to the rush of air 
from between our palms, forgetting 
she is deaf, that she’s heard nothing 
I’ve said, that this is a poem, 
that I am out of arrows and more 
importantly out of bows

 

Taking care

She was such a good liar the county put in a road 
up the mountain to her house for the hundreds 
of people who got off the highway each week. 
You have a way with words, she’d tell them, 
or the sky forms clouds in your honor, or ham 
is good for you, or the cancer is gone, 
and they’d believe her, a few even managing 
to fly without wings or motors on her say so. 
When she died and the women who wash bodies 
for the grave were doing what they did 
better than anyone has ever done a thing, 
the bodies so clean they hummed, one of the women 
noticed that the lying woman’s clitoris 
was bell-shaped and told the other, 
who rang it, a beautiful, clear ringing 
they spent the rest of their lives 
trying to describe to whoever would listen, 
which was fewer people all the time, 
until it was just the two of them, one saying, 
it was like a song-bird drinking champagne,
the other saying, that makes no sense,
the other saying, it does spiritually, 
the other saying, I know I was moved,
the other saying, to tears, the other saying,
exactly, the other saying, I could have rowed
away on that sound, the other saying, I did.



A gift

At the end of the concert, the famous rock harpist 
wants to lift his harp over his head and smash it 
but harps are as heavy as the ocean. To bring roadies out 
to smash his harp would be inauthentic rage. He settles 
on burning his harp, the audience loves it and demands 
an encore. He tells them he only has ashes to play 
and they chant, PLAY THE ASHES. He plays the ashes 
more imaginatively than he ever played the harp. 
Finished, he tells the audience he has nothing to smash 
or burn except the ashes. No one knows what to do now, 
if the concert is over if nothing is smashed or burned, 
whether to leave or make love and raise the children 
born of these confused unions in the aisles. They make love 
and raise the children to expect music to come and go 
without the burning or smashing of what brought the music, 
forgetting the famous rock harpist along the way. He’s old
and crossing a park when he sees a young woman
stroking a harp with a sparrow in each hand. He stops
to save the birds and show her how its done, holds his breath 
in one hand, his piss in the other, and with a third hand 
no one can see, touches the strings with a tiny volcano 
he carries in his pocket. He knows he’s going to die soon 
and gives her the volcano. Thank you, she says, holding 
the volcano in her palm, the two of them 
admiring how persuasively it fits, the sun going down, 
the gyro guy packing up his cart and pushing away 
the scent of lamb that has given the day 
a significant portion of its structure and belief.



Some recent weather

The rain is pregnant with a shape 
exactly like you, late to tell your lover 
it’s over, who is late to tell you 
he never loved you, also in the rain, 
as wet as a goat in the rain or a statue 
of rain in the rain, if there is one, 
would have epaulets of rain in the rain 
and be made of bronze or toffee, you are running 
now in the rain, your version 
of the human spirit, your very private instance 
of converting sunlight when available 
into vitamin D, for the energy 
to believe we are more than energy, hoping 
that you are wrong in the rain, 
that it will never be over, as he 
is hoping that he always loved you 
in the rain, three blocks, two blocks, one block 
to go and there his is, more lickable 
than prophecy, like dew has taken human form 
and put on a yellow shirt and shaved 
in the rain, the rain so hard 
you fuck in the rain and no one notices, the rain 
fuck-shaped where you are fucking, an animal 
with its mouth to your ear, and you 
an animal with your mouth to its ear, everyone 
on equal footing in the rain, the rain 
speaking to your panting with its panting, the rain 
washing away the rain



Ode owed to the mind of the mouth

Honestly I never wanted 
to be an angel, the wings 
so large, the purity 
so difficult to keep clean, I prefer 
a penguin’s unflying 
flapping, to walk, dig a trench, 
to chant myself 
well out into the Atlantic
to the Azores, half way 
between empires that have failed 
to shine the moon, no need to land 
or find a hotel or a spot 
to curl and sleep 
among the picture-tongues 
of dreams, Azores, you are my life 
as I say you, as rain 
is the body of the sky 
until it dies and has no idea 
it ever lived, no memory 
except in pools and lakes and rivers 
and a glass of water 
set on a podium for a woman 
about to clear her throat 
in a room in a building in a covenant 
with dust and speak into a world 
changed by what she has to offer,
if only a little bit, 
which is to say, completely

The Violence of the Violins

It was in them, they would say.
It was what they were, what they
did. It was part of them, carved 
into them like an F hole, like 
a clef tattooed onto a biceps. 
And there was nothing you 
could say or do to change that. 
It was their way. It was the way 
of the world, and also of the sun
exploding a million miles away,
warming your soft cheek. Face
the music, they would say. Stop 
listening with your eyes closed. 
See the string tightened almost 
to breaking, the bow torturing it 
into song. Feel the skin stretched
over the drum so tightly it makes
your heart pound. And where 
did you think it all came from, 
the easy melody, the high tinkling
finery? We are hurt into beauty.
And you, up in the balcony, rising
to your feet, applauding fiercely, look 
down at what your own hands are doing.

 

Concentration Camps

The way I explained it to myself, the way
I made sense of it in my own way (I was eight 
when I first learned about them), was all those people
starving and crying and dying together in those big
piles behind the barbed wire—were forced to concentrate
on suffering. So it made sense to call it that. That part
made sense, I thought, because concentration was very
difficult. And I hated having to do it myself
in elementary school when the teacher caught us
looking out the window at the trees, or the sky, or the rooftops
of the houses across the street—when she caught us looking
out at life—and forced us cruelly back to the problem 
under our noses, the problem of the numbers, the problem 
that wasn’t going away no matter how much we
looked away from it. And those people, I thought, they must have 
tried to look away from it too. They must have groaned
and looked away, and there must have been sky 
above them, and trees on the other side, and maybe even a red 
rooftop or two off in the distance where life was going on 
in rooms with clean white linen and tinkling forks and knives…
The way you make sense of a problem like that, a solution like that, 
a number like that, a number that’s so big you can’t fit it 
in your head, can’t fit it in the world—though the world keeps trying 
that solution, over and over—is to break it down, like the teacher said, 
and keep breaking it down until you get to the smallest parts, 
the ones divisible only by themselves and one: sky, tree, house,
one little boy. Then look out the window at the world again,
and see if it looks any different.

 

Foreclosure

We took it out back
and we beat the stuffing out of it,
then we stuffed it, broken, into the back
of the car, and dumped its mutilated body at the dump. 
It felt good to do this. After all, the cat had peed on it twice, 
and the mortgage company had sent another threatening letter, 
and we felt like kicking the shit out of some bankers—
but all we could do was sit back down
on the couch, and drink another beer,
and our helplessness smacked of
cat piss.

So we dragged it outside
and bludgeoned it with the sledgehammer.
Then we took the ax to its back, its arms and legs
and middle, the springs coiled up inside like large and small
intestines spilling out in the yard as we chopped and hacked,
breathing hard from the hard work of beating
the crap out of something you might have
caressed in another life, or another
house, one without a cat with
a urinary tract infection,
or one without

an adjustable rate mortgage,
an ARM you want to break but can’t—
so you look around for something else to break,
and it could be your banker or it could be your cat or it could be
someone you loved in another life, or maybe even in this life.
And it feels good to do this. But then it begins
to feel like an indiscretion. And then
like a desecration. And then
it begins, like a death—
a death with its own
life.

 

Against Beauty

“It’s an affliction,” she said, 
brushing away a strand of hair 
from her smooth forehead.
Or was she brushing away 
a tear? It was difficult
to tell. He’d been focused on
her lips, wondering how it would
feel to be kissing them, 
even as she was saying it:
“It’s an affliction. It’s like
a disfigurement, or a severe 
speech impediment. People stare.
They feed. They look, then look away,
then look some more. It’s like 
that dream where you’ve come to school
in nothing but your underwear.”
As her lips formed the word ‘underwear’
he felt a devastatingly sweet 
gasp in the loins, and he looked up
into her eyes which were unmistakably 
full of tears. “Attraction is
the opposite of repulsion,” she said,
“and opposites attract. So people
love you and they hate you
just for being beautiful. And you 
begin to hate yourself for not
knowing yourself. For who 
can know beauty?” she asked,
and she burst into tears, draping
her slender trickling arms around 
his thick neck. He was a man with 
a great thirst. And she was a body 
of water, slipping through his fingers.

 

Honda Pavarotti
                        after Hoagland

My Aunt Hannah loved Pavarotti
so when she came to Boston for the second
opinion on the leg, he was belting it out
on the tape deck in my car parked live
outside the diabetes hospital. Live parking 
is when your body waits in your car 
the way a soul waits in a body idling
in a hospital. And when the doctor said
she would have to lose the leg or else 
we would surely lose Aunt Hannah and that
was his expert opinion, for which he surely
would charge an arm and a leg, she looked
like a book you can’t read because it’s closed
and leaning its stiff and fraying spine against
the closed book of your cousin walking slowly
beside her toward your car. So what I did was
I cranked up the volume because I knew
my Aunt Hannah loved Pavarotti, but after
she’d lowered the wreck-in-progress of her 
body into the front seat, she angrily clicked
the music off. And the aria died right there
in the dead air of my car. So I put it in drive and
we went screeching out of there without a word. 

Krishna’s Mother Advises

Watch out for the one with pink cheeks,
with wrists that can twist to music.  
She wants you for the wrong reason:
the way the blue of your skin reminds 
her of the sky after a monsoon.  
No matter how much rain, 
the color stays the same. 

The cows rustle in the bleached hills, 
in soft tufts of grain, urging you to resist   
her tender shoulder, the smooth slope of back.  
Resist her slim ankles, her milk-scent, her wonder. 

You can name every flower, every animal 
in the darkening forest, and she, simple, 
only calls out the obvious—marigold, peacock, bull.

 

Sati 
Hindu Goddess for whom the practice of a widow throwing herself on her husband’s funeral pyre is named

My heart is no lantern.
No matter what they tell you, 
it’s not all marigolds and Ram, Ram
like some Hindu cheerleading chant.

At first, all I wanted was fire: 
soot-lined skin, my hair in needles
of light and heat, the tight fist 
of lungs like a blazing hive. 

Red flame, blue flame—it was all the same.

But then, right before my bones 
flared like torchlight, singed fingertips 
smoothed to a shine, I thought 
of the cool cusp of the moon,

river water soothing my throat,
contracting around me—
a muddy womb.  Muck and silt 
lining my mouth like a new word

for smoke, for freedom. 

Instead I have cinder, all this
useless ash cupped into 
the curve of my body, sitting 
on my skin for an eternity.

 

Parvati: A Wife’s Mantra

It has taken me years to tempt you
from your holiness—your name
scrapes against thick-edged leaves, 
against felled trees and cave walls 
where I’ve written my name
in vermillion, so you won’t forget.

I’ve called you out of your forest
into mine—see how the kitchen
gleams the sharp silver 
of a mended heart.  It’s sore 
and pinches every so often.

Hours in front of a stove, 
the oil spits at me from a pan 
like your mother’s spite.  
I mince garlic with hennaed 
hands—a garden of orchids 
blooming from wrist to thumb.
  
When the sky’s pitted 
with stars, we eat mangoes 
that make our throats itch, 
remind us of the sweet pulp 
of first love. 

 

Krishna’s Mother Speaks of Her Regrets

I am stiff with losing.  Child 
after child unfurls from my body—
each one a peacock feather,

each one turned to ash 
before I can name it.  
All except for you—

my last one, my blue one.
At first push, the night sky 
puckered with lightning,

my body leaked over 
the prison floor 
like the moon’s cold

drizzle to dawn,
my womb swept clean 
for the last time.

I can already smell 
the cow’s milk on your skin, 
the wet grass and marigolds

where you will roam.  
When you arrive in town, 
the cows shine yellow

with turmeric: your birth 
announced not as a god, 
but a boy, son of a cow herder.

Your whole life in disguise.  
Now every time the wind 
rustles I know it’s your flute

calling over hillsides and rivers, 
across fields of rice—a world away.  
My ears how they prick, how they lie.

American Gothic: Revival

. . . these are the very hours during which solitude grows; for its growing is painful as the growing of boys . . .
—from Rilke’s Letters to a Young Poet

Dear Rilke, I am not young and I am not a poet. I slink around the city, disaster-footed, sure for danger, face unknown, I pull my hoodie up. I snick around, I slink around the city’s back. Short for danger. My motherless face bagged. I like a girl at Taco Bell but she knows only my voice. I wear my clothes like a blanket around the shipwreck of my body, the et cetera of my body. Like Dracula, I don’t exist. There is no such thing as a moonless night. There are only nights and nights in a blown together indigo accordion. I’m there at 2 a.m. to shut down Leilani’s, pilfer burritos and lumpia. I like to keep zippered all the way. I like the sound my skateboard makes on the asphalt. I think dreadlock is a funny way of putting it. I call my face a jihad. I, the lesser victor. I call my face a tattoo. One my father gave me—someone else’s face Frankensteined to mine. Inside my head, my father’s words,  notations, fatwas. My father stalks me like a footnote. Follows me—   when I see boards pasted with pictures of the missing, I look for my face. That is me, gone. It’s been much more than 24 hours. In society. Among citizens. I never take off my hood, because inside I’m all wolf. My reasons are still unknown.

Dear Rilke, I read your book. I read your book anyway.

 

Boy in a Box

In 1762, King Yongjo ordered his son Sado to step into a grain coffer and be sealed inside until death. Sado did it. They said he was crazy; they said he had strange habits and an obsession with garments, with silk; they said he killed servants and it was quite a mess; they said he was not a good son, not a good prince. It took eight days before he died in the rice box. They said.

Sado to himself

When I woke in the box, I was folded like a letter, doubled into my new robe. The silk sleeves pleased me. Paper can be folded only 8 times before the thickness presses back. I could bend once, but I could stay bent for 8 days. A spear of light poked me through the hinged slat and I saw my two fists so awkward, each stillborn, coiled, and dried. Sing: To market with these handsomely trimmed cuttlefish! I hear mother crying. When I woke, I was folded like a child. Not yet Confucian enough. I am a crumpled son, unruly. No part fit for crowning. No time to go back. There are days to spend. The next thing is to scoop that grain of barley into the boat of my nail, to practice my powers of two. Still adrift, dear father, dear father—one ear to the bench, the other uncovered.  An unwise position for a king.

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Sado v. rooster

I could not remember the lesson. Father asked and asked. My mind fell into the pond, all my answers swam like carp. My mind stumbled, dropped to the ground, all my answers breaking to pieces. He struck me with the ink block. How a father loves his son. (Dear Hyegyong, good wife, take note. How a royal does duty.) Afterward, when I called to my rooster to take the seed from my hand as he always does, he would not come. Oh but I made him. I opened his throat, pulled out all the lost answers one by one. I trailed them through the house to show father. Here they are, my answers, still warm. All the answers—take them. I draped them in his lap where they splayed like wet ribbons, like shined purses of skin. I knew someone had stolen them. I told you. The house is full of thieves, those hens.

 

Eyjafjallajokull

As ash from Iceland's Eyjafjallajokull volcano continued to keep European airspace shut down . . . affecting millions . . . agencies and airlines clashed . . .
Some restricted airspace is now beginning to open up.
—from The Boston Globe, April 19, 2010

            Il miglior fabbro

I’ve been reading Ashbery 
            again
            getting lost
            in all the names
hanging in the dusk-charged air
in O’Hara
and Bishop
and Ashbery.
            You are worried, I can see. Also
Berryman, 
Plath, Creeley,
Also Kerouac. And Blake.      And
Dickinson.
And three-named poets
of the Midwest.        Of Asia
                        occasionally Basho.
            And Ashbery.             It occurs to me
I have been reading a lot of pages
            out of order, and repeating, 
re-reading, and
still don’t know what
it’s all about.                 Tasking myself
                                    to get to the end, the last page,
                                    I kept following the unknown

                                    guide upriver through Situaciones,
the one 
who spoke                     to me from the page’s
                                    corner: Go to page 16.
I flipped.                       There, 
a study of                      you—subject
                                    pronouns, both similar to and different
                                    from their English
counterparts.

▲  

                                    Look more closely at
the word

“you.”                           Usted. Tú.
You formal.                   You informal.
The difference                lies
                                    in the degree of formality conveyed by
the speaker. 
                                    Go to 37. Now
                                    let’s translate
the model sentences:
                                    Mi libro es pequeño. 
My book is small.
                                    El tuyo es grande. 
Yours is large.
                                    Tu pluma es roja. 
Your pen is red.
                                    El mío es verde. 
Mine is green.
                                    These assume that
you                               you are talking
                                    to a friend, someone
you know well.
(Ustedes: large books, red pens.)
                                    Go to 22.
Definite and indefinite
                                    articles, gendered.
            Imagine a desk covered in pages.
            Take the page
                                    tome la página (43)
            a page
                                    una página  (3)
            any number of pages
            (51, 148, 92) 
Pay attention to
masculine, feminine, singular,  plural.
            (93, 17, 157, 30) I did.

▲  

            I did it all. I am a good follower. I am
            good at turning pages. 
                                    Señora said
at times I sound authentic.      Good, 
            good. My accent.
                                    Muy bueno. 
            Now I’ve lost it
                                    all except
                                    the conjugations.
I am. I mean.   As in

            for ser/estar. 
            For things permanent or essential—
inherent to a person, one says—
                                    for things temporary, such as location
                                    or emotional condition—for if 
the state you’re in is temporary.
            I’m not sure anymore,
            so I look it up
            online. I find
            it’s been asked before,
            a common question.
                                    “Soy? Estoy? Help!”
            An answer: 
                                    “I’d say estar is a resultant state
                                    and ser is what describes you.
            We have abused the difference …the myth
            of permanent vs non permanent; 
            although it is true sometimes, 
            it causes confusion with: 
                                    NY esta en EUA vs Yo soy estudiante. 
NY being                       in the USA is 
more permanent            than being a student. 
            (You always leave the school eventually.) 
                                    To be a student 
                                    describes you, your characteristics, 
and NY is                       in the USA as 
a result of                      something 
(place).”

 

            The pages never took me any place.
Abused, confused
me, the myth.               Soy estudiante 
more permanent. (It is true.) You
            always leave something, NY, a place, the difference.
Help.

▲  

I asked to be failed
that time. The TA
told me I should 
write a new language
for Asian America. 
Huh? I couldn’t 
even learn Spanish.
I wanted to
            say go to hell
            remember soy/estoy
            be new,
            be the one
                                    ¡post-lingual matrix changer!
                                    ¿unfetter us from almonds!
                                    ¿unload all this fake jade!
I failed. English
is the only language
I know. 

▲  

The first thing they teach you
to say is
Hello
my name is—

▲  

I am practicing
the name, the correct way.
                                    Eyjafjallajokull
erupts              in Iceland.
No one can                    go to Europe;
no one can leave.
No one can pronounce the name,
the consonants flow too fast to swim in.

The thing that’s erupting    —like a taboo, a profanity—    is
                                                          hard to say.

The announcers skip straight to the image,
“The volcano’s dust . . . a cloud of glass 
                                    shards in the atmosphere 
large and dangerous enough
to take down a jumbo jet” 
                         “dust so fine
it makes baby powder feel      like grit.” The announcers,
push
bravely along.
They discover it is easier

for the thing to become the name. Unluckily, 
on top of the volcano, now The Volcano,
there is a glacier with the same name as The Volcano.
Now, The Glacier. (Or, The Icelandic Glacier for clarity.)

There seems to be no way around the name,
the very big name.

“The volcanic eruption beneath 
The Glacier 
has captured imaginations around the world, spawned . . .
                                                devoted Twitter 
following under the name 
#ashtag . . .
The Volcano                has drawn millions . . . The 
. . .
large-scale
beauty.”

 

They probably tell them:
keep talking, plod on through the dust, the freeze, the unsayable syllables,
amid factories and buildings, flow serenely though your tongue is ice.

 

In the photos,                          a sun
comes out of   
The Volcano.

His head          
                        belches sun.

▲

Once, I was on my way up
a small mountain or a very large hill
(could’ve been 
a volcano) following 
behind the better climbers. I had to 
stop. I saw this sign:

            When confronted by a mountain lion,
            do not turn away, 
            do not run, do not scream, or crouch, 
            do not cry,
            do not play dead. 
            Doing these makes you seem like prey.

            Instead, make yourself as big as possible, as large.

                                                That’s it.                      Open up your coat.

            Throw things. Rocks are one choice.

                                                Is there a volcano inside?
                                                Something unpronounceable,
                                                unrepeatable?
 
            A stare-down may be in order. 
            Speak in a low, firm voice.     Like a man.

Be a man.

Stand up and face him. 

 

            Also, there is slowly walking away,
            backwards, 
            the way you came.

            Or, most around here carry a pen knife;
            lions have been killed this way.

 

The idea of being extraordinary*

was like the power lines, the ship’s hull’s
forward, forward

Thus my family gathered 
my letters and at regular intervals
washed away all that was written
Epistolary

form was occasionally resorted to
for self-presentation. Relying on each other
my son and I 
thus preserved ourselves

On the night of the seventeenth 
he is reported to have dreamt 
that a black dragon appeared 
on the wall of the room in which Mother was staying.
This led them to expect 
a boy
Experiences

are not things that can be written down in detail
and so I will omit them
arrange chronological details to construct 
the closest approximation 
to the ideal

(Occasionally resort to
my letters)

The publishers expressed a wish that I 
should furnish them with some account of the origin 
of the story

Still I did nothing
I gave the world an elephant
to support it
I stood on a tortoise
The materials in place       invention, 
suggested, out of void

life appeared 
my lot
not confined to my own identity 
I could people the hours, the shape 
lost beneath the fated house, 
the forehead of boys

Didn’t know what to do

(the poets, annoyed, relinquished their task)

He hurt his own precious body quite a lot
all this out of filial concern
His illness grew much worse

though I am only a woman, I have read 
a considerable number of unofficial histories 
of this dynasty
translated  I wrote 
in a most common-place style
belonging to our house, the bleak sides

We are continually reminded of the story
of Columbus and his egg, Darwin’s vermicelli

born, fostered

Grief seemed to turn into that tumor

Things have not been dealt with straightforwardly
There are two versions of the incident that year

the pale student, the thing he had put together, a man 
stretched out, some powerful engine, stands
glassy, unlucky

Behold, the white high Alps

It is hard to describe the depth of my loneliness
accumulating since childhood
there simply is no room
to allow even one loose word
both versions 
are defamatory neither 
is factually correct

I did not make myself (the heroine)
born of a vulgar mother

My husband however, was, from the first, 
very anxious that I should prove myself worthy
of my parentage

In the final analysis, we were all unfilial.

Tinker Bell Thinks About What She Wants

To this Tink replied in these words, ‘you silly ass,’ and disappeared into the bathroom.  “She is quite a common fairy,” Peter explained apologetically, “she is called Tinker Bell because she mends the pots and kettles.”  —J. M. Barrie, Peter Pan and Wendy

Tink. Tink.  Makes me sick, the lick
of their soft calls, this flighty work:

dust won’t take the dents 
from these pots, won’t unwarp the kettle. 

I want impact, the magic of my fists  
fixing metal through their brute launch.

Wish I’d had the luck to gulp a clock—
to have a life divided by firm ticking

from a heavy center.  Instead Tink, Tink
coming always from the outside, feather-

feeble, the brush of words from boys 
who’ll never want more than a mother.

Instead I’m steam—Goddamn—desire like waters
thinning to the ends of me and lifting                 

me unwilling from the earth 
each time I see him.             Peter,

pull me down. I want you 
but wish I did not need your hands

to do my dirt work, your heavy heat to solder 
or your pretty mouth to                 

tell me over, make me more     
than a sliver of a dead child’s laugh.

Kiss me kettle-hard: yank                     
my sorry ass from Never.   

Somewhere I’m skin without wings.
Somewhere my name means tough as light.

 

What Wendy Tells Her Brother

“Listen, then,” said Wendy, settling down to her story, with Michael at her feet. . . . ”There was once a gentleman [whose]  name . . . was Mr. Darling, and her name was Mrs. Darling.” 
“I think I knew them,” said Michael rather doubtfully .  —J.M. Barrie, Peter Pan and Wendy

Don’t you remember
living behind bricks, 
dry paper asters flowering to the wall
and curtains rough and broad
drifting past the glass that held us?
The yellow roses pouring down our mother’s dress?
Don’t you remember
the smell of her—lemon and ash—
her skin’s speckle like wrens’ eggs 
and the warm wind of her moving in 
off the edge of the bed, to hover 
by cool sheets and bring her hands
down on your face 
like rain?  We were safe there,
bandaged to our beds by cotton quilts,
hearing the scratch of toothless things—
her slippers’ dull drag on the tile.
Sometimes I want to follow the sky back
to that dream, where I’m
a daughter again and you’re
nosing someone else’s knee.
We carried coins and umbrellas
and read a black clock on the wall.
And though it wasn’t real
it was home.  And though it was in time
it was ours, the mother and father
who draped the air, their bodies strange 
and soft with yearning.
It felt right to have a mother, to live
in the lap of a world I hadn’t made.
Don’t you remember?
It felt just like this story
that I am telling you.

 

Wendy Remembers Falling
London, 1930

I had only wanted my mother.
You’d think it would be flight 

I’d remember—that sweet ache, 
my new body swimming
all night through a garnet sky—

but here at King’s Cross 
when I feel the engine lurch

I’m falling down the slate 
stairs again to my mother,
dead ten years now but still standing

at the foot of the past in her yellow dress, 
her hand a wing or cry that lifts 

but will never meet my small hips 
which rise and lose air spinning
hand-to-kneebone, shoulders storming steps

until my chin splinters: arrival strikes my tongue. 
I had only wanted her hands—

the leather of her warm fingers in my hair, 
even the smooth-glass drag of her ring.
Now I wonder if that’s why

I learned to fly:
because the only way down

had turned out to be
the crack of my bones and hard rain,
because all her hands had done

was find her lips
and rest against them

as I slapped and slid my hard way
to her shoes: their refusal,
that alien brown shine.

 

Notes from a Fairy Autopsy

“It was poisoned, Peter,” [Tinker Bell] told him softly, “and now I am going to be dead.”  —JM Barrie, Peter Pan and Wendy

1.  The Initial Report

How can I tell 
what’s missing?
In the bowl: the glint of her 
powdered, red-gold, 
webbed
by the jet shine
of her thin flight-bones

and a button,
the pearl-eye 
from the center 
of her left wing—
stolen, she’d once said,
from her mother’s 
last coat.

Searched too and set
on the tray: buds
of loose glass stained
suicide-blue
and the bits of dark-wine shell
that starred
her blood, gone bronze

now that it’s dried in trails
through the handful
of painted dust
we’re calling a girl:

and here,
two bones from the tongue
of a lark—
I can’t even say.

They smell like apples.
They may have been her hands.


2. Cause of Death

Well, did somebody hit her?
Wendy was never 
her friend, but Wendy’s gone
years now, her strong arms
likely folded on some train 
through London,
the city she’d tell  
when we needed bricks in rain.

We’d say Pirates,
but they always swarmed 
down like storms—
and now without Hook  
they just stink and swear dull songs.
At that hour 
all their silver threats
were sleeping.

Kill a fairy?
Can’t think who’d care
enough anymore.

She once claimed she’d been poisoned—
her trick, we think,
to make us say  
we believed.
A tooth-bright ocean, her need.

This morning we woke
to find her petal-pressed to the wall,
a lit map, a coral-and-wine
bright shrine of a stain. 
Maybe a dream did her in.

Could she have been old?
We don’t ask that here.
Peter needs all 
our play foul.  
Grief grounds him.


3.  Confession from the Coroner

So, I’m not
really a doctor—
just the boy Pete
gave the white coat.
I’ve got a handkerchief shroud 
and an oily toothpick dagger.
I don’t know what killed her

and if you ask me
we’re all 
dead already.
I miss my mother.  She’d know why 
I’m standing over a tray
of crushed wings, numberless sunset bones.
I miss her
and her warm, dry skin.

Eurydice (Inversion)

At her gunmetal taste he remembered his own death some days before, and he followed her out of the city past the train yards, under a white sky, light glancing off her rippling skirt, deep blue silk he had shredded from her waist as she flung herself backward like a bridge across blind air, and even with her salted ribcage beneath his tongue he knew her no more than music heard at a distance, no more than sunrise. His rage tore along his spine and ran out the soles of his feet scoring the dust. Helpless he stalked behind her body cupped like a sail against the wind, her scent of flowers and blood curling at back of his throat as buildings fell away, chicory, queen anne’s lace, trees ascendant, scrubby lots and telephone wires, a dog wildly barking. The road curved through a young wood gripped with brambles, and white petals skittered after him as he emerged, tripped on a child’s bicycle, fetched up among a flock of stone geese and she receded and receded and he wondered when she would reach the horizon and then would she finally look back so he could grasp her throat and kiss her again but he became confused and saw her turning and turning not back to him but like a dancer there on the horizon line seared silver across the land as he fell.

 

Why does your face?
(After Gilgamesh, Tablet X)

When she was first born my child’s face
was that of one who had undergone a long journey.

In the warm room, her lips moved whispering 
secrets I heard but did not understand until

she slept, and the air around her small hands 
untied my knotted heart. I tore my hair

and wept at the secrets I did not understand
until she slept and I saw the breath flutter

in her throat, and the green veins drawn 
along her wrists. I sang to her, Why does your face

look like that of one who has made a long
journey? I was a bow strung tight

and slowly I stretched to cradle the arrow’s
willing length. Now it has sprung from me

and I tear my hair and weep that it will meet
its mark in a green field I cannot know. Until

my child slept I did not understand why her face 
looked as if she had endured a long journey

until I watched her mouth reveal her breath
and the flicker of her eyes beneath their lids.

 

Ganymede, Largest Satellite of Jupiter, Travels 
In a 1:2:4 Orbital Resonance With Europa and Io

—and his dogs’ barking faded, the last glimpse

of his comrades’ gaping mouths, and his weight
curled in the eagle’s claw. The heft of wing

beats. His muscles slackened, the bird peered
down at him, chuckled with delight at the pearls
of his earlobes, his tapered fingers still wound
round a useless bow. Now, hand round the wine,

cup-bearer they sang out, crashing golden
goblets across the sky. 
                                     For the first billion years, 
he tossed vessels into heaps of shattered clay, drowned 
out Zeus’s whispers with his own magnetosphere.
 
By the time the spyglass found him he had lapsed 
into silence, turned his back to the fond red eye

secreted his heat within a liquid iron core. 


During the Other
                        after C. K. Williams

Do they know how much love is left
on the earth? Five tiny bits of love are left,
seared on one nerve like a birthmark.
And how many joys there still are? One joy,
and another and the next one and this one.

And there is one betrayal left, judging
by the taste of the poison and one 
apartment and one knife and one groan
of recognition that rises from the disappearing 
cities and the wind-scoured hilltops.

And so this evening, anticipating the second
joy from the last, knowing pleasure in 
my first skin, chips in the paint, 
flies in the Vaseline
this evening, for someone who’s not even
certain he exists, I contrive smiles.
I add up the tax and the tip.
I howl. I pay for everything.

 

Holy Days

The seasonal displays are going up 
all over town. Across the street 
my neighbors light one candle 
in each window, drape pine swags 
from all their porch rails, spill red 
velveteen in one large bow down their 
front door. 
                        Signals reach us in our cars.
AM talk shows, FM news. Reports 
from the Iraqi war, bowl game match-ups, 
losers, blues. There’s no reason to repeat
any of this. No reason to recount a rumor 
that’s been circulating about the Taliban 
leader, Mullah Omar, how he forbids his 
people music. As if the music of his own
name, and the names of far cities like Kabul 
and Kandahar, were not enough to delight 
a weary ear. 
                        When the infidels raided his 
compound, it is said, Omar fled, leaving 
behind his limited edition Toyota Land 
Cruiser.  One reporter claimed he witnessed
this, claimed he climbed in with an Afghan 
soldier who turned it over, unprepared  
for the blasting bass-line of the western-
pop CD the mullah also left behind, cranked 
up in the player. 
                        A silly story, still, it gives me 
hope. It makes the evil ones seem almost 
human. Almost as human as Larry and Barbara         
there across the street. Superstitious barbarians. 
Look at them, stringing up their talismans.  
As if green boughs and silver foil could 
save us from the daily growing dark.

 

Last Call, 1989

It’s three in the morning.  I could leave 
a message, for all the good it would do.  

Not to say anything profound, just to admit 
something mundane and essentially meaningless.

I watched a documentary today about wolves.  
Seems they’re nearly extinct on the Great Plains. 

Certain activists hope to restore the species 
in its natural habitat. Others have tried to breed

hybrids, crossing native stocks with calmer canine 
strains like huskies or German shepherds. 

But people have been attacked by some of these 
chimeras—the experts claim nothing can drown out

the faint, feral soundings of wild blood.  This might  
explain our human fits of rage. How trapped we can

become inside the groping, ersatz language of  
a fight.  The things we save or choose to throw away.

Like the cassettes I packed up with our old answering 
machine. When one got broken in the move I tossed it

from a third story window and it tangled in
an inconvenient tree.  The tape, slowly unspooling

in sunlit gusts across the lawn, easily gave up its coded 
versions of our voices.  I dodged the dark knots of it

a hundred times, going back and forth, carrying things. 
Until I found myself looking forward to the predictable

fear of tripping over it, feeling vindicated as I managed 
each small uncertainty. Unlike this dread that sets in

sometimes when I’m climbing my new staircase in the dark.
Some nights I lose count, step up blindly toward something

that should be solid pine but it’s not there. Funny how the heart 
panics, instinctively, startled by the hard fact of thin air.

 

Grand Illumination: A Koan

It’s taken years of planning and more than a few 
lucky accidents to arrive here, at this moment 
of truth. The crowd is growing wild.

What we must contemplate is just how many glances 
fit within the match-flare’s finite release
of energy, its visible spending.

Imagine a stadium as large as imagination 
might make it, so many seats that all of history 
could be seated there.

So many eyes that even the dozers,
the nearly passed-out, dull drunkards 
fresh off the boats from anywhere

amount to little more than a hoard
the scalpers could handle, hawking chits
at face-value just to break even.

In the salient darkness at center field
a solitary figure stands, ready to smoke 
one ‘cause she’s got it, to taste the rolled nightshade

like her own ache as it becomes immolation.
Way up in the nose-bleeds you’re paying close
attention, but, never the best relativist, you fear

the breeze is stiff enough to ruin the experiment,
snuff out her flame so fast it just won’t register to all 
the gathered throng, the obverse of that falling tree.

For argument’s sake the crowd is so large 
that any random sampling will suffice to drain 
the passing flash down to its last quantum.

Who’s left in darkness here? How many fail 
to see that sulfur spark of yellow-blue she’s lifted
toward herself, inhaling what she’s barely set alight?

 

Tambourine
              after David St. John

I have always loved the word. 
And, though I have never known gypsies,
I have always cherished dreams of them,
nomadic and not loved enough by the world
they wander through, scattering ballads.
The world could never pay them back for that.
Or you, little niece, little C-section,
who spent two days trying to enter it
through the bloodied gate of your mother’s 
body, only to find it shut against you
by the bony hand of her pelvis. After
that much struggle, I could never praise you
enough. Still I look forward to spending 
my spare time with you, riding nowhere 
in my truck. To the way we’ll listen together 
for the automatic metallic jerk of the blinker 
unkinking its twisted arm and plan impossible
perfect weddings for you, with elements
of voodoo and pagan ceremony
beside a chlorinated pool. I foresee
white doves, jessed with lace and tinny 
bells, held in festooned wicker cages
fluttering and jingling, out of time,
their netted bones a charm against the evil
such soft music can’t repel. Your sullen cousins, 
pulled from little league for the afternoon, 
will carry the birds before you and after you.  
You see, it must be afternoon, late enough
for you to make your promise and release them
just as the sky releases the setting sun
from its day lit cage.  The summer breeze
will be the one hand gentle and invisible
enough to raise itself against the closed
circle of skin you carry, your bouquet 
of cymbals perfuming the air with trembling 
song. And, as you round the familiar corner 
of your vows, the signal of daylight winking out 
behind you, look up, take in their dark eyes, 
their white wings to zils struck in rhythm 
for good luck escaping, rising away, clean. 
I’ve always loved the word tambourine.

Because I’ll Never Swim in Every Ocean

Want is ten thousand blue feathers falling
all around me, and me unable to stomach 
that I might catch five but never ten thousand. 
So I drop my hands to my sides and wait 
to be buried. I open a book and the words 
spring and taunt. Flashes—motel, lapidary, 
piranha—of every story, every poem I’ll never 
know well enough to conjure in sleep. 
What’s the point of words if I can’t
own them all? I toss book after book
into my imaginary trashcan fire. 
Or I think I’ll learn piano. At the first lesson, 
we’re clapping whole and half notes 
and this is childish, I’m better than this. 
I’d like to leave playing Ravel. I’d like
to give a concerto on Saturday. So I quit.
I have standards. Then on Saturday, 
I have a beer, watch a telethon. Or
we watch a documentary on Antarctica. 
The interviewees are from Belarus, Lima, Berlin. 
Everyone speaks English. Everyone names 
a philosopher, an ethos. One man carries a raft 
on his back at all times. I went to Nebraska once
and swore it was a great adventure. It was. 
I think of how I’ll never go to Antarctica, 
mainly because I don’t much want to. But 
I should want to. I should be the girl 
with a raft on her back. When I think 
of all the mountains and monuments 
and skyscapes I haven’t seen, all the trains 
I should take, all the camels and mopeds 
and ferries I should ride, all the scorching
hikes I should nearly die on, I press 
my body down, down into the vast green 
couch. If I step out the door, the infinity 
of what I’ve missed will zorro me across 
the face with a big L for Lazy. Sometimes 
I watch finches at the feeder, their wings small 
suns, and have to grab the sill to steady myself. 
Metaphorically, of course. I’m no loon. 
Look—even my awestruck is half-assed. 
But I’m so tired of the small steps—
the pentatonic scale, the frequent flyer
hoarding, the one exquisite sentence
in a forest of exquisite sentences. 
There is a globe welling up inside of me. 
Mountain ranges ridging my skin,
oceans filling my mouth. If I stay still
long enough, I could become my own world.

 

For This You Have No Reason

In Sacramento, a Virgin Mary has begun spilling 
blood from its stone eyes. Articles offer theories:

a prank, a rusting mineral. There is no explanation,
I say over and over, my heart tensed like a fist. Once,

at Chez la Mer, I watched a magician turn silver coins 
into yellow fin tuna while diners oohed. When the room

shuddered with calls for the big reveal, I ducked 
outside, humming to cover the sound of the secret.

Here are facts: the dog gone for a decade makes
its way to Arizona and finds its family still pining,

now joy-struck. The wooden Christ in St. Stephen’s 
Cathedral grows hair, and is groomed every year

before Easter. A friend’s father saw three UFOs 
zoom into a lit triangle, then shoot to far

corners of the lake-dark sky. He was not a man 
who lied. For years I found playing cards facedown

on sidewalks, and each was the jack of hearts—
absurd, but I swear this is true. Here, each face said,

for this you have no reason. Each new finding shores up 
something always close to collapse inside my ribs.

Let these strangenesses be like the impossible lizard’s 
tail: gone forever, because how could it be otherwise,

and then reappearing, iridescent and blood-warmed, 
because how could it be otherwise?

 

Scale

At the base of a mountain, 
you are small, and the world
clicks smoothly over you.

At the base of a mountain, 
you glow inside almost, 
and few lights are so generous.

At the base of a mountain, 
death is inevitable. Look 
how the rock has swallowed 
centuries. You could melt 
into its sun-ovened roughness.

At the base of a mountain, 
you see, in the hazeless light,
the revised version of yourself.
You think, I will do what it takes 
to breathe this prickling air. 
You think, I will turn alarm bells
into pine needles, and then 
I’ll walk over them. You think, 
I’ll let my hair grow again. 
I’ll eat apples, avocados. 

You think, there is nothing 
ahead and nothing behind. 
You think of a thousand songs
and choose silence. It whistles 
softly to you. No. It’s whistling 
to the mountain. It doesn’t 
even know you’re there.

 

The Seventies Aren’t Coming Back

Never again will George bellow at Louise 
on a school night. Never again will the audience 
adore Florence. The soft plumes of Miss Maryland’s 
hair were sincere and fantastic, but ventriloquists
never won; Miss Texas would take it, if you knew 
anything about beauty and you did. The couch 
was velour and the color of bricks. Your mind 
was a minefield—every wicked thought a tripwire 
you sprung again and again until you evaporated 
inside guilt’s white blasts. The six o’clock news 
hummed in the background like the cicadas outside 
your window. What war? The couch was so soft. 
Miss Maryland was a cockatiel. Your head 
was a haunted factory, but there was cinnamon 
in the spaghetti sauce. The O’Jays were on the radio. 
You knew Rhoda Morganstern and Spiro T. Agnew 
and how to find the groove for “Brand New Key.” 
Sometimes you got trapped in dreams—waking 
was a window you could see through but not open. 
The studio audience wore red and beige; the host 
had large, cheerful teeth. Door Number Three 
revealed a horse, and the band played wah-wah, 
but you wanted Door Number Three. No one 
understood. You were locked in yourself all day, 
all night, like the song that buzzed in your brain 
when you were translucent with fever. Every movie 
your parents watched ended with a sax solo. It floated 
through the vents to where you almost slept. 
You rode its waves straight into longing, 
where you live now, where you’ll live forever.


Syria, 2011

Have you seen the Middle Eastern sun
gleaming through a curtained window,
slanting its rays upon a platter of kibbeh, 
drawing arcs on a silk Shambar ahmar,
casting half-an-olive face to a nimbus, 
bronzing a dribbling, gold nib,
sketching shadows on marginalia,
muffling voices to a lion’s nap
till rest has swelled a highwater?

We Who Live Here See Air

the shapes it takes in other air, clarity
partial potential

peaks often snow-covered the mountain
never its own color of air

over the air the dark of invisible
glitters

the shapes of air are many I collect
them all, my small hobby

here are approaches for
the nonlinear analysis of

for example 
mountain air radiant

a study of cloud as boundary

geometric and equilibrial relations
in explicit closed forms

variations on cloud, condensate forming
its own skin—the edge of cloud

above a mountain-shaped mass
with snow which formed then fell through its own

cloud is one kind.

 

Cipher

Privacy privileges an inside. We are social creatures we are 
told. Words get out, outside, and when our mother began 
her disease she knew the difference, inside versus outside. 
Deprived, she spoke even when eating, when she could eat. 
Then she could speak but not swallow so a hole was made in 
her where food could go in. Then she could no longer speak 
but when I visited she wrote things on a notebook she carried 
with her always. Always I carried a notebook too but she could 
hear so I did not write. She wrote but then her hands shook 
and then she did not write and did not eat and did not leave 
her house her room her bed and there is a kind of breathing 
called Cheyne-Stokes which she did which was a sign the 
boundary between inside and outside was growing firmer, 
sharper and then the breathing stopped. Her last note I kept 
I have been trying to decipher. I know some of the words.

 

At Henri Michaux’s

                        I told him how much I envied him for this
            silence. He interrupted me: From time to time I hear
            a child. That’s normal, I said to him without thinking.
            Excuse me, he cut me off once again, it’s not at all
            normal. It would be normal if I heard a tiger, not a child.
                        Mircea Eliade, Journal II, 21 July 1961

To celebrate sound and silence we have
fabulous friends and fable is a sound especially
at night with light reflecting off the page.

They do sleep some nights and hear only
distantly the cries tigerish of territory.
If I cry myself I show sincerity
of the child not the tiger. Sincere tiger
startles. I sleep soundly
through silence but awaken with a start.

~

Geometry meant measure
of the earth itself not distant silence
before flayed earth naked turned

abstract as any continuous curve
as in words stretched: tense, tendon,
tenet, tent, tenor, tender, pretend
all that in space extended
hypotenuse tenure in time, too. Sounds
of a child in the night is natural

a cry having lost his toy her toy
a stuffed tiger a doll a dearness
under duress. This in the night

~

under the linens a lining
so-called “bed-clothes” in which to wrap
and sleep a self a me

involved: the circling sounds
or lines out of sight I thought
I heard the told the telling
driving north to south entire
continental the words wore
out, no, driving Prudhoe Bay

to Ushuaia (the terminus
was Buenos Aires when as a child
I heard first the story of the highway

some engineer’s dream) Line lingers
lingery lingerie, but I meant
a dream of driving whole continents
contiguous continuously
toying out the time.
A dream is dreary a drive

in the night with tigers passing
jungled beyond the windows
the cheering sounds of sounds of

celebrate that. Earth. I live here.
I am abstract. Outrageous.
I cry and cringe. Tiger and Toy. Child.

 

Margery Kempe and the Questionings

Later a lesser cleric came to her to ask what words
she would recommend for one so humble, so pointless.

She replied: mine is not the body, my disagreeable need. Persist at risk. Do as you     will.

He said: Too many words. I am small and all.

She said: Increase, multiply. The smallness of one
becomes two, then four, eight, sixteen, thirty-
two of you

and the fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast—your pets will    tremble, 
your livestock will flee—and neither air nor water
will hide them. Into your well-toothed mouth
they will scamper

and your anguish will require their blood.

And then Margery Kempe stopped speaking
to the lesser cleric with a shameful hunger

who had no Latin, no Greek, no books.
“Banish” is a curious word. To summon. To curse.

 

Random Walk (Central Limit Theorem)

She grew there, up, among plants
and images, insects, sex, and such.
Animals to serve her, here, served

a mind most attached, to be attached—
look how lovely love is, the humidity
and the shape of the leaf (sword shape)

and the shade it cast, palmetto. If I
could I would bring “green” into the poem.
five hundred and ten nanometers

right in the middle of the visible spectrum.
Specter. The green of palmetto darkened
with depth into the swamp she waded

into a kind of danger not very but still
there were snakes and sex, insects
and there was the growing to do.

Those leaves, those palmetto fronds
would wave in wind, would cut flesh.
Kepler was the first to use “focus”

for a geometrical shape, the spot
where rays come together, as sun
focused into a fire hazard by boys

around ant beds. Her adventures
were bucolic, leisurely, greenly
gathering among wildlife

and an occasional orchid (a keen
eye needed to find it, but there
it could be), curious testament.

 

Going Without, Saying

A magnet might erase—erasure as reversible—I 
played with magnets watched one spin when
held against the other north to north like repels

it is light—there is light now visible—no
night is going, elsewhere—a shadowy not self

in the morning light a morning glory
morning face insects to dine there, thereon—slenderer
messages sent against fasting far ranging
arranging daylight against green of grass and all

when I see the flower stem bend with the weight
of the bee I know what to believe every
emperor clothed the shell of the thing flies
from the thing into the eye is belief. My eye.

 

Litmus

Light moss along the north
   sides the trees boy scout lore
      the handbook the brilliance

these trees nearby mines 
   abandoned arsenic, zinc,
      cadmium, copper,

Peru Creek, seven 
   thousand abandoned mines 
      Animas River devoid

cast out all aquatic life
   I do not know this
      I am a visitor

you loved me once
   anyway, left a little
     for the next in line

but looked only up to 
   the sky when the sky 
      was its blackest

and polished telescopes
   fiddled with settings
      photographed Jupiter,

photographed Mars and
   stars amid galaxies 
      spinning like hard drives

spinning like wheels within 
   wheels, problems of distance and time
      offering problems of reason and rhyme

looked and liked it and claimed it:

“We find that the differences in the hour
are proportional to the distances between 
the places[of observation]. Hence one can                    Ptolemy
reasonably conclude that the earth’s surface                Mathematika Syntaxis
is spherical because its evenly curving                           Book 1
surface (for so it is when considered as a 
whole) cuts off [the heavenly bodies] for 
each set of observers in turn in a regular fashion”

First among equals we

will deal with body last
   because it has a surface, is first
      to know its own shape

like a breast which yields
  when asked by mouth
      the mouth and leaking breath

a tongue which takes a shape
   of an interior (think water)
      the lips and teeth and lungs,

alveoli, larynx, sphenoid sinuses,
   secret, silent adolescent . . .
      those who search the mouths

of lovers for something
   with the tongue, a Braille un-
      translatable, unlearned

others who listen in the night
   for the dream speech 
     of the beloved who answer,

to become one in her dream, 
   trying to trap her there
      one will open eyes as if

to force a seeing, a sight
   to force it into the brain
      to take a shape of thought

which is not yet thought, does
   not belong to lovers
      is no one’s tool or toy

or task, a last prime
   among the mysteries
      so much smaller so

divisible by itself and one
   but the Frenchman said
      if you laugh

it is because you are afraid;
   if you are afraid it is
      spring and floral;

fear has a botanical component
   Frenchmen fear flowers
      while Americans fear

minerals, heavy metals, flow
   of their own effluvia down
      stream land of little-leafed

flora; she was afraid
   to ask for details, for
      explanations of flowers near.

Depression

His morning routine: Lucky Charms and Dexedrine, a joint afterward if his fingers would let him. Could you call this happiness? he said to the mirror, straightening his eighty-dollar tie until it was crooked. He waited for the mirror to talk back. But the mirror kept laughing, trails of smoke stinging its eyes. The office was an hour away. In another town as equally depressed. But he wasn’t going there or anywhere really. Because the firm he worked for arranged liquidations. When business was good, business was bad. For everybody, including himself. Life is a short term gain, his father had told him, wheezing. Machines around him in perfect rhythm. Like an orchestra. The best of Brahms, his father added. Was there anything else to say? He examined cracks in the glass. He moved closer, breath on the mirror. The texture of tap water. Inside the cracks, another world he couldn’t inhabit. Life in miniature. The only way to take it since she left.

 

Manila Folders

Symbolism’s a bitch, his boss said, without irony. Tie on his neck as green as money. A portrait on the wall of Benjamin Franklin. They stared out the window of his office at a bird’s nest entombed in a spider web. Such intricate netting. On his desk: the details of three new clients in a stack of manila folders, which meant three more failed businesses in town. The confetti of pink slips. Grief’s ecosystem. New life nourished by the old like maggots in road kill. What’s the matter? his boss asked. Cat got your tongue? On the drive an hour later, a mutt lying in the center of the two-lane highway, half a mile from home. He stopped, waited, hovered like a turkey hawk. But the dog didn’t move for two minutes according to his BlackBerry. He tried to concentrate on its chest, but he couldn’t tell if it was breathing. No traffic in the rear view. Nothing coming from the other direction.

The Shelter

I set all of the hedges on fire myself. We’ve had to hide in the mushroom cellar, it smells like hot 
paint sometimes, the smell has a weight, a bread weight, a loaf. The trees are mostly quiet now. 
We have retreated. In the cellar my husband rests his gun on his lap, he says forget about the hedges, 
as they are burning the smoke forms a shelter. There may be a way in we can’t see. Out there, gaining, 
the squares of marble, the wedge of iron, the violet cloth draping from the wires and the faces 
of the lost, the sparrows of incredible speed.

 

Rubric

Wait by the landing for the water. Blight of crop
becomes blight of fields becomes just blight, already
pink heliotrope in rows on the windowsill,
the white in our house overtaken. I’ve made you
a jar of gloves, I’ve sunk one tangerine into
the nest of gray. An ice-dripping apparatus
sits stippled in the sun. Bend the stones around each
aqueduct, complete the pattern of mesh and soap,
you’ll know the place by its overabundance. Bright
slurry will sweep and surge, past delicate systems
of jeweled tripods, a piece of your thigh taken 
out by frost. The sun rises behind your head,
it filters through the ice-tipped leaves as they decay,
it bristles in the net work, clarifies your ear. 

So the posture corresponds
sun through or on the under-
sides of leaves, a glint like

rosemary hinted toward by
the cup’s lip, though I miss
you, though have polished

metal to mirror, a nostalgia
not of this year but historic,
impersonal, unwell, yet

conserves its lovely heft
shrewd to me, stretched on
a rain couch hands within reeds

Your syllabus was not desire but
its tributarial wanings had
in mind the cardstock quality of
this yawn I wish contagious so
you will show me not
the refrain but a feeling I know
this song a mouth it is the one
with slices of hound mid wood
fence an effect seasonal in every
season

Once I read a math workbook, onto audio cassette

For the blind. Pausing for answers

~

I wish to say too much

As one steps, overdressed, into an unexpected summer

~

Now take a consequential breath

The wedge you cut

Has all the lemon’s juice

~

I pinch the wick. This yellow sign

Has gone white

The children it warned of have gone

~

Filled the well with seed until it absorbed the spring’s last seep and something could blossom slightly there

~

Dear _____,

You & I sit in the center of a long string spooled and counter-strung off branch tines and coiled at a playground ladder’s bend, now lifted to a cradled shape by wind. Hummingbirds can land on it, I won’t mind. I touch each part in case: blood. Elastic like shaved ice, the good ongoing light takes its time, drumming like typing students’ fingers on their rubber, dummy keys.

It comes to me: in _____, you will see Things I could not provide but here the avid hours hold up as a man carying several keyholes around. I recall your agate breath. Roughed lemon in the halo of a hanging copper dish, walls we pressed like in a lung against

~

To say memory undercuts

The present

Sense that memory is perceiving not

In relation to

Yet through the country of

My eyes had no color but what they saw

~

Did you see it he said no she said I saw it the day before and after

~

It takes seven years to be an official

Missing person

They’re taking down the canvas

Around the booths

On the closed streets

~

When you read this I may no longer be in love

~

Rome, 2002

Impatient with sculpture, she nevertheless enjoyed the painted shutters pinned open near dusk. Out one, laundry steam animate as marble wings scrolled violate toward a man bare to his stomach leaning on forearms that could have been two small dogs, the pastry dangling from one hand an errant bone.

The definition of art was once defensible tenderness.

Still, certain the last must be best, yet also that the best is everything at once, she held a book so shade made the page indistinguishable from general dusk in the square. Using a wooden wand, the pancake man spread his batter. Some light leeched from the hook-rug clouds, spanning the fountain’s sway. A section called “We Begin Now to Touch Secretly The Conjurer’s Hands.”

The magician is still assembling his crowd. He directs the few he’s caught to cheer, drawing others in. They applaud the barest moon.

~

Instead you

Gulls in a puddle, not feeding but washing

Because of where I grew

Water is always west

The Wine-Dark Sea

Knowing suffering
is a liturgy.

Knowing the eyeless
we grow more eyes.

Just think: your
own hand
is always awake.

I want to show you
what I saw
in the glass
where there is no longer
any glass.

Let’s keep everything
unburied
like a calendar clotted 
with nests.

 

The Wine-Dark Sea

Lay me down
in a bed full 
of rain.

So close to the river
the trucks & insects 
merge.

In the river
I’d be a difference.

Beneath the bridge,
an orange plastic bag
wedged into the stones.

In the river
I could be 
a catalog.

Lay me down
on the ceasing moon,
this morning.

 

The Wine-Dark Sea

The other one,
the supposing,
impersonal as diagnosis, 
waits in scratches
on the shiny steel.

First there is not enough water
& then too much.

The day eternal
& then a fly
buzzing the window’s glass.

The asphalt spills
into the caesura.

The whole mess
fidgets 
like an abnormal winter.

I live toward that.

 

The Wine-Dark Sea

To begin, water.

My bleached bones 
studded with gemstones.

I vanish as I appear.

My first teacher 
was a burning.

I change skins. 
It is a nursery.

I see my father 
incoherent

in the moment 
of his death.

I see the settling 
of the blood
beneath the skin.

I see the sun 
in his chest.

For me to live something
has to die.

My mother in white. 
I open my mouth

& gravel spills out.

Imaginary Portrait

A warbled intonation
emanates from the speakers
of a desktop computer
collapsing distance between bodies. Your voices
shift red to you, you to red shift
back again, coloring pronouns
with late-spring birdsong
in the space of fractured narratives
composed of white noise
and what it means to be
complicated, reddish, and alive.

 

Imaginary Portrait

Insomnia lulls you into landscapes
where everything is as real
as everything that is imaginary
and everything is as imaginary
as everything that is real.
The difference between everythings is little
more than a coyote
staring at you before it slips
between the rows of a barbed-wire fence
on top of a prairie ridge, leaving you
with liminal after-images.

 

Imaginary Portrait

A purple and crimson bruise
blossoms on your left shoulder
as an apple tree loses its petals
for a mind of summer. All that is new
transforms into marks
of misguided lovers shaping themselves
into another season's aesthetic
ritual to prolong the poem
living within sex sweat
of bodies and breath of
wine-soaked mouths.

 

Imaginary Portrait

Overcast sky, the angle of Flat
Iron canyons, and heavy
maroon drapes cloak
a bedroom in darkness
so you cannot even see black
silhouettes of bodies moving
in the night. This absence is
a monk's cowl under which hide
bluebirds that alighted from
the heavens many poems ago
failing to reappear until now.

 

Imaginary Portrait

You paint a vase of roses
one hundred times over, each one
a representation of the previous painting.
Roses look less like roses
with each subsequent attempt
yet you capture the idea
of roses more thoroughly
with every new permutation
enabling the viewer to understand
what it means to be a rose
in the illimitable imagination. 

Lux:  Times  Squared

You might hirple down from Central Park 
like windblown coupons for gentlemen’s clubs

or drift, apparitional, up from Battery Park
or rise in the crowd from the subway, 
as if called by the pulse of taxicab horns.

But arrive you will, and stand on an island 
on an island and isolate still 
to see dusk recast into a neon canyon. 
 
And you have seen lights like these before 
in the shine of new coins, 
in the gem-light eyes of fifth avenue,
once in the turbine flames of a lumberyard fire,
and once in the condensed eternity
of a lake-side Ferris Wheel 
as it bloomed at the hands of lightning.

Not far is the first fire from this fire,
charged, mosaic’d, taxi-window faceted,
now safe in the gloves of  cable and wires.

Say you return in pieces now
your life lashed to lives that have fallen away
and given their shadows to stones.

Say all of your life is a losing autumn.

No cold church, no bridge, no stern harbor statue,
will work as these lights work,
and work and every day.

This, the hub and crux,
leaking fire like a molten cup.
In immutable, electric starlight, to everyone,

Look up, they say, look up.

 

The  Night  Watch

The purity of want, immediate
as fire, calls and calls distantly through sleep, 
and meets me somewhere in my dream of her.
Before that somnolent bleat escalates, 
blooms to a skirl of bagpipe, to a red-faced 
locomotive punching the very air,
warping the tracks of sound, shaking out crows 
from the drowsy pine woods—before letters
of complaint arrive from neighbors long dead—
I’ll zombie down the endless stairs to her,
her mother’s milk on my wrist like a watch,
her plum-heart tapping like a blind man’s cane.
            I’d say I was awake already, listening,
             and sleep, even if endless, is no distance.

 

Apostrophe to Wistful

Wistful, the belonging part of remember,
the kiss and the Greyhound 
sighing closed, leaving town.

Wistful, the silent film
with Fond Regret and Pining For.

The petal-hand of goodbye 
from a ship forever sliding  
                       decades away.

Wistful, silence is your publisher 
and the vitreous pour of the moon.

Wistful, splinter-skinny, 
you hardly eat a thing in your Empire dress, 
disconsolate hair pin, Victorian knife— 
you keep a dull shine like a scar

 

Apostrophe to Splendid
 
Splendid, a child’s dance 
with an accomplished ending.
 
You, in the watch-workings of maypop,
in the small bells of clear drinks 
on sherbet-cool porches, 
or in any shine-happening in Charleston.
 
There, in the gloved hands of magnolia,
in the chanting bees’ vocation,
you are all French cuffs and cloche hats.
 
Splendid, you are two days out of the year,
a desert-flower-word, a certain peach,
a wren in the corvid sky.

 

Apostrophe to Brutal

Brutal, you drive careless and cruel before you,
            mean and un-sorry in your fur coat.
 
Brutal, you’ve a hog killer’s circumspection, 
lizard indifferent, cold as demoted Pluto.
 
Brutal with your wolverine empathy, you tip the cauldron 
over the parapet and tally dementia’s loses— 
            this afternoon, this name, a face
            I thought beyond forgetting’s reach.
 
Brutal, shark-certain, the tedious axe 
that cuts the mute root’s prayer.

Letter Written on the James

                                                                        To Joshua Poteat, from Richmond

When you ask, I’ll want to say maybe—
           maybe I have been here before,

family tour, class trip hemmed
                      in the back of the bus, or maybe

it’s just photographs I remember,
           the light that seems familiar,

the rain, the sepia morning,
                      the sepia afternoon that hold me

in a shop window over a history of the city
           I could walk through if I knew the way.

How long have I waited, sure some old idea 
           was about to come back,

waiting for someone to come and lead me away?

                      The smell of the bindings’ glue,
the thread now broken, fallen

           into a breath of tobacco and clay 
and the little snows of lint

           that fall whenever we check our phones.

So here I am in Carytown,

                      not remembering how I got here,
when the pressure drops, the rain comes again,

           and I feel like I’m rising out of myself,
becoming a column of air anyone can pass through,

                      taking some of the vapor, 
some of the warmth I have left

           and carry it through the streets to wherever they want.

Then, maybe I’m there, too, staring at a window’s
                      perfect sky in one of those hours

when a camera can make a morning of an afternoon, 
           dusk from dawn’s first feathers.

Then the day is a damp newspaper 
           folded on itself, one side smudging itself

on the other, and it’s easy to forget
                      what side of time you’re on . . .

Then the day comes apart, 
           decoupling in the wash of the James,

a drummer in Confederate gray
           takes up beneath the monument of Robert E. Lee,

and then it’s only the motion 
                      that distinguishes the living from the god.

If we could raise the image from the gutter 
           or the river, maybe we’d see them there

burning into one another, 
                      or maybe they’d just roil

into another cloud of birds 
           remembering what cannon smoke looks like,

starlings, blown from the explosion

                      and swept back north, pulled, 
as if on strings from the bluebirds’ cavities

           and reeled back into the cages, the cages
back to the boat, to Britain, to Shakespeare,

                      a strange display over the veteran’s barbecue—
dark firework in the evening of a century—

and everyone sucks his beard back into his face
           and returns to the lines. And maybe

this kid is one of them, almost a grandfather 
                      when the day runs back against itself

and he knows Lincoln will emancipate the bullet
           and they will have to fight the Seven Days again,

the young men, pale as fresh sheets of paper,
                      furling from Hollywood Cemetery

over Oregon Hill with orders 
           for Mechanicsville and Totopotomoy,

but this time the statues of the generals
                      are already there.

It is morning in Richmond, it is evening,

           and the generals are bronze, impervious,

so they march against the traffic,
                      Church Hill and Union Hill,

but no sees them, their slight exposures
           just tissues, vapor on the glass.

Maybe we’ve all seen this too many times before . . .

                      You can wait until the glasses are filled,
until the day shakes the ash from its cigarette,

           like lint from the wounds 
of the recalled battalions, filing from Chimbarazo

                      or the herons and egrets and gulls 
riding their thermals from the river

           then drifting back again,

stars spinning behind the sun 
                      so the twins come down.

One relieves the other, taking the drum
           and slinging it over his fresh gray coat,

its buttons and the drum’s knobs 
                      rhyming in the wipe of headlights,

the other, unbuttoned, cupping his face 
           in the bookstore’s window

so he can get the cigarette 
                      to learn the flame. The smoke plumes

into a parenthesis. The drumming stops,
           and they amble off into the dim.

Anyone could see them stopping on a corner
                      to catch a breath.

Maybe they’ve been doing this so long
           they’ve forgotten all the rest.

In the twilight, they cross the Fan,
                      then slip back into the cemetery

and down the bluff.

           They’ve got little discs of biscuit in their pockets

they’ll throw to the riverbirds
                      for a while, until even they get tired.

You’ve seen all this before,

           that moment when day retreats,
an explosion folding back into a cannonball,

                      foam dying back into the beer.

If someone mentioned it, 
           you would shake your head,

but no one says anything . . .

                      Not the twins, who are done
casting their biscuit to the birds,

           or the birds, who fold 
into the foliage along the banks.

                      We say they are sleeping now,
but we can see them, feathers casting back the light,

           we see them, glowing like lamps
all along the water, like pineknots

                      stevedores used, so fierce it seems

the dark can’t touch them.

           They burn all night, each night,
in case anyone remembers.

                      There is no other way they can tell us

there is only one year,
           and it repeats itself forever.

 

 

Eroteme

                                                                                   a Poteat


                                                  before

                            photographs
                              the light

                      the

                window                            the city

                                                       some old idea 

 

                                                       the                  glue,
the thread

       the little snows of lint

                        whenever

             I 
                             remember

                                                            myself,

 

_____

 

becoming a column of air anyone can pass through,

                      taking some of the vapor, 
some of the warmth I have left

           and carry it through the streets to wherever they want.

Then, maybe I’m there, too, staring at a window’s
                      perfect sky in one of those magic hours

when a camera can make a morning of an afternoon, 
           dusk from dawn’s first feathers.

Then the day is a damp newspaper 
           folded on itself, one side smudging itself

on the other, and it’s easy to forget
                      what side of time you’re on . . .

 

_____

 

           takes up beneath the monument of Robert E. Lee,

and then it’s only the motion 
                      that distinguishes the living from the god.

If we could raise the image from the gutter 
           or the river, maybe we’d see them there

into another cloud of birds 
           remembering what cannon smoke looks like,

                      and swept back north, pulled,

 

_____

 

                      a strange display over the veteran’s barbecue,
dark firework in the evening of a century

and everyone sucks his beard back into his face
           and returns to the lines, and maybe

                      when the day runs back against itself

 

the young men, pale as fresh sheets of paper,
                      furling from Hollywood Cemetery

           and the generals are bronze, impervious,

so they march against the traffic,
                      tissues, vapor on the glass.

 

_____

 

Maybe we’ve all seen this too many times before . . .

                      You can wait until the glasses are filled,
until the day shakes the ash from its cigarette,

           like lint from the wounds 
of the recalled battalions, filing from Chimbarazo

                      or the herons and egrets and gulls 
riding their thermals from the river

           then drifting back again,

 

_____

 

the stars spinning behind the sun 
                      so the twins come down.

One relieves the other, taking the drum
                      to learn the flame. The smoke plumes,

 

                      to catch a breath.

Maybe they’ve been doing this so long
           they’ve forgotten all the rest.

 

_____

In the twilight, they cross the Fan,
                      they slip back into the cemetery

and down the bluff.

           They’ve got little discs of biscuit in their pockets

they’ll throw to the riverbirds 
                      for a while, until even they get tired.

We have probably seen all this before,

           that moment when day retreats,
an explosion folding back into a cannonball,

                      foam dying back into the beer.

If someone mentioned it, 
           you would shake your head,

but no one says anything,

                      not the twins, who are done
casting their biscuit to the birds,

           or the birds, who fold 
into the foliage along the banks.

                      We say they are sleeping now,
but we can see them, feathers casting back the light,

           we can see them, glowing like lamps
all along the water, like pineknots

                      the stevedores used, so fierce it seems

the dark can’t touch them.

           They burn all night, each night,
in case anyone remembers.

                      There is no other way they can tell us

there is only one

North Carolina College for Women
                                           1992

We knew we were women. 
I mean, there were boys about
and we knew that need. 
We also had the need

to be taken seriously 
outside of our hometowns,

away from parents and secrets 
we didn’t want to discuss.

When we went home we were still girls, 
and we didn’t want that

so we didn’t go. 
We stayed on campus for the weekend 

and bought greasy cheeseburgers 
and danced at clubs

and slept with boys. But the next day, 
we didn’t mention the boys.

We shared poems and maybe 
the latest oil painting of a mermaid

rising up out of green tides. 
We were always broke.

We walked everywhere, 
wanted everything.

We shopped consignment 
and praised one another

for our finds of cardigans 
and costume jewelry.

There was so much to love,
except ourselves,

but we never let on. 
Poetry and art would do. They would stand

in place of self-love 
and it worked. It worked so well

we never gave it up. 

Up Late Packing While Outside It Rains

Rivulets, which are hungry and without surface, their mouths have mouths.  We’re not thirsty but we notice their thirst.  They redefine compassion by their persistence, so that it includes going first and also not explaining your actions.  Mouth, dark and snow stuffed, is and going to be.  Mary is sleeping and I’m not sleepy her breath is a wave as I type this.  Some cotton, on top of the plastic travel casing for her insulin pump, next to the keyboard, I shouldn’t complain about the clutter I’m making, three pairs of shoes on the floor, all mine.  I use my mouth all day long, which feeds a body of water that breathes, down the tip of my back, which awaits winter.

 

Chris’s Chickens

Or it’s very good to eat and it’s good to hang out with the chickens who spend their time eating.  Lay wrinkly oblong eggs.  Deep hearted chickens, God chooses the strangest of languages to discuss intimacies with us.  Mary tells me about the General, whose wings she clipped today, how this bird escaped and flew up a tree and then she clucked in surprise at my wife, as in how did I arrive here and I have been hearing stories and even though I’m up here I don’t like the view.  So Chris called the chicken down, fed her crushed seashells. Small and suddenly quiet you can feel the static like a very soft blanket.

 

Hula

Worn off a little.  Like the lilting like the flow of it, and the way that flow halts and resumes, the motion of the sea, to which so much is so.  Which is a danced lullaby, for women dressed in blue, their arms moving like ocean swells, where the feet step simply to the side and all is expressed in the upper body and arms.  Then be, or become, or display horror, or be horrified, get tacky, get Hollywood-style, grass-skirt hula dancing, two witty numbers.  Get set to soupy vocal music by Alfred Apaka, get to communicate, make them feel the dark mortal menace that hangs over me, in my heart, where all it does all day is dance, it dances like the sea.

 

All I Want to Do All Day Is Smoke Dope and Stare at Crows

He tries to sleep with crows in his bed, he likes having crows.  He gets fed by the crows, they feed him like a baby crow.  He goes to the bar the crows come along.  He goes to work they circle the plant.  He says hi to his daughter they grasp her in their claws and fly her towards him, she thinks she’s a crow.  They peck at his eyes, so he has to smoke dope.  Smoking dope, he smells like the art teacher’s office.  He plays bad music really loud, then he has to wear a suit that has nothing to do with healing his eyes.  Then he has to go to a concert, then he has to quit smoking, and his pupils become soft squares once more.

But all I want to do all day is smoke dope, stare at crows, and wonder how I’d handle my life if that thing with the birds ever happened to me.

Free

I’m lucky to have 
this bistro stool and table, the kids
at school, time before market and shuttling
to lessons, The Office Depot
for Pink Pearl erasers, colored chalk. 
Even better would be 
to score that awesome residency, 
a room by the sea in a dead movie star’s house, 
far from the hiss and grind of baristas 
shoveling beans, steaming rush hour milk,  
Rufus Wainwright crooning on hidden loop 
inside buckling walls. I could laugh 
or slit my meaningless wrists 
not that it’s funny thinking about 
last year’s residency pick, the Persian poet 
whose wife lost her head 
to a fascist regime, really, 
what do I know of suffering? 
If there were times wandering 
the mall, sobbing into my fries 
I thought of Paris, running free 
from debt, sick children, 
a stressed-out tryst, so what? 
In the stubbled turret of the Hotel Esmeralda 
I’d disappear, send smoke signals 
up my rickety flue. They’d shoot past 
Notre Dame, over ancient 
hobbled streets, a disembodied moon 
and still the gargoyles frozen 
to their indifferent haunches 
would grimace back, unmoved.

 

In the Mining Shaft

The ladder down is rickety 
and swoons, each rung a bent bow
under heel. The air thickens;
its black dream seethes. Mansion 
of many dooms, chained doors 
quicken, haunted, rupture breath
as the lamp-heart flickers, a yellow bird
swaying in sync. I don’t know
what I’m looking for, only know
it is more precious
than coal or gold. Some days
I think I won’t clock out,
won’t heed the weakening canaries,
resurrect or compose myself
in that cold, dim light. I’m lost
if I am anything. Deaf
to whistles, the land-lark cry, click
of my empty lunch pail,
its skull licked clean.

 

Birth
  
Blue yoga ball and mat in tow, 
soft spool of boom-box cello 
draping hospital drab with Bach, 
I sighed and chanted through the tepid cramps 
but when the hellish labor hit 
I screamed for shots: Demerol, I got, 
HMO protocol to stand down pain. 
The next hour, a Jimi Hendrix acid trip: 
purple haze of morphing faces, gloves, 
green masks and rubber hands 
zoomed in and out of focus, 
my husbands’ oozing eyeballs 
wet with worry, the blurred white shape 
of mother scurrying in the background. 
Someone shouted Push! 
and the final gears engaged, 
the pelvic elevator blooming, 
my baby’s head galumphing 
through the ravaged pit, 
the strangling chute, heralded 
by a sphincter blast of feces 
from my sprung and trumpeting bowels 
and we cried “Welcome to the world!”

 

Scorch

As memory brushes its sequins 
under the desert’s 
lifted skirt

I pray with a monk’s fever

and stitch an austere habit
from the calico
of your eyes

that no longer watch 
but wing     like clouds

over the trembling mesa.

No way to scour
this smoke
from your sky’s eternal rooms

or the tempered rock—

ghosting  into        gone.

Deja Vu

Rolling over the blackbird 
her throat

locked out,
a letter T   

punctures her chest. 
White light.

To write equals to love
a stranger

or disappearing porch.
Wood saved from fire,

cut by a coping saw. 
On the roof it smells like a birthday.

Despite repetition, 
everything unfamiliar—

There’s no way 
around the tandem bicycle

her house 
hung

on its own door 
to dry.

 

Signing Divorce Papers
              for SW

Forest slows to a stop

Truck tire
onto my foot

I pledged to hold up the sky

Gut of a burro      
Shivering songbird

Moose shoulder-deep    the lily pads
Thick panic breath

I swallow bees 
to believe the world

How much of this I dreamt?

Ink-bellied horseshoe bat 
wakes under the barn

surrounded by food
Sunrise     set

Night travels all day 
twisting this letter forever

I will not love you

Cephalopodic

Within the body of water, 
other bodies of water. 
It cossets her, one tentacle

and then more. 
Behind each suction cup,
a blue mark: half moon, star, 

and a night sky
it only knows from rumor. 
Awkwardness,

though it is governed by fluidity. 
It sees farther out than she,
into tide and current, guarding.

It thinks to return her to the surface,
but with each slip across her skin, 
she says, “Stay.”

It cannot sleep anymore—
too many visions 
of fishhooks and cleavers. 

Her back curves in to it.
They are buoyant, 
and it is wild eyed:

when has it been loved like this? 
It would live in her world—
bathtubbed. But she says, 

“Stay here in the sea.” 
It wants to be her diving bell,
surround her in pocketed air,

but she will kick to the surface.
They drift in and out 
of their domains,

air and water exchanges. 
She moves her home to the edge.  
It stays close as the surf will allow.

 

Labor Day

1.

the apartment building windows
are the cells of a hive
a place to store drones in the off hours—
where bodies
lay dreamless of the day
away from paid sweat
or the uniform pretension
of “appearances.”
Dreamless of the lobby walls
etched with hollow-fonted mission statements
where god loves his cogs,
his flywheels, his grease—
all the machines
built in his image.

I finger my name into the fog
of my breath upon the apartment window.

A clean exhalation—no textile
or coal dust.

For this, my body is grateful.

I stare at my soft fingers
that I have used today
to run ahead of my reading
page after bound page.

Where is the parade of the day?
Too much work?


2.

I napped on the made bed
with the window open
a slight breeze thumbing
the pages, losing my place.

I translated street noise
into waves, into currents,
water and sand—but
no visions accompanied.

I was blind in the desert,
the sound of rattlesnakes
to fear, I followed
along the bank.

No rest was my bounty
from sleep. No
angeled epiphany alighted
upon my brow or woke me.


3.

the evening amber windows
the light of hundreds of cells

each has its own movement
of bodies using time

to wander the realms
of coglessness

away from the engine hum
of apocryphal needs.

#220

Poetry from a pure place
is an impossibility: as you
write, even the slants you
tell fall within the purview
of the filthy. So did Emily,
alone in a drafty house in
snow-capped Amherst, as
a dream presented itself to
her of Gods in America. As
those Gods became common,
hovering in or past receptive
heads, the filth was in not just
her words but her life. Solitary
filth— that’s all of us, but the
visionary deadness and the
beautiful scum make pretty
pictures against grains, strains.

 

#221

Torque: you can start a mile past
personal emotions, but you must
jog back and touch emotion’s very
green blarney stone every few lines
to fulfill responsibilities no one else
wants to engage. Slats of blinds get
shut to keep sun out of your eyes,
even as the torque expresses both
elisions, ellipses, eerie as they form
a blockade of angles to knock you
down. It’s the warp of centuries: “I”
set loose to torque combinations of
data in every way creepy to desires
for raw earth permanence, mountainous
forms. They attract mist, kisses, and the
accursed share of angst that dawdles in
flesh like a child with a blanket.

 

#222

He told me about his next door 
neighbor, an old miser who never
looks anyone in the eye. I didn’t
look him in the eye as he was telling
me this. Later, I realized that a
condition of agedness means, or
can mean, the exact opposite of
wisdom. I was in bed, in darkness,
and I scared myself half to death
as I realized this. We all have neighbors.

Rare Zodiacs

How’s Mercury in retrograde treating you? 
My browser won’t open, email status bar
nothing but spinning hourglasses. Makes sense,

Great Communicator turned cosmic trickster,

though rare zodiacs only appear to drift
backwards – like overtaking headlights at night,
some strange family inside singing though darkness.

 

Recoil

A soldier from another century points
his weapon in your direction. This is how
wars pierce the future. Imagine your neighbor

missing an arm. Some say “Secure the borders.”

Some say “Darwin was the first capitalist.”
Truth be told, nature only collaborates. 
Every wound writes invitations to the past.

 

Hi-Rez

657 new barrier
islands cataloged this year by satellite
reveal we’re still learning to count what we can’t

view from above. Your iPhone keeps its secrets

but there’s an app download to delete your tracks.
Remote imagery improves resolution. 
Barrier islands migrate through erosion.

History & Theory of Basements

That dirt floor.
When the storm
surrounds & the lights
go out, that cascade
of descending pressures.

Corner: Where the cat died.
Rafters: Spiders.
Coal bin, mucky wall, half window.
Dirty string for light.

It’s not the sort of home
for morning tea.
Lately, laundry.
When you were small
the furnace was a mystery,
a clanking cephalopod,
a thing with rusting breath.
Machine now
like any other.

If you don’t watch out
you’ll fall down those stairs on your head.

You live alone now
and put your faith
in wooden banisters,
just a dowel rod really.
Just that cracked circumference
between you and—

Every time your floor
creaks beneath your feet
you hear the word stumble,
the word refuge.

When you descend to change
the burned-out light,
cobwebs graze your face.

Plumbing: The cold sweat.
Window: What the dark earth fills.
The corner, the floor
slope, the shade.

 

Earthquake Weather

            I.

I am relearning, this late in life, to take
my coffee black: the undiluted night

and the way I can open my back window
to look right out into it: the screen

barest separation. I can’t hear the owl
but know it lives in one of these trees

one of those apparitions I’ll never look
directly at, like the admonishment

against staring at the solar eclipse
and the pinhole cardboard we constructed,

all us kids lined up on the sidewalk
in highest afternoon. I am thinking

of this, the way the sky pewtered
and birds confused themselves in trees

because of the dangerous sense I have now
that time is disordering itself, that days

repeat or skip and then reverse. I drink
coffee in the middle of the night, fall

asleep on a sunny afternoon. Nothing tethers
me. It is this house, the walls that rattled

me awake last spring when the temblor hit
and the way the wind comes in. The four

a.m. arousal of birds, pre-dawn deliveries that hurry
across town. Once I saw a fox

crossing Atwater, darting towards the campus
errant like flame. Once I woke staring

at the boards of my living room floor
and the light that spilled across them,

dreamlagged, uncertain. I’d call you
if I had your number, and anything

to say. I’d mention your name to friends
as if it changed things. We used to talk

about walls and the spells that echoed
off them. We’d laugh about ending

up alone: now look at me waking
into stillness, waiting for the quake.


            II.

Bits of the world come loose and fly
through the air like snowflakes. On

the radio the singer croons trust me
but there’s nothing here I trust, not

the ground beneath my feet, not the changing
pewter-starling sky. Does everyone walk

around cracked open, baffled like this? I’m
happy more days than not, but when the air

does this buck and shimmy I keep driving
just to stay out in the world, afraid

that facing my own four walls
would unfasten the last of what tethers me

and I’d break apart down to that place
where I’ve always been split, always lived

in pieces. The singer’s smiling, I know that
much. For now I turn it up, I settle in my body.


            III.

how we spend our lives trying
to break free of our own bodies
the shimmer of skin
on skin and the sun
that warmed us at the beach
that day, we struck
ourselves together like
stone and spark, we’d do
anything to escape ourselves,
the way we laughed like ice
breaking from trees and falling

and how you died inside
your body, your hand
in mine a closing
gate behind you, smaller
and smaller in that freezing
bed, no pillow high
enough to lift your face to heaven


            IV.

Snowflakes aimless in the air like
tiny angels, dead and drifting

in this window, in this field of vision
where all this Midwestern weather

confuses me, snags on the rough spots
of my heart. Birds dart and tug

at the edges of the light, working
something open. I live alone

now and go there willing, close
the door behind me. I’m relearning,

this late in life, to trust what breaks
me, to waken in a shaking

world without alarm. It isn’t dawn
yet but the starlings hear it coming,

suddenly the trees are filled with them
and I’m waking in my waking body,

all the names of shameless
angels on my lips. 

Seed Erratum and the Divine Hen’s Eggy Cipher

*

The painter plunders a gesture for 
solidarity and absolute need. 
The painter said I’m alive. She won’t believe
the stillness with which the self transforms

from supine to straight the silhouette’s lie,
even finer than the lie in relief. 
Stars are the sky’s erroneous belief.
I have a Chinese lantern. I have a firefly.

The painter says redo the stars your doomed
to something sort-of crocus, 
the silver-sided hill, hibiscus. 
No matter the sky, I shouldn’t presume.

No matter I’m not a pulmonary, split
cell, but a third kind of revelator
falling into reverie
easy as falling into a chair. Whit

of a crocus is crushed for its saffron, side
of a hill stripped for what it provides—


*

House and garden should not separate. 
Walking one to the next is useful, 
but to walking add another wrinkle:
house, garden, stable should be inseparable,

but for garden substitute river: house, 
river, stable should be inseparable. 
Sailing is adorable
but there’s always the trouble: what hearth

boat, what boat kitchen table? Choose geese
for fois gras, chickens for eggs, remake
oyster shells into gravel, head to the lake. 
A gate opens onto some caprice

of a meadow painted since tomorrow
a luminous, branched canopy, brocade
route to absolute enjoyment inlaid 
with annual baby’s breath and corn flower

and above: the house, garden, stable
disguised as weather’s cloudy preamble.


*

Little to do, body’s palladium  
swings in the metonymic breeze
just to crumple in allés of orange trees. 
Poor marbled Apollo is dumb

to locomotion’s one desire 
for half-moon, a full folded up 
lunar lecture sky disrupts 
with crosshatchings of telephone wire

and the snaky undulations of geese. 
How silly to drape a thundercloud,
that low-slung, mid-afternoon shroud,
over an already funereal face!

Three o’clock’s disappointment spills 
black fabric across the brow. As in boats 
that cruise the canal, my hands under coats 
cruise whatever vellum skin’s living will

I happen across. With a fingertip 
I read: a pair of chairs. A sailing ship.


*

Congregating to themselves birds gather
not simply the first representation, 
but second and third, seed erratum
and the divine hen’s eggy cipher.

A shadow lacks dirt material. 
Which came first? A Pierrot writes
in his notebook (again and again): stage fright,
when he really means self-denial

which is not among the list of birds he loves. 
Harlequin peacock outcocks the chicken.
Caprioling fountain in flight mimics
what’s perfect and good about the mourning dove.

To go back and decide what’s beautiful!
To go back and decide what’s vital, oh
how petrifying and how like a Perriot
to write himself into that fable

of naming and deciding. It’s so like
a clown to be that worn down and heart sick.


*

A Grand Tour is now a fancy walk-through 
an empty park. Trash of my thoughts catch 
in its trees. Click of simple machines blotch
the beating of birds’ wings. That’s what I like!

Muffled beat, bulk metal returning
to vindicate, ash of my fire,
if a breeze blows, rioting to a high
mimetic tinder can still out burn:

the beating of birds’ wings. In an ash grove’s
rot of leaves, I sink my momentous 
snow-tipped, vertigo-hung hardscape,
coo out the most tender ringdove

from its nest in my copper-stripped hair
and with my hands smother it to sleep. 
There, there. Long-buried ego seeps
the watershed, drowns somewhere        else.

The next tour of my body’s house begins:
where god is now you’d find the kitchen. 

Rumba — lady’s wrap

I’m a fox and he has his hands
on me. I step back, wild.
He moves closer, twists somehow
and I’m curled in his arm,
walking forward.

I have no idea how I got here.

She says, now turn her again
and he unwraps me like a candied chocolate.
An exotic pear, un-netted.
A hairpin slipped loose.
I try to dance away
but he catches me
easily.

I’d say I was lost but it would be a lie.
The music is a leash and he is
turning me again.
I’m trapped
against his other side, walking backwards,
dizzy as a maple seed.
He pivots
and I follow.
I am a kite on a string.
Horse and halter. He smiles into the wind
and I let him let me go
into a double chassé.
Suddenly I am a stray balloon.
A missing key.

A dropped penny, desperate for him
to scoop me back up.

 

Cha Cha — paseo

Everything new is strange.
She starts the music and my feet tangle
into his. My hands crooked.
He counts aloud so I know where we are
but this step is long as a river.
I try to swim but the trees look away in confusion.

We begin again: lady’s military turn, open break,
two more spins into the spot turn, walks, a kick and head flick.
She says, now the spiral curve, don’t forget
and this time he spins too before we meet
for the backward walk. Then he lets go. My arms flail.
We’re supposed to find each other
but my fingers are not graceful. His are not ready.
I wander like an ugly duckling—
What are all these flowers doing here?
Where is the water?

We practice until the river is littered with petals
and the trees have given up on us.
I don’t notice.
My hands point into the wind—
This way. Over here.
He stops counting to listen.
The petals are gone.

By late summer I’m spiraling my arms,
fingers arranged like blossoms on the grass.
He picks them up gently, lets go at the right moment
and I touch palms to trees as we promenade.
Kick. Flick our heads back.
The spirals, his hands perfectly arranged.
I spin and spin.

I am a late rose, kissing the wind.

I am a swan
dancing in the water.

 

Tango — medio corte

Stand closer, she says and I slot
against his thigh
as though no one can see us.
We don’t look at each other.
In fact, we push away: shoulders back,
heads arched. I pretend indifference.
He knows better.
When he turns me the first time I lean
so close his hip scars my body.
The second time I crawl
high enough to touch skin
and he’s perfectly frozen, for just a moment.

Our teacher claps. I don’t look at her.
I don’t look at him either but I can imagine
his face as we slip into pivots,
a promenade, the basic.
I am a cat, nonchalant as three o’clock.
He leads me across the room,
its mirrored wall transparent
as wind.
I am a feather.
Fluff on the lawn.
A slip of paper flirting towards
the corner until he grabs my wrist, locks
it against my spine, secure
as a fallen angel.

My body is frozen. I want to kiss him.

He opens his hand
and looks away.

 

Backstage

Exposed rafters.
The dull back of the curtain shivers
near the line of miniature tap shoes abandoned
along the wall like beheaded dandelions. Sweat.
Flashing audio equipment staggered,
drunk in the corner.
Yellow duct tape. Knee pads.
Rhinestones piled like bubbles.
I’m in the wings, gut strapped into spandex.
Armor. He holds my hand so I don’t escape.
I’m ignorant as an unpainted mask.

She asks, do you know where the ballerina is hiding?
I point away and she darts into the secret tunnel,
fabric twisted in her wake like a flock of bats
spiraling out of the darkness.
I stare, transfixed as the curtain slivers apart
for just a moment: lights sharp as stars
against a faceless crowd.
Where is the phantom? I want to ask
but these shoes pinch as much as the hairpins.
I’ve no time to move the strap.
The curtain grinds open
as we slip into place.

The Continuing Struggle of the Philistines Jr.

                       Hey, hey, it’s the end of the world again
                       Here we are just waiting for everything to end
                                    —The Philistines Jr.

I

We’re somewhere in South Carolina, I think on Folly Beach,
Where we threw a football once, you and I,
I the quarterback and you the wide receiver, we couldn’t stop laughing
At “wide receiver.” You kept diving to catch my passes,
Trying to hit the inside of a cresting wave
Just as the ball arrived. I liked treating you like
The younger brother I never had, eating dinner alongside you on our 
      couch
While we watched TV
Instead of breaking out the fancy napkins
And looking at you across the kitchen table, as I did the first night
We had sex.
How could I resist those napkin rings? you said.
Hey, it only took the end of the world for me to regret this, to remember
How I also treated my younger sister, making her do slant routes
In our upstairs hallway at home in Pepper Pike,
Where errant passes knocked crystals off Mom’s chandelier.


II

Hey, it’s the end of the world again.
The sky looks scratched, like an old vinyl record
Played too many times then forgotten about, used
As a makeshift coaster, a coffee table
Conversation starter. You never used the real coasters
I set out, just dumped your drinks
Wherever you damn pleased, including on top of my only Billy Joel 
      record.
I’m not so mad about that anymore,
Just as I’m not so mad at all the planes that keep dumping their mugs of 
      jet fuel
Wherever they please. The damned please.
Only a few planes left, even fewer peanuts on those planes, the once                  outrageously long lines
Have dwindled. I like the word “dwindled.”
Antarctica has dwindled. But people keep flying there
While there’s still a chance to see a whole continent melt. Or see at all.


III

It’s the end of the world again
And you refuse to go anywhere. You figure you can
Keep up with what everyone else is doing
On Facebook. I’m looking at this plane taking off
And you’re texting. It’s the end of the world
And you’re texting. You’re also wearing cargo pants,
Which I deplore. I’ve got my hands on my hips;
Someone in the dunes behind us
Might be taking a picture of all this, an album cover for the final, vinyl 
      sky,
And I want to show I’ve got nothing to do
With those cargo pants. Other people in the distance
Put their hands on their hips, but with much less
Authority, look at how they keep slipping their hands in their pockets,
Perhaps wishing they had cargo pockets.
I’ve learned a lot from sorority girls’ Facebook photos.


IV

What else have I learned?
Oh, not much, how tastefully to underline my books,
How not to split infinitives, how to fit all my toiletries into one quart-size 
      Ziploc bag.
More recently, how to make Rachel Ray’s buttermilk chicken tenders
For Super Bowl Sunday. What joy to hear you refer to them as 
      “chickens.”
Are the chickens done yet? you asked from the couch.
And then you learned how to make seafood pasta, which you knew I 
      loved,
And I almost died when I heard you say “shrimps.”  

Zero hour

The engineers line up and the machines line up.
The high schools line up outside, in the town, where students line up also.
Along the edge of the city there is a line of pink and silver light.
You can look at the map all you want. The city
isn’t there and the beginning of day isn’t there, the factories
aren’t there and the students aren’t there.
Make room for this country that doesn’t show up on maps.
Here, we’ve picked up all the numbers.
The transparency of numbers.
A perfect fuel.
Everything that isn’t there we call a zero.
Engineer zero, machine zero, high school zero, student zero, city
zero, light zero, day zero, country zero, map zero, number zero.
We’re waiting. We’re not sure why you’re here,
you with your single spine a total assertion of one.

 

Big questions

Why this insistence on the century.
Why the return to fields where human bodies died?

It should be enough to watch the sulphur lights turn off and on through your    window.
Down the street lights go on in houses too.

But we know the century was everywhere.
Every house has hands, every hand is a flower, every flower marks a grave, every    grave is five graves.
All those bodies of everyone, everywhere, always.

How can this day be different from any other?
We have moved the fields again and hope no one will see them.

Some people are seeing them of course but we hope no one will see them.
They move over the fields in their slow dresses and with their hands.

The century sees them.
We have been imagining the century far away.

The century is among us now. It moves with a force we can barely estimate.
The hand of the century touches the bodies.
No place is too far away, it says.

 

Ukrainian scientists split the atom

We were fixed in a westerly orientation.

Our focus on the moon, we calculated distances and time.
Inside big labs we got a clear picture,
through the windows in the roof the stars appeared
even in daylight.

 

                   We scalded
                             our throats       looking at the sky


                   Half the moon emerged like a piece of metal in a blue felt pocket
                   Our privilege was we saw the fibers of things


                   The beginning was a case for new numbers and letters
                   meanwhile certain names were rubbed off the books

                   birds and Americans were also learning new flight

 

There was no picture in our encyclopedia for FUTURE. 
The entry had been partially blacked out by censors anyway.

It was imagined in the noises of unseen animals
moving in bracken, the clear smooth glassware

our hands habitually caressed.

 

                   —a new day, a silver-tipped pink atomic dawn

 

Our hands became gloves for handling
the new world’s most precious ore—
beyond our doorways men with uniforms assured us things
were going well. A crow alighted on a train track and was flattened.

 

                   Our models of the world moved constantly in such directions.

 

About the invisibility of Comrade Yezhov

An invisibility topped by a fur hat: one thing
we learned was that disappearance was unpreventable
even by voracious cruelty while in power.

He had been advised against pneumonia, against
for instance the train journey he took alone
to the Caucasus, also the wiles of women poets

and drinking too much, alone, too late
at night. Still his persistence in appearing
for official photographs impresses.

Here is the space for Yezhov’s body in front
of the Kremlin, here is a Yezhov-shaped mist
cutting the ribbon across a school’s door.

Here’s the place, right under that same fur hat, where
Comrade Yezhov used to hang himself.
An emptiness of Yezhov, a Yezhov deficiency

not unlike a lack of some essential 
mineral, something that aches or gnaws only
a little, when you sit for too long, say, or

when, late at night you find yourself trembling
and wide awake, alert to the sounds in the house
that mark the start of your effacement,

the entrance of a fog the exact dimensions
of your body into each part of the public record,
beginning of a new dictionary entry,

one that certainly begins and ends without
once mentioning your famous name. 

To Cesare Pavese from the Shores of the Mississippi

Whether you’re watching the movie star 
with a Chianti bottle looped on her finger
as she pays for a basket of olives
or you’re eyeing the fishing boats at sea,
whether your notion of love forgives  
or condemns every last man to desire, 
I talk to you, dead by pills or pistol,
or, dead like the drunks in your poems,
freefalling the terraces above the sea,
a rock or a root opening your brain 
and letting your lungs fill with salt.
Maybe we share the same disease, 
the same twisted scarcity, the same lips. 

The way I see it:  you took your life 
so mine might start, 
give or take a few moments, 
as processes like transmigration take, 
given how the human spark
somersaults one soul to the next.
I’ve endured the eroding murmurs 
because I barely hear them.
Maybe they’re the narcissism 
I’ve told myself I hate.
I never said I was a genius.
I never said I was patient.
How does forgiveness work?

You and I crave the light of women
along hotel corridors, 
past the statues of soldiers, 
past pigeons we don’t mean to kick, 
the birds’ iridescent throats
softly moaning, as if lifting everything.
I want to cry my people, my people,
but they’re cut in half by this river 
drowning the fool who dunks his head.  
Close to the bluff the city’s named for,
the Chickasaws hauled dirt from somewhere
to raise this grave mound 
so their dead might look down on the river and live.

I carry a coin the color of coffee with a little milk, 
a lire coin I saved from a bootblack, 
wet hair slicked back, 
a grimace around his eyes and mouth,
your spitting image.  
Should I apologize for what I want?
Maybe death is not the other side of hunger.
Without desires, aren’t we dirt?
This is how lights pass over barges at night.
Mosquitoes rise for swooping bats. 
It’s our lot to hug shadows:  
the way you wrote this, I believe
these embraces, like rain, quicken the vines and dirt.

 

Three Odd Ducks on the Atlantic Coast

I’m wearing a beryl stone with the image of a hoopoe.  
I’m wearing it on a leather loop around my neck.
I can feel it stick to my chest so I free it with fingers,
an adjustment.  I click the hairline break in my ankle 
that never quite healed after I climbed the back wall 
playing racquetball like some stupid Superman.  
I click it because I can and there is some pleasure 
in flaunting most versions of adversity.  I click my own 
wretched survival, using my tongue, using my fingers.  
With a sprig in its beak, this crazed Old World woodpecker 
lets me talk with the dead, two in particular who died
under suspicious circumstance.  We walk past the cliffs, 
past the skyscrapers, past the dank estuaries and isles.  
In a sweatshirt hood, Pasolini looks like a squire, 
his mouth and nose a poor stray’s muzzle.  
Sand sifting where he steps, he says he can’t recall 
his assailants’ faces—his own blood everywhere 
as one of the men turns and howls at the sea, 
lifting his hands to the night sky.  One of their faces
was exultant, he says, like the crucified saint’s.  
Pasolini says men in Italy just break into song 
right on the street, but not the women, the young ones, 
thin and hurrying.  Frank O’Hara says his death was awful, 
but he clams up, mum as Lazarus, the friend for whom 
Jesus wept, imagine that, to have a friend weep like that.
Frank O’Hara would rather talk about the new paintings 
his own friends are working on, Larry Rivers, 
Joan Mitchell. Grace Hartigan, Michael Goldberg. 
I don’t recognize all the names, maybe they’re artists,
maybe they’re longshoremen or hermaphrodites,
Frank loves so many different forms of beauty, 
the lovely man.  There’s sand in his hair, he’s talking
with his hands the way I do, the way we all do, 
like birds’ wings a bit flustered at a feeder, 
fixated on seeds.  We’re all talking at once when, 
all of a sudden, I don’t know what’s got into me, 
I launch into the air, coming down on the muck 
from an old jellyfish, purple or white, it’s hard to tell 
it’s so dark—sorry, Jolly Roger, sorry, Treasure Island, 
sorry, Peg Leg Pete.  I step on a small rusted nail, 
maybe part of an old ship or part of a boathouse
blown off in a storm.  It’s all right, what’s a little blood, 
what’s a little rust, it’s wonderful, isn’t it:  oxidation, 
I mean, my heels hard as doorknobs from walking? 
Frank starts singing  “Last Night I Got Loaded”  
with a British, with a Mexican, with a lithe swagger.
I’m balancing on a seawall, spoofing in falsetto 
“Brandy, you’re a fine girl,” a plaintive bubblegum love, 
oh the blind fifties, its grisly head still above water.  
I sing Pier Paolo Pasolini, and he says, “Get it right, 
you poor Irish Yankee”—all his wonderful Italian vowels 
in my mouth:  Pier Paolo Pasolini, Pier Paolo Pasolini!  
3 P’s, I’m giggling, and he loves my coinage, the thought 
of it:  perseverance, pleasure, peace.  We recite it black 
as the night is black because the sea swallows our voices 
and adds its own.  We’re like gulls stopping and starting,
crossing private rights of way as well as public beaches, 
the rocks and dirt on one side, the waves on the other. 
We heave stones and shells into the waves, we heave 
our own clumsy bodies.  The water is cold and the wind 
makes us shiver.  My sleeves droop like the angel’s wings
on the side of the Duomo in Milan, my pant-legs stick.  
3 P’s is sweeping back his hair.  He’s a handsome demon 
and a frustrated gargoyle, either and both.  The sun is just 
starting to make the night albescent—I love that word—its 
cradle cap still beneath the horizon—the dark, as they say, lifting.

 

Autopsy with One Precaution

Close to sand dollars flecked with perforations,
close to damp sand and desiccated seaweed,
to burst jellyfish, a white one, a purple one,
close to a dead fire, a black elbow of driftwood,
the crabs weave around him their delicate yoyos.
Once, a red mullet hit his calf as he staggered in surf.
Once, he dove to touch the scales, a failing.
Now, so much is reserve, a holding back.
A necklace of wrack, brine dilating the nostrils.

His eyes like burnished lapis glance down
with false modesty and a few ounces of fear.
His teeth ache in the jet stream of saliva.
His tongue curls against the scalpel, 
purple with wine.  Tonsils curl 
like damp stones either side the throat,
his uvula an insidious hot pepper.
Doctor, don’t wipe your eyes of sleep or tears.
The lungs, two sparrows on a snowy branch, 
don’t sing anymore, but the blood 
rich with sugar denies the Invisible 
its inevitable desiccation.  A note
crushed in the fist dedicates the spleen 
dark with spite and wizened desire.  The heels twist 
like doorknobs worn smooth with travelers’ hands.
The stirrup bones inside the ears shine stoically like garnets  
to rock the continental shelf with defiant namelessness
one generation to the next, burning fashion, burning time itself. 

He shows the child

how to ply the line.  How to work the barb into the throat.  Reaching after the hook

he scrapes his finger on a line of teeth and the surface of the lake flares
          like a looking glass.  He cuts away from the tail     along the line of the palm. 

White flesh falls open     unzipped 
          at the seam.  There are many ways to gut a fish. 

The child refuses the rod, will not take barb or bait.  The line hangs 
          empty. 

Lake smooth & undisturbed     a mirror without a face. 

What peers from the belly     a kind of betrayal.  How many does it take 
         to satisfy a line, a limit.  

What is it we see in the face of the mirror 
          and what prevents us from dipping in our own.

How the landed body flips and shivers.  Pulled onto sandy bank 
          gills gape like terrible wounds—

air drawn from the body     a cut, a whistle.

When does the leaving occur and how soon does rigor mortis set in 
          making the skin stiff as chain mail.

To bone a fish, lift the tail and scrape the scales forward.  Loosen the flesh
          until it pulls free. 

Unfold the ribs’ feathery architecture then flip and repeat.  Lay the halves 
          side by side—  like imperfect mirrors. 

In the child’s body, a growing sleekness.  The skin thins and repels 
          rain.  Scales develop. 

Cut the line, it tells the man     shows an odd affinity for fish.  What fails to pass 
          from one set of hands

to the next.  What slips away     trailing a cut line.  The departed body
          fills with radiance. 

There is no way to know if a fish is female if you refuse to split the hull.

 

A History of Grandmother

Grandmother is lady cross Pacific and fly over Black Caspian and Arabian to get to United States.  Is lady strip gobo root and slice as if pickling ginger.  Is lady wipe face and turn from train track when spat at.  Is lady held by barbed wire and B-24 bomber in Arkansas desert.  Is lady wave to Japanese housekeeper when war start.  Is lady shout goodbye from kitchen window.  Is lady measure length of silk to tuck at hip with safety pin wrap round waist and pleat at shoulder.  Is lady tape name to bottom of pan before church social.  Is lady sell kimono and cut boiled potato to size of rice grain.  Is lady make quick slit in palm and twirl circle of dough in shape of cone.  Is lady tuck kitchen blade beneath box spring next to No. 11 knitting needle. 

~

In brown church siren fade to rubble.  All home fade to rubble.  Yellow dust will not wash.  Overhead air raid is dry spike arrange on stem hard like rain.  Body slice by shrapnel like pickled ginger dye bright pink and bury.  Before meal wipe metal free of dust.  Behind barbed wire all question run to one. 

Spread nori over element to crinkle which will prevent warp when holding salt or water.  Sprinkle sesame seedsalt.  Moisten saltwater hand before press kernel to shape of cupped palm.  Watch sea spread pattern of sparkle.  Hold salt soak before release.

Separate spice in proportion of difference and if unused later discard.  Crush cardamom between finger and tear baggy husk.  Let seed drop like crusted fruit.  Separate Western Japanese cup bowl in kitchen cabinet. Wipe spittle from cheek in Cincinnati and leave sorority.  Mark difference.  Watch son stain yellow.  Tape name to bottom of pot before bring to church.  Tape name to casserole pitcher knife.

~

I cannot remember where is grandmother during the war.  Is it Oslo or is it Osaka.  I does not wish to appear foolish.  There is the question of authenticity.

When I writes about family I uses words like ______ and _______ knowing such designations will make no sense.  I uses these details to make herself at home on a page that is otherwise white.

I puts the rim of her teacup against lower lip and blows through her teeth for a dampening effect.

I wishes to write about an important person in her life but cannot do so without saying ________ or ________.

Instead I writes about dust.  A flat pigment that stains yellow and cannot be washed from steel.  A spice with a seedy head shaped like a pincushion.  I names no names.

~

Wrap round and round   tight-suck waist   fix bow on back use metal prong   fold stiff silk   press in fan shape    smooth fold across chest   remove every wrinkle   face camera angle body to catch every pattern and line.

Brother Adam

Brother Adam was a monk and beekeeper at Buckfast Abbey.  He crossbred a bee that could survive the Isle of Wight disease devastating much of Britain's bee population.

This is the story of a boy on a train.   
This is the story of a twelve year old on a steamship,
how he lurked small in the shadows
of the monks, cassocks whirled around ankles
to keep the bees from stinging.  This is the story
of a boy who knew bees haunted people. Captured them.
The boy who loved bees so much he changed his name
and gave it to god.   And the black bees, the grumpy ones,
their certain death.   It was in their throats.   It was in the new hives.
It was in the air. It was the bees held against each other,
this boy whispering to the bees that they should
exchange their best parts.  Work stopped at five
for vespers at Buckfast Abbey.  Voice through stone.
The monks and their opened throats.  The lavender garden,
the rose garden. Sit between them to meditate about love.
Lean toward the rose for desire.   Pull the bees out.
Are they the best yet.  The monks with their pipettes
full of semen. The monks blowing the queen into tubes,
hooks pulling her body open. The queen taking the dose.
The queen crucial to the hive.   The boy with heart disease
now, driving to Provence. The story of seventy-two
bends in the road, hairwork-cramped.  All to see a gentle bee.
Hermits in Greece.  The car crashed in Turkey. His heart in his body.
Queen bees sent like postcards. Queen bees rising flush from sage. 
The river dart. The river takes a heart. This is the story of a year.   
Kilimanjaro. Our boy, eighty-nine, carried up the mountain
by two other beekeepers. He writes these hives are the fiercest
he’s known.    He writes without gloves. He prefers a delicate touch.
Pulls bee skin onto his own fingers. Black body, gold stripes,
white hand. Wings. Wrinkles.  Logs cracked to proffer bees,
black on black.   Hope of mail. Death in mail.  The boy dead
in ten years. Buried under bells.  This is the story of a boy on a train.

 

At Buckfast Abbey: After the Bee Burnings

I know they were here. 
Their vertigo twists around 
the wind.    It is my sickness too.


I play blind, smooth over tree trunks with my palms.
I  smell the soot of brimstone, the dangling of a hive.

Daylight hard as leaves.   I smell the smoke.
Skeps still burn like witches.
            
             They used to harvest honey by burning up the hive.
             Bee bodies and a single rhubarb leaf
             kindled the flame for beekeepers 
             to mine with bare hands.

                          The rest of the comb
             they melted down cell by soggy cell
until the wax was useful light.

                          And honeybees, they say, 
             were the first tears
                          cried on the cross.

             ~


             Ghost bees shiver, 
                          here a leg stuck in resin,
             here a wing in the grit of pollen.  

                          I can feel their flight 
             trying to make these woods
                          warm again.

             I’m asking for the bees back.   
             If it’s in your power,


make the stark and sketchy treetops
             look less like junkie tourniquets 
and more like apologies.   

                                       Make the trees say they’re sorry
                                                    they kept growing 
                          after thirty thousand hearts 
                                       were burned.


                                       If it’s in your power, make me say
                                                    I’m sorry too.  

             ~

                                       There’s still the scent of smoke
             in the air, maybe from a bonfire,
                          maybe not, and beneath it is the
             sticky hum of amber, and somewhere 
                                       beneath that is me—notebook,
                                                    cigarette lighter, plastic bag.  

 

             I can hear the vespers next door.
             The living are praying,

                          but  I need the ash
             and the burned-out bees, 
             the brimstone to be wise.

                        I want to ink out 
             the taste of charred honey
                                       so I can be glad when there is no fire.

                                       Learn this lesson for me.  Tell me what
                          not to do, how to keep without taking,

                                       how to do better, 
             here, now, my hair in my eyes,
                                       a pencil in my hair. 

The Lifeguard

Every job a person does necessarily destroys him in small important ways. 
The shoreline is the hem of a dress destroying me;
taken up and let out in a kind of modesty I don’t understand.
Nothing is truly buried in or built from sand. That destroys me.
I look down the beach at little dots of color orbiting a vanishing point. 
I think of myself as a pocket of gravity in space
presumed to be weightless. I think of my body doing what the moon does: taking
and repurposing light. I think of the public; how there is no such thing, 
how I am a part of it, and the texture of pleasure conflated with risk. 
When I lie down at night to sleep, I find myself still breathing 
the half breath half kiss of rescue.

 

The Bourbon Drinker’s Guide to Intimacy

I prefer the contrast of drinking very slowly from a shot glass.
Each sip is immeasurably small, so afterwards 
my need is stronger and more invisible.
However you choose to partake, each dead drink 
is the husk of a ghost
and also a little empty diving bell
representing the person and the ocean. 
It should take a long time, longer than your life, 
and you should not walk or speak a lot
as these are the two things that can most betray you.
If you’re sitting in a bar, think of the weight of a dart
disappearing in the air, death throes of the jukebox 
mistaken for music. If you’re at home, make sure every light is on 
to muffle the sound of pouring, which invokes distance 
and gravity. At home you’re responsible, and in the dark it’s easy 
to confuse the smell lingering in the ditch
with the dead coming back to life.

 

The Former Player Provides Commentary

It’s easy to leave it all on the field because the field grows relentlessly.
I feel like an amnesiac holding a photograph. 
We talk about these men as if they’re children, these children
as if they’re explosions. But when you’re playing, 
you don’t think of it that way, as a child loves 
to be chased by her father, moon obscured by clouds, 
man and then monster; a process of exhaustion. 
These feelings come to you later, looking down at your life,
which can so easily be covered by a piece of paper.
Your body was a door you slammed and slammed.
And then there are all those guys who never make it, 
filling the stadium with resentment as a form of worship.
They are luckier than you, and they know it, holding tickets 
and diet sodas, lying to their children about teamwork, 
living and reliving memories of a life that never happened. 

Mercy

           ~Wildlife Rescue Center, Castlewood, MO

You’d bring us each wounded opossum,
broken jaw, eye gone slack from socket, 
prayed mercy for the dying, for the dead.

So often I held it hissing on a sterile gurney
while Regina considered the damage, eye
back in or clipped it, cleaned the socket.

More times than not just loaded the syringe
as I pinned and waited until the pulse ran out,
until I could feel the ghost of it through

the rubber gloves, buried her with the rest
in the morgue freezer. Death is common
as duckweed sloughing a pond in summer.

Life is coaxing a fake rubber nipple down
the throats of pink nothings found inside
a mother’s bloodied pouch, press a small bit

of formula into their stomachs. Opossums
are sluggish, hearty creatures that look up
at each zooming headlight as though salvation

or the afterlife had come to meet them halfway 
in your Mercedes C-Class. It’s why they suffer
head injuries. Not because your car represents

the combustion engine, industrial revolution,
angel of global warming that wings dry hillsides
into raging fires. No, don’t apologize.

It makes you look weak, foolish and arrogant.

The Letter

In the letter,
          she says she doesn’t

want to end
          the letter so I’ll

never stop reading
          this scrap light

as ash in the pit
          where I’ve sworn

for thirty years to burn it

 

She Loved

after Akhmatova

She loved malted milk,
roasted corn, snow
& the pump organ passed down
on her mother’s side.

She hated men
with nasal voices, flattery
& people who expect
something for nothing.

No one alive
knows anything more.

 

Another Gratitude Poem

Bitter chocolate
          & the memory of it
                   on her lips.

Her lips
          & the memory of kisses
                   on the gray porch.

The gray porch
          & the memory of rain
                   after a blizzard.

The blizzard
          & the memory of wind
                   & waffles in solitude.

Solitude
          & the memory of it,
                   the hunger for it

& its breaking.

 

Encouragement

for J.W.R.

Such solace after all
the jobs & kids to sit

in a paid-for yard 
watching squirrels eat      

the peanuts you scatter,
silence at last sufficient,

the only speech words
of encouragement. 

Black button

From the top of a building to its bottom 
Is a tall stack of people. There is no waiting
In the elemental, only the sound of water
Slatting down across the goings. Black spikes
Enter the sky and the clouds until these shapes
Become the very experience. Being in a triangle
Is being pushed forward, outward, and besides
Its first bright utility it grows small, like a mushroom
Forgetting its light in the cold of my refrigerator. 
It is there, yes, right now, crinkling into a fetter 
Of shrinks. It is black but a strange black. There is no story
To it, not that I can hear. Everything is thicker
In the coldness, even the slack of space in the sky 
Slants bolder. Days break through and topple
But nothing stops, just slides. We need a generous
Crash for this century, the center of which breaks
Groundwise.

 

Entry: open sky

^
It’s your city that’s in the flood zone the whole
city which now is yours a paper
bowl filled with water and the cats everywhere
in little stitches moving out

^
Out-moving stitches
litter in everywhere cats
the and
and water with fillings 
your bowl or paper burns
it’s yours now
which city holes the zone
flooding the in 
that’s city 
you’re it

^
It: you are city
It: that’s in the flooding
which zones the holes 
City which now you’re
it: burn paper or bowl your fillings
with water and and
the cats everywhere
in little stitches
move out

^
Out.
Move.
Stitches litter everywhere.
Cats.
The and and water’s width
filling your bowl.
Your paper burns.
It’s yours now.
With city holes.
The zones which flood.
The in that’s it.
City are you it. 

Antisex

So I was lonely, and yes, it was physical. All
the connections couldn’t work their way out.

I wanted to dismiss logic and become an animal,
real claws on the throat. The barbs dig in deep,

and drag me down. You know how it goes. That
brush. A small wind on skin, or hair falling

against the face. Great movements in the dark,
all breath stripped of syntax. No glass is left

unshattered by this parlor magic, all these
needles flowing through my veins. I get the idea

of sex. But I picture the women in all the towns 
I’ve lived going to the forest at night to summon

the crouched wilderness to burrow up through
city streets and tear apart our plotted mess,

to rip open our churches like eggs, our
libraries. I still want them in a way that makes

me shiver. The words in the soundproof booth 
escape all at once when the door is opened.

The collected words, from all the conversations
ever held in secret. Gropes and grunts. Hair

falling against my face like misdirected wind.
I can move slow, but I don’t choose to. I can

cure all desire in an instant. Errors, bloody things.

 

Feudalism

Albums of popular music have reached new lows
in cost. Thousands of labels, thousands of artists.
I’m not a giver, but I’m also not a taker. Here,
that’s what we’ve come to consider to be a hero,
if I do say so myself. Bombarded by music, what 
to choose, what to be altered by, each assemblage 
of notes creating minor explosions of love and hate.
What are these marks, these moles on my body, 
there are so many of them. I can’t understand 
this level of blemish. Nobody wants to kill me, 
the speakers sing only loud music. Cancer, strokes,
specters hovering halfway in me and halfway out.
Music with just one click, always if you focus
you can hear it, you can’t drown it out. Let’s sleep
with all the lights on. Tonight, the moon is as bright
as it will be all year, as close as it will be to Earth.
Dolorous, the wind bringing us pollen. The music
is not a salve, it is quiet but the lyrics are reductive.
Say it in another language instead. The lights, 
the sounds, the power bill can take it, the plant
is a marvel of engineering. I’ve been through
mandatory evacuations, I’ve moved as if heat 
through stone. There’s a connection here, I’m sure 
of it. Perhaps anger is our engine. Our staff in the 
dark, our heat, our stone. The notes of a song bending
until there’s just a hiss of strings, a gasp of a chorus.

 

Metal Reports

It’s late at the bar, we’re talking
and we’re friends but yet there’s
a pulse that overtakes us, they say

it’s sin to want to dance so close
to a number of different people.
The remix of the pop song could

be successful without following
the traditional rules of songwriting.
Stay too long on a harmony, bass

turned too far up. A flute previously
hidden under the sturm und drang 
of a danceable beat. It’s just enough,

enough is all it can ever be, enough
is satisfaction or a plea. To know 
more about the presence of sin than

of God, that’s a gift. The presence 
and the problem. Not that it’s a real 
problem, that is, what is sin. I know

about the idea of sin, I know me.
I was born in Halifax, but now live
in Houston, where I edit the journal

NANO Fiction. My work has 
appeared in Subtropics. New Ohio
Review. Common drawers, paper

plants. The metals used to build
Yankee stadium were subpar, they
were not up to code, and it will cost

millions to repair. Ha, the rich get
it too. We all get it. Sins in, or without.
We all get enough, we’re ok here

in America, don’t worry, we’ve got 
our young myths. Nine you’re fine,
Big Foot. Apocalypse narratives,

hilarious things. Who’d want to die with
all this stuff around us? Dust on our
collectibles, one trinket getting more

attention than the rest. I don’t mean it!
Everything gets my love, what a sin.
I know it’s a thin blanket. I like

the cold. Come here, fond wrench, 
I have poems forthcoming. The stack
of papers on the desk is highly sensitive.

All our hate is fake, is done to be dramatic
or get our faces seen, we’d hold each 
other if liquor or cold commanded.

What’s commanding, the bar is closing. 
The woman is struck in the shoulder 
by a foul ball and the entire crowd watches

her to make sure she’s ok as millionaires
enact the rote movements of sport
within the enclosed area below.

 

The Misdirected Shipment of Fruit for the Poor Ends Up at a Festival in a Rich City Where It Is Mistaken for an Anonymous Gift

It’s the revengers who lead us to the open pits, through the dark. 
I’ve brought the nails before, and so have you. I’ve wanted
to level a plank against my neighbor. I’ve noticed the villain

is always a swarthy character, like myself. Who has done
some great wrong against our kids. I’m always talking to religious people
about the terror that flows around us. In heaven, they say,

we will forget our enemies as we stand next to them. The fist
that clenched in our gut for justice and revenge is loosed.
Defeat. Will we know something so sewn to us in life

has been torn away? Not that I even believe in heaven. On Earth 
I am always bound on the plane that drops the most bolts,
the train that jumps the most tracks. I always want a balance,

revenge, justice. The house that draws the most tornados.
You and I have nothing in common but our ability to drink
champagne. Or blood. Or you don’t know how it feels to be me.

bird & hand

listen:   you are an eyesore   glitzy
as a billboard   my bluelight
special baby  my-shiny-in-the-rain 
but the heart is a homey summer

slippy as a raw egg on my plate  
crumped   open like a torso   my 
bloody clementine    pitched  
on the tarmac   under the jizz of stars 

and the street’s gone vacant    vagrant
the lawn unmown   the lawn 
a little forest a little savagery 
like the one between us darling

a bird trapped in the house    
banging   and banging   and when I
opened my fist to the blueblack   
it was already gone

 

Dear Imperfect Stranger

                        I will never love winter, as you do
                                    though there is a case to be made
                             for being, as they call it, “in extremity”

                                                         with purple, swollen ankle
                                         or meshed in the breathy dark— 


                        and how long must I wait to tell you
                                                   that I love the imperious geese
                                    how they eye me with their small black eyes
                                                                        as I cross the sloppy lawn


                                                that I love the taste of my knuckles
                                                            crammed in my very own mouth


                                                or the way my cringing cities fell
                                                                        as they buckled into flame?

                                   

                                    But let us please not speak of what is “bearable.”


                                                And thinking of home, as we were
                                                            Didn’t there used to be coffee cups
                                                        and salmon in a pan beside the stove
                                                weren’t there forks enough for guests
                                         And how many hands are holding us, do you think?


                                                   Does violence make us stronger?


                                         Because I too hate what might be called
                                                   the insistently innocent
                                                         though the truly innocent
                                                                are okay, I guess.

                                                 And how long should I wait to say
                                                                   that our injuries swell to meet us

                                                         (though I am, of course, fully intact)

                                                 that I know you rise from your bed at night
                                                          to bandage the knife in the drawer
                                                          to drink brine from the pickle jar
                                                                                 secretly, without envy
                                                                                                        or regret?


                                                 How long has your mouth been waiting

                                                                                    at exit 24B

                                                                             (skirting you slowly 
                                                                             in the roundabout)


                             and what did you mean exactly when you called me “beautiful”?


           (Don’t answer that, I.S. There are some things that won’t bear answering.)

            
                                                 But remember our horizon line 
                                                             all crinkling waves and salt—
                                    how we loved the silver weather balloon 
                                                 that crumpled the air?


                                                             I have the wrong kind of wishing.


                                                             And every day my broken bones
                                                 are knitting themselves back wrong.
                                                             And though I cannot chance, as you would
                            
                                                                                              the cold vernacular

                                                             I still want to risk it
                                                             and how many times 
                                                             do I have

                                                                         to tell you this? 

Late Last Week

On the eighth day, machine guns.
The ninth: trenches, barbed wire, flasks
secured to our green helmets.
What I’m saying is God quit two days
ago & now what?
What I’m saying is the trees shaped like sharp poles 
will always look that way. The sun, 
halfway between a cloud & another cloud, 
will eventually pick a cloud.
After, it will pick another cloud & then what?
Who could possibly look at a volcano
& not think lava lamp?
I could eat a bread bowl every meal 
& still feel empty.
See, I have measured monogamy. 
I have published the results 
inside the pillowcase on my bed.
It was so thick there was no room for my pillow.
It was so thick there was no room for a bed,
so we each traveled the Garden.
The Garden was so big we lost each other for weeks.
Later, I found her nose halfway up an apple tree.
Maybe she was trying to reach every crater
on the moon.
I would like to reach every crater on the moon,
take a nap & then start over.
What I’m saying is every argument
should’ve ended late last week.

 

Book Release

On the seventh day I drink everything iced.
God says Reasonable.
It’s so hot I am sticking to every cow
I ride around Eden.

I wander around my computer, 
sit in an egg colored chair.

I birth lobotomy.
I birth hips.
I birth boredom, concession stands,
anthropology.
I birth sunburn.
I birth electric toothbrushes.
I birth misery.
I birth a book with numbered women
doing things to my heart & everything
above & below it.

I tell her I am writing to remember.
I am writing to remember how lucky
I am to tell her I am writing to never 
remember again.

I birth bombs.
I birth politicians.
I birth regret.
I birth custodians.

 

Carbs: An Essay

The egg I came from was so big & full of yellow.
My pockets were full of Valium. My pockets’ pockets
were full Valium & my Valium’s pockets were full 
of Xanax. Such heavy hearts, such forever thinking.

It is hard understanding life.

Coo coo coo goes something that coos.

These days I never wonder aloud Where did all the giant sloths go?
I know where they went: Heaven, obviously.

Poor sloths & their discontinued spines.
Poor elephants, you are pregnant for so long.

I’m sorry.

Really.

Lately I have wanted to tear the world apart,
tell my lover We will live quietly in a corner.

I’m exhausted & dirty as hell
& I’m not even talking about my cock.

Put hip-hop on the back of my neck.
Put my neck on the front of her neck.

Everything makes me feel old.

Abraham turns his iPod up, doesn’t hear God
say Drop the axe.

Jesus isn’t eating, He’s dieting for Salvation.

Maybe nobody is hungry & that’s why two fish
feed thousands.

I am a carb man myself.

 

Never Have I Ever

Never have I ever walked into a room feeling brave. I drink flower water and bloom the sun. Dehydration sets in, which brings night, which brings frogs, which hop towards the lights above apartment doors. If Hell exists, I don’t want to know God. Never have I ever not missed K. In every poem I have yet to write I am hoping she shows up with a glass of flower water, two hearts saying mush mush mush. It’s too hot to see our breath but we’re still alive, so we know it’s there. My lemonade stand is open even in winter. Sugar teeth I tell her. Come home and spoil me. Sometimes a song makes me want to surf and I’m like Stop that right this instant. Atlantis sank and that’s weird. Venice is sinking but I’m too worried about my receding gums to care. The levees broke, people were like Help us, help us! Days and days and then some help. Never have I ever been rich. I am scared of needles shaped as needles. I am scared of needles shaped as anything that turns into a needle. When did blood get a bad wrap? It is why I am touching K on a nightly and a morning and sometimes a mid-morning basis. Lately I have been thinking about sitting under a linden tree. Lately I have been thinking about the age of trees and the age of romance and the strength of K’s thighs wrapped around mine when there is nothing keeping us apart but our own sweat. Lately I have understood how they all mean the same thing.

 

Village Poem

K and I marry on a bench at a bus stop in a village that hasn’t been discovered yet. During our vows K promises all the shipwrecks in the world. She promises an inch is still an in inch and we’ll never get metric. She promises domestication, sharing a shopping cart at the grocery store. It’s romantic, watching K’s white dress turn clear and the bench at a bus stop in a village that hasn’t been discovered yet turn into an air mattress. After, I pretend to be in a spaceship through most of the afternoon. After, a song goes But everyone is just everyone.

This Town

You might tell yourself you want to leave. Hell, 
you might want to leave. This town, this stinking town,

the woods and cornfields that lured you from home 
late at night while your parents slept, bulldozed

for strip malls and surface parking. Once you could lie 
in the tall grass with the boy you loved, the deer

just feet away, and never be found. You haven’t been 
kissed like that in years, pressed to the earth in a place

you called nowhere because there was nothing 
to fence in. You might have dreamt it except for

the details: the taste of drugstore wine, the speckled
fawn staring, not even flicking an ear. Acorns

pinged a barn roof and rolled in the gutters 
like arcade pinballs. Bats darted at the treeline,

half-drunk, hungry for your hair. Face it, your life 
is not what it was. The boy you loved is a dozen

years behind you, whatever that translates to in miles.
He’s married to someone else and has a daughter,

and so do you. His parents don’t live in the house 
you crept to, the house in the sticks. Teenagers now

can’t have what you had in this town—nowheres 
all along Old 3-C highway, hawks appearing wherever

you went like a talisman, the crickets in stereo, 
tricking you into believing they had you surrounded.

But the creek still runs cold behind the house 
where your parents raised you, where they live,

and the deer still find their way to the backyard 
somehow, deep in the suburbs. They materialize

behind the house and just as quickly, they’re gone.

 

First Fall

I’m your guide here. In the evening-dark 
morning streets, I point and name.
Look, the sycamores, their mottled,
paint-by-number bark. Look, the leaves 
rusting and crisping at the edges. 
I walk through Schiller Park with you 
on my chest. Stars smolder well 
into daylight. Look, the pond, the ducks, 
the dogs paddling after their prized sticks. 
Fall is when the only things you know 
because I’ve named them 
begin to end. Soon I’ll have another 
season to offer you: frost soft
on the window and a porthole 
sighed there, ice sleeving the bare 
gray branches. The first time you see 
something die, you won’t know it might 
come back. I’m desperate for you 
to love the world because I brought you here.

here

a glass box of broken limbs
face worn away
I can still ride this horse
glow at night
like red light on Egyptian blue
I was born to be luminescent
a stampede
here
forced down on one knee
held by my hair
that languid boy
cast a shadow even in relief
even in fragments
mouth open, nostrils flared
I am nomad, moon goddess, carbon smear
if wings sprouted from my face
I would not fly back

Fever Dream in Which Anne Sexton Is My Mother Begging for Her Job 
at the Sunshine Supermart After Her Third Reprimand for Tardiness

starched, my lavender blouse
I’ll splay two buttons open 
so you sir & the checkouts & 
our regional supervisor can talk 
weather to the pale sloping 
crevice of my breasts

in lulls I’ll heft crates
of navels & marigolds
balanced on my head
like a thewy Congolese
aching through rainforest 
mute & kissed by vines

I’ll tell my boy he can’t 
keep calling here here is
a place of business stop
crying will be my lone refrain
why don’t you munch pretzels
& tuck yourself in

during my break I’ll mash
all my crackers into crumbs
for a gloomy escadrille 
of crows before I lick 
rust-crust dumpsters clean
gulping their curdled fumes

I’ll gnash the parking lot’s 
one gray elm choking down
every spindly twig see me
swallow its knotted fist
of roots before I fist 
the earth into my mouth

 

Target Practice

On our makeshift range of folding chairs, 
of ammo boxes muralled with mallards,
my brother and I steady our sights as best 
we can, plinking clips of .22s while flurries 
adagio down to flannels father 
gummed with sap as a younger man.

We do our best not to jerk our barrels 
or anticipate the tiny jolt against 
our shoulders—that stuttered hiss 
like the final shushing of a boy whose sob 
melts to sniffling sleep after fighting
his nightly rite of marching off to bed.

Each round blisters newsprint, blowing 
minikin wisps of gray confetti
through the bull’s-eye’s contracting circles—
red, then yellow, an expansive rim
of black. Each sputters into weeds,
into the dark soil our mountain.

When all that’s left is splattered brass
we switch our safeties on and clomp
downrange. Like Hans Brinker we poke 
our gloved pinkies through the holes
to ooh and ahh at where the rounds
splintered to lodge inside a wooden post.

Remarkable caliber, my brother says, the .22,
it looks so weak stalled inside a two-by-four—
when Quentin, my bunkmate from basic 
laid his father’s Marlin on his tongue 
wobbly as it was with his only hand
it was strong enough to do the job.

The Visitors

He came before light, 
his bags heavy
but compact—one steel-backed
pack, as they carry

into combat. He grinned
when I asked
how he had eaten, 
where he had carried

the book I knew 
he needed to keep him
steady, the one
made of an animal, fat
but bendy, its pages prone
to tearing. He smiled,

and pinched me. 
We offered him water, 
sesame crackers, a twisted
strip of meat, a tinned fish. 
He took an impossibly tiny

cup of coffee. He said
we had not changed
through the years, had we? 
We didn’t know

if it was a question, 
or a fact. He ate a round, 
pepper-flecked cracker
like a mouse, vicious
little nibbles.

                           ~

Our visitor is lovely, her dress
always pushed up her knees, her knees
the only place that won’t tan. Her history

could make a movie, will be
a movie starring somebody delicate
but busted, in a painful haircolor, the kind
you find on baby dolls
in the grocery toy aisle. Her heels
are clear, her nails pure pink 
with white, thick tips. I move

a wide circle around her, though she’s sweet, 
her naked face pinker 
than her celebrated frills, which I
have never seen, though the rumors
are all over the town
and the internet. In the morning, 
when she comes to me
for more coffee, she holds her cup

above her head like a child holds
a bowl for it to be filled again
with more mint chocolate chip ice cream, please.

And I think that child should have everything
she asks for in this world. And I think that 
child will grow up to be an ungrateful pig.

 

The Climate

I didn’t know
what it would do today,
somebody says. She’s only talking
about the weather.

It has not rained yet.

The temperature has dropped. 
(Every time, I imagine 
the second shoe       
or a red-leather medicine ball)

The rain has pounded
the plastic green
from the trees, left
them heavy with red 
undercolor.

We remember that here, 
the sky is visible. I spot
Orion, his drawn bow, 
the red star nestled
in his armpit like a sore.

A bustle of cotton-candy yellow
in the humid green comes
to the eye like a wave
of air conditioning.

Portrait of the Portrait as Simulacrum

I used to walk to work through the park before sunrise,
which wasn’t safe, but I think it was this sense
of danger that impelled me, this knowingness
that anything could happen, that I wouldn’t know
until something did.                    
                                           Though mostly, it didn’t.

I would arrive on the other side with an illusion
of success, relief & grief & fortitude flooding
my young, green veins.

The other side was the city, which was not my
birthplace, but which I had come, in my own way,
to love.  I passed the coffee shop where, despite
six inches of snow, the man who worked the 
early shift stepped out in only his polo shirt
& khaki slacks.  I was all bundled up & muffled too,
watching as he dragged a bag of stale breads
toward the dumpster—not even shivering,
not even hurrying back.

Then, I passed the second coffee shop 
where the same man with the black beret
sat every morning with his white porcelain cup
& his (must have been) cappuccino & his
crumpled copy of The New York Times.

He was older, & I liked to imagine him as 
my father, who never had time to read the paper
& only knew coffee came in “instant” & “black.”
But thinking of my father, tenderly this way, 
becomes a conduit to thinking of my mother,
who only drank tea & had decreed it the superior
beverage; my mother, who did not know how 
to be still or at ease in the world & for whom
I had long felt some contempt & much sorrow.

                                           Mostly now, just sorrow.

It strikes me as wrong what they say about hindsight’s
perfect vision.  We take pictures because we want to
remember what we know we’ll forget; we keep them
because we hope to make their meanings new.  
Every morning I wake beside the woman to whom
I have set my heart like a radio dial, the light static
of her breathing in the constant dark & our movement
together through these channels, the riddle of us replete 
& recurrent as song.

I have no explanation for the impulse toward artistic
rendering, though I suspect the wish for preservation
is always somehow involved.  Once, as a child,
my mother showed me her hand, a place where she had
been burned & scarred.  It was not a deep scar, but
something she said “would be with her” forever.
I was troubled by this notion, & I even cried about it:
the problem of lost purity, of uncommissioned alterations.

What I want now is only to keep moving forward, 
to continue this path among young flowers & aging trees
& to come upon even the gravestones with patience, as they too 
have a place in this story.  I have asked myself here, unraveling the
quiet, retrospective yarn which—though far from impartial—
instructs me in the way we might see, the way we might begin

to take notice of what will be with us forever: everything
backlit, suspended in time, & much of it also foreshadowed.
I come to the crosswalk, I look both ways, I chance the 
newly crowded intersection.  And I repeat to myself, which is the 
true purpose of mantra or prayer: Such as we are, I say.
                
                                                                   Such as we ever will be.

Walt Whitman

Walt Whitman walks with me 
down the street, holds
doors open for me, whispers

in my ear: You can do nothing and be nothing but 
what I will infold you.
Whitman, how good it feels, your

love, the perfect love of poets and
fathers, after they’re gone. Illness
outran my father’s

mind, so he could not hold
doors open for me. 
Whitman grieves with me. The father,

he says, holds his grown or ungrown son 
in his arms with measureless love. 
But did he, Whitman, did your father hold

you in his arms? Together 
we decide nothing 
is more desirable than love from the dead.

 

Some Deaths

           Some deaths are buried in 
shame, like a gravestone 
is buried in leaves. These 
 
           are the stones that no one
kneels before, not to pray,  
not to clear away

           debris. Somewhere, 
someone wishes to see 
the stone turn from gray

           to white in winter. They 
imagine the name 
carved in the granite, as if

           in the cursive of god. 
They would pass  
their fingers along each

           letter, scratch the dirt
from the letters with 
their nails, speak

           aloud to the fallen, 
if only shame had not buried 
the dead in silence. 

Dayfly: A Lecturer’s Lament

It’s early morning & dawn is drunk and 
at it once more, her vase of fuchsias & wood lilies

strewn oblong across the butte. I interrupt my lecture:
the affective fallacy & intentional fallacy . . .

yet nowhere can we discern what the light intends, 
the emotion it draws, my students

on their tip toes, educable ballerinas 
at this early hour. Sleep-laden, at 7am, they sag into

the metal of their desks, Dali-like, 
& from the clearing of their consciousness

dredge the silted ground to excavate a comment.
I ask about symbolism & metaphor

in A Raisin in the Sun, & what I gift them later
makes them feel uncomfortable, comments on “race

restrictive covenants” and Lindner’s 
“Improvement Association” aren’t familiar terms,

& what they gift me makes me feel secluded 
on this southern Utah stage, the silence welling up

in both our sensibilities, delicate walls to stay the water
before the storm recedes. But I don’t care

for silence, indifference’s brutish step-brother,
I care for resistance to marginalization,

for thought to get combed back in, follicles 
to breathe, the rats and ruin to decenter us dear

listeners, for the world made of exploitation
& my students awareness of it

to tremor at this our hour of the desert’s bloom-driven 
sun & Hansberry’s uneasy depiction.

You Are Blue

Sometimes you’re a blue shadow standing on a cymbal 
silent before the drum sticks hit. My glow-worm sky 
reverberates under the sheets & a poem
shakes out, my contemporary. My rearranged periphery 
pooling a bloody couplet. Slinky noose. 
You nose the volume up a notch. A cough
copasetic to illegible regret. My parents took 
the poem out of the garbage. A hasty babysitter who 
burnt our counter. I’m trying to keep a plant 
alive that’s older than I am. Who told you I’ve 
killed before? The orange couch chorus?

 

You Can’t Marry History
For AAB

I shipwrecked the mountain
with lurid rain
cinched, helmed to
heighten the
cleavage-glare
through antlers & fog.
I used to think about you
with love & now I think
of you with love & sadness.
Let’s rent a larger 
apartment for memories.
Whatever happens, I’m no longer 
afraid the poems won’t come,
won’t smear the wallpaper 
with the sunburned heat of
my horned headlamp. 
High ceilings save me.

 

Make a Bright Baby of Death

I locked 
the habitat reminder
in the back alley

it is, is not yours
to destroy

shadow on shadow
did we rip off color?

can we talk 
ourselves out of here?

              ~

we pearled
we shimmy past pearl
now feet, canvas

double shadow of
the camouflaged 
store-front

a lag-time flashes
in sunglass or falls 
asleep with
headphones

              ~

the myth was in
your mouth

flashlights spawning
out of the garden

I never was
trying for wholesome

more like an
intravenous wave

does it matter if we call
the milky air?

woodsman, i have a song for you

cull on o woodsman cull & mountain roll
fish the silver streams & bait the bears or dance
with bears. you sleep alone or next to a pit 
bull. you build a fire early early morn you don’t
mess with colemans you don’t mess with bread.
you eat the inner lichen from an ancient tree
you lick the bark for moisture.
you piss in the dawn’s darkness & it is a luxuriant
sound. the woods leaving you to return to woods.
you know you will return to me. you will
bring me a heart. it will be a bambi heart or a 
woodchuck heart or a porcupine or even a baby
bear’s after you’ve danced the mother 
into cotillion, into waltz, into oblivion. she knows
what you’re capable of but you have the charm
of a shy Southern boy and his killing instincts 
too. you kill for me daily &
i never thank you. i take the jewel i take
the box. i watch the heart harden
on red velvet. always red. & i watch the mother 
bear sway and shiver and sway and long

Power Outage, Pittsburgh, 3 A.M.

The guy screams

you fucking bitch

and the girl five steps

behind him

silent

he stops, waits

like an electric fence

one hot wire

his arms jerking

like he’s firing off

rounds. I’m watching

out the window

squeezing my phone

if he touches her

he almost/I think/

but collapses

on the curb

she stands above him

now

now

she does not leave now

now she touches him

the trinity of moon

and blood and river

watches

here at the window

I drop the phone

I release I re-cradle

I curse I wave

the trinity of moon

and blood and river

once I blew out the candles

too soon

remember me

in your dreams

 

Family Relics: The Suicide Policeman’s Blackjack

I look for bloodstains in the leather
            like I looked for Lincoln’s in the chair
            from Ford’s Theater roped off in the museum
to imagine the moment of impact.

He killed himself with his service revolver
            the tiny brittle clipping reads.
Small enough to miss in the daily paper
            but someone didn’t.

My great uncle.  I got his watch fixed
            so it ticks again. Won for racing pigeons
it hangs on its ceremonial hook
            as if waiting to hypnotize the naïve
or compassionate.

The blackjack, the clipping, the watch.
            You might think it
a mysterious triangle, but we
            in the family follow
dotted lines, jump over the gaps
            in the liquored pools 
of our besotted history.

                            ~

My father enters the frame
            turns the scrapbook page
fingers the blackjack
            whacks the loose ball bearings
in its leather sack against his palm,
            another way we keep time 
in our family

            and I’m hearing shot glasses
clocking against the wooden table
            in a rhythmic dirge
some might blame on blood

            so who did he hit and when
and why are there no survivors
            to smudge these pages,
to fill in and erase and reinvent,
            to claim the clock
to claim the blackjack
            and its history of hitting?

                            ~

I stared at the leather chair
            roped off from my grasp
and imagined the dark stuffy theater
            and the enormous Lincoln
of history books. I knew
            the story and yet did not know
the story. 

            I listen to my father
enumerate the victims
            of the curse
that runs—does not walk
            or stroll or jog or mosey—
in the family. The particulars
            I imagine. The bedtime story
I half-told myself for my own 
            ten drunken years—
good uncles, great cousins,
aunts, and laughter cut short,
            clock hands woozy. 
We changed the spelling of our name
            and the labels on our bottles.
We hid the weapons
            and the maps. Both the keys
and the locks.

                            ~

My father flutters the pages
            and I hear the wings
of pigeons, the dirty birds
            of our heritage.
By his own hand. Somewhere
            a steady hand fixed the clock
while cruelty landed its blows
            and my father taught me
not to turn away
            but to witness
                        and pass on.

The blackjack in a box
            will be mine
the rhythm section to the song
            I sing to my children
and the small dogs of their dreams
            that do not bark or bite
and the birds who come home to roost
            and how we shoo them away
by all means necessary

defining survival
            as avoiding small hard things
and reading the small print
            and telling time
                        the old-fashioned way.

Day 8

                        before 
            software release, 
which means 
                        it’s time 
to add the last minute

            frantic code

the execs swore 
            up and down 
            last week 
they wouldn’t want 
            until next month.

 

Design

On his quiet, evening drive home, the dark, steamy suburbs rose from the manholes and extinguished the city. A sliver of a moon grinned at him in the rear view mirror. The man had emptied his life into the job today like when arriving home, his wife will pour him his glass of wine. She will greet him at the door as if she has just seen—not the Ghost in the Machine—but whatever it was she saw yesterday and all the days before that. At the dinner table, not speaking anymore and especially not to him, their son’s hungry eyes may well read a book of frightful and sullen 19th century Russian fiction. The chicken teriyaki tells a bad joke, without the taste to warn him that his life too is surely done. He cannot tell his wife even where he went for lunch.  His colleagues had scoffed at the snuff film’s very scene that held him too intimately for the professed casual affair.  Entirely exposed, he said to himself that if this were all meant to be, it would be called Design. Hume would have had no need for Darwin. God would be God and we all would be pocket-protected, student engineers.  The stars would punch out the cardboard sky into a pattern like they used to do. His son’s eyes would not be prisoners of 17th century time when skyscrapers were mere candles on Descartes’ writing desk only to be snuffed out after a night of philosophical study. 

 

Lazarus, Visiting Kansas

                      “So he called to him, ‘Father Abraham, have pity on me
                      and send Lazarus to dip the tip of his finger in water and 
                      cool my tongue, because I am in agony in this fire.”
                                                                             Luke 16:24

When she runs out of people to visit, 
she visits the headstones. There is family
all along I-70 from Salina to Hays –
Uncle Rudy with his shirt off in the fields 
plowing on his John Deere. That day 
in 1966, Aunt Betty wouldn’t stop 
to give him a drink of water for the way 
he looked. He didn’t appear a good
Christian man and certainly no brother
of hers. Today she would donate a thousand 
bucks to hell to give him a drink of water,
make him the richest man in the family 
no longer alive. Her back stooped, she pours 
water as if out of her eyes, to fill the vase 
and keep alive the goldenrod and tansy 
she clipped by the roadside. And off she goes 
to visit Aunt Ruth, not knowing anymore 
whether the people are here or they’re gone.

 

The Awards Ceremony

I was a cloud of no particular consciousness. Champaign glasses tinkled like Christmas bells. All the faces were huge and austere. A political expert from India, a very distinguished black man from television, and a woman of unquestioned scholarship and horn-rimmed glasses expressed a sense of humor I did not understand. They spoke quite passionately and were most intimidating.  They spoke directly to me or so I thought, but they seemed not to expect me to answer. They praised me in a language that I could not understand either and now sounded distasteful.  I knew they all were very famous and now I too had become so.  After they presented me with the award and a big check, they introduced me to the master songwriter of whom I had been a fan for fifty years.  He closed the event with a song that he did not write, the song with which they always close the event. He said he liked my book, but anything I could say to him would have seemed pointless.  He asked me if I would like to go with him to the recording studio.  There he sang a song of bottomless darkness in my own words. He said we had a #1 hit and he had achieved his standard sense of passion and dignity with it.  His eyes twinkled like a glass of bubbly.

What he kissed in me

was the bear, the great bruin,
                                             big-pawed ursa.

The bed was crowded.
The world was old.
We were young.
The bear slumbered.

It was winter and outside snow
                                             flew against the windows,

white moths,
wet feathers,
slick comet lines.

He wanted me mythic and curled into the cave of him,
my claw and fang hooded in dream,
                                             wanted me

drowsy and myopic.
But I did not go under,
never down
into the sockeye world.

No, I wanted the night sky, to lean against another
                                             large-backed dark.

What he kissed in me
roused and reared up,
fiercely turning

to that flurry and beyond. Not sorry,
                                             all night I outran him.

        Note: Title is from “Last Evening: Index of first lines” by Anne Marie Rooney

 

Once Not, Now Broken

Before you ask about my lightning mouth,
understand, I might have been a summer,
though I told like a hand,
though I told like a hammer.
and my demons never were ironic.

I was too possible, like death, like the world isn’t.
Lethargic warrior, you didn’t want an other,
you wanted a desert.

Before you ask about the love-struck bell,
think of all the stairs we had to climb,
the heaviness of iron, but how
once we got it going,
we left the ground, we flew.

Time made me soft around the edges, fog-throated,
an October patois, and though I betrayed you
I never was untrue.

Before you ask about the mercury and needles
understand, I'm talking about weather, how
the wind is always moving on
and snow becomes 
salt, burning in my hands.

Your angels were faithless, lines of light dividing
air and dust. Transparent—you, the future,
most of all, your disappointment.

Before you ask what I mean by disappointment 
understand, those were butter days,
of heat and sweet corn,
nights of loose horses running through us,
the shine of their silken knees.

At my Mother’s House, October of her 88th Year

Look at the light. Look between the trees
           where branches overlap. Stippled 
                      green and yellow, foliage gleams

a few seconds silver. Across the road, 
           where the first house stood, 
                      burnished orange has blasted 
 
one side of a conical maple. The beech is flying
           its cadmium flags, that will cling
                      all winter. Hemlocks sway.                

Staghorn sumac browned by frost, 
           holds its furry seeds teetering
                       at the edge of over-ripe.

In through this raised bedroom window, 
           a breeze wanders away from its mother
                      the wind, which belongs nowhere.

Its warm gusts have rushed off the great lake, 
           whirling a magnificent cape,
                      undulating above lively marshes,

tilted between ocher and bronze,
           sliding down the vertical blue. 
                      Undeterred, it enters this bedroom,

ruffles blank pages, awakens 
           summer’s somnolent flies, stirs 
                      eddies of dust, each mote

 a memory untethered, drifting
           in a ray of variegated light, 
                      that sweeps over me, half-asleep,

half-covered, nerve endings alive, 
           restless and unwilling to settle 
                      into the comfortable bed.

The Patient’s Complaint

Anything I say will be held against me. This complaint for instance. You’ll label me non-compliant for complaining. I may be held. There are restraints for that. Medicine. Jackets. Rooms. But I swear, I’m only moving two letters around. I-A-N-T. A-I-N-T. The beginning’s still the same. C-O-M-P-L. As in complementary: things that go well together. Complimentary: words we use when we think someone has done well or if we like their choice of clothing. I’m a fan of jackets, but I’m afraid I can’t compliment yours. Bright white doesn’t complement my skin tone. One of the boxes the nurse ticked off about me when I checked into the hospital was unkempt. And it’s true. I could not keep up.

Non compos mentis. Not of sound mind. Non-compl-iant. Non-compl-aint. Ain’t. I’m sounding ignorant. But I’m not. I just can’t think fast right now. My brain has thickened to gravy. I can’t swim through the thoughts to get to the other side. The other side has left the building. I can’t leave the building. There are locks and checks and double checks. And there’s fresh air outside, anyway, on the 12 foot by 12 foot enclosed patio with the two picnic benches and the thirty-odd patients filtering in and out to smoke and remind themselves that there is a world beyond the 15-minute checks at night and the compulsory classes on managing anger or sadness or your shoes without their laces. Wouldn’t want us to try anything. Wouldn’t want us to be non-compliant.

And if you do. If you, say, try to hang yourself with your bed sheets knotted and tied to the bathroom door, push both beds against the door to the room, while I am off on the patio smoking, expect me to feel guilty I wasn’t there to stop you. Expect me to scream for a nurse when I get to the door I can’t open all the way and see your face purpling above the white sheets tied tight around your neck. Expect boxes to be ticked off. Expect to be moved to a ward with one-on-one observation. Expect to be labeled non-compliant. But don’t expect me to complain or follow your lead.

My complaints have not made it past my gravy-thick brain to my mouth, my voice. I’m voiceless. My speech: retarded. My affect: flat. Blunted. There is no there, there. I’ve disappeared. I couldn’t complain even if I wanted to, but I don’t. Want to, that is. Because I’ve done this before. I know the quickest way out is to be compliant. Take what’s offered. Pills. Therapy. Even though they don’t work. Haven’t ever worked. The cure is an illusion. The hospital is an allusion. Each state a different hospital. Each hospital the same state. The same staff. The same game. You want to leave? Be compliant. Don’t complain.

 

The Patient Talks of Electroshock and Lobster

Lobster is all I remember about Pop-Pop’s electroshock at the hospital on South Beach. He was given lobster on the ward and liked it. I didn’t visit him there, didn’t see him gorge on that sweet meat after his calculated convulsions. But lobster is what I heard a decade later when the doctor suggested electroconvulsive therapy as a way to pierce depression’s seal on my skin. This was no child’s play, no white glue poured over fingers, set dry, and peeled off slow. No delight in a fingerprint’s lingering kiss. No thrill in traversing the stifling layers, my tongue made thick with language I could not speak. What the doctor suggested would not do. All I could think about was Pop-Pop and the lobster. Until the lobster became the ECT machine became the lobster, and I pictured my skin angry like a lobster’s tail post-boil. Now, lobsters can be shocked to death. The CrustaStun can knock a lobster out in .3 seconds, kill it in less than 10. More humane than boiling, the device shortens the lobster’s suffering by minutes. If my depression could have been disappeared that fast, I would have said yes. Yes to the current to lighten my mood. Yes to the lobster.

Facts about Zurich
                          —after John D’Agata

I heard only one joke in all the time I spent in Zurich, 
on business, courted one night by a wry-eyed economist.  
We were in bed and he said, When the urge thickens in me 
like air before a wet snow, I think I will go out to a field 
and shoot myself. I didn’t say it was a funny joke.  
I didn’t say anything. He propped his neckless head 
on one arm, and laughed at my mouth jarred open, 
brows bent like broken legs—the face of pity. 
We were naked, there was no coffee, and I wanted 
to leave because I’d lied about where I was from
—just fling out the door in the camo jacket 
I bought precisely because it lent me a refugee air.  
I stayed—it was my hotel room. Our heads were citizens 
of the same pillow. I saw inside him room for the field 
to flatten, slip in sideways. I couldn’t leave us there, 
so I recounted the time I drove into a surge 
of monarch butterflies migrating home. I rolled up 
the windows, blotting out the countryside, 
but the bodies still slipped in through the vents, 
slicking my arms and face. This happened here, 
in America, where we were that moment swaddled 
in sheets I hadn’t washed since my boyfriend left, 
in the home I lived in like a runaway, where I wished 
for all the wings in the world I wasn’t living.  
Butterfly blood is clear and viscous, it won’t stain you.  
He was silent, he tried to believe. Before he left, 
he rolled down the car window and called the name 
I’d given him. I would love, he said, to see your face again, 
commandeered by broken orange wing.  When I called,
a recorded voice advised me to Hang up, try again.  
There, finally, was the punchline. What else should I do 
but laugh, cradling my face in my own two living hands?

Daily Chores

The important things
don’t just happen by accident
They don’t get said
if no one’s willing
to go out on a limb
and maybe fall into the waiting
arms of the meadow, the meadow so dark
we can’t see it, or so light-bright
I can’t see you drumming
right next to me yesterday—
perfectly clattery cacophony—
the latter a word that makes a shape
in one’s mouth     Say it,
Cacophony     Your body changes
Your mind moves over the water
And that’s really all there is
You are bigger than lightning
And the waves don’t dry up
for fear of crashing against me
If this all seems a little abstract
it’s because I’m becoming less
fond of the concrete particulars,
the polyp in my throat
won’t burst or go away
like a dandelion    I think
I should do more screaming
about the contented little houses
of this neighborhood
and the tensions well-hidden
inside them, a million secret swells
of violence and affection,
the motion of the jungle
right here in Cincinnati
And last night’s dishes
still stacked in the sink,
the laundry too dumb
to be surprising



Raider Of Cities

. . . and up comes a wall from the bottom
of my stomach, covered in vines,
poured over with graffiti     O cement mixer
Dylan Thomas eating porridge

with Samuel Taylor Coleridge     I shouldn’t
worry about it, but I have to clamber
over it, have to find a way around it, have to
dig a hole under it     Ask the princess

to dance     Throw myself upon her
mercy     So many tongues
and skirts going round     The vocals
sort of screamy, golden fishes

in my pockets     My bottomless pockets
and cops overflowing when they see me,
if they see me    I’ve been to sea
for an awfully long time, writing

little notes on the waves, My heart
is breaking     So many sorrows
and tomorrow is another     My forces 
well-hidden and waiting for the signal,

but I don’t use the signal     Everyone fails
to notice when I trace her face in pencil,
my only souvenir when the city sends me
packing     So I raid another city

A city in Texas     Maybe I’ll catch them
with their pants in the trees, the trees
they make light of in Texas

Victims of the Wedding

He who has suffer’d you to impose on him, knows you.
                                —William Blake

1:  Prenuptial

He wakes with his face pressed against the window of an airliner. Outside he can see nothing but clouds, and in his memory the dream he had been dreaming also contained nothing but clouds. There was, he thinks, a rightness in that marriage of world and dream, of mind and sky: Adam’s dream of Eve in Milton, which the man had read in college. He is holding an old spiral-bound notebook in his lap, with the nub of a pencil attached to it by a length of greasy string. Should he be writing something? Was he in the habit of taking notes? As he watches, the thunderheads through which the plane is flying seem to be vanishing, thinning, or melting away. Soon he will see the earth again, and the city to which he is traveling; soon he will remember himself, and the name of the city, and the reason he is going there. But the more the clouds depart, the less he can see the ground; gaps in the clouds reveal only darkness, and darkness beyond darkness, until at length he begins to see stars within it, and he thinks Have I slept into the night? But wasn’t I to arrive at noon?  Were others on the airplane seeing what he saw? Was there a general bewilderment, or panic? He looked down at his notebook and saw written there, in his own hand, these words: Do you hear the sound the water in the streambed makes as it runs over smooth stones? There is the entrance. He looked around and saw there was no one else on the plane. The seats were empty, as though while he was sleeping there had been an evacuation, or the Rapture had taken the others. Beyond the window he could see now only space and its unfamiliar constellations. The clouds had erased the earth. So, he thought, this is how it ends. But wasn’t he supposed to attend a wedding? What would they think of him, the bride and groom, the wedding party, the bridesmaids, if he did not appear? How would he explain himself? And how would his gift now be delivered?


2: The Doorjamb of the Labyrinth

An angel and a daemon were having a meeting just past midnight on a dewy lawn. They were the angel and daemon of a particular woman and man—or one of their angels and one of their daemons—and they had business to attend to.

We have both made promises, the daemon said. Whose promises shall be kept?

My promises, said the angel, are difficult things, but attainable.

Mine, said the daemon, are easy things, but impossible.

That’s the traditional way, the angel said, and they shook hands on it. 


3: A Confusion of Choices Among the Forking Ways

She went down to the shore of her lake, and there she found him, naked and unconscious, washed up among the remnants of his craft that had foundered. She lifted him easily—she was powerful—and took him back to her home. She laid him still unconscious on her bed, and washed him all over, cleansing every inch of him carefully, considering each part. This one has promise, she thought, and so I won’t turn him immediately into a pig, unless he turns out to be one. She washed him again—not because she thought he needed it, but for her own curiosity and satisfaction, probing into every crevice of him. When he wakes, she thought, if he ever does, I will find out his story. But for now I will find out him. And she washed him a third time, anointing him in costly oils after absorbing every smell he possessed. 

The angel and the daemon sat near the bed in their usual chairs. This is an interesting scenario, the angel said, though I have a feeling I have seen it before. 

What haven’t you seen before? the daemon said, and then went on watching while she washed the senseless man a fourth time for reasons entirely of her own.


4: An Uncertain Path through Branching Tunnels

In the middle of the night he finally wakes up. He is lying next to a woman, who is sleeping; it is winter, and there is a deep fresh snowfall outside; though there are no lights on, the window is illuminated by moonlight reflected from the snow. The man and woman are both naked, but covered in a thick duvet they are warm. The man’s arms are around the woman and her back is to him; he can feel her breath as it moves in and out of her body, just as he himself had done a few hours earlier, she atop him and astride, but with the cover up against the cold that surrounded them, leaning close to him so he could take her nipple in his mouth and feel the soft moan that came out of her along with her breath, the same breath he can see lit like the window by moonlight, snow-light, that hangs around them, like the cold that hangs around them, making a crystal cave for them in the bed where they lie, as in cave in a forest, safe and glowing just a little, magical, alive.


5: Dead End

A spring night next. He is standing at the top of the garden’s highest hill just as the sun is setting: a very slender crescent moon, no more than a curved incision of light, presides over the sun’s departure. The air is heavy with smells: cut grass, fresh herbs, the provocation of mock orange. The man feels himself pierced by the evening’s aura: it is a bounty and a judgment of which he feels unworthy but by which he feels blessed. When the woman appears soundlessly beside him as if herself conjured by that air, or as if the embodiment of that aura, he is not surprised. The hill is hers, and the sky is hers, and the night, and the moon carved into it. This place is like a flawless piece of fruit, into which he has insinuated himself like rot, but he is neither sorry nor guilty; rather he is grateful to be so nourished. Is it time? he asks the woman. Time for what? she says. To die, he says, or to go inside. 


6: Backtrack/Recursion I

In the back of the house there was a secret room. No one knew about it, not the man, not even the woman whose house it was; likely not even the previous owner had known of its existence, or the owner before that one. The history of the room went back to the builder of the house, and even she had, by the end of her life, barely remembered it was there. It had been, then, decades since anyone had found the cunningly hidden door, or opened its intricate catch, much less entered the room to find its secret. Or such was the dream the man was having when he woke that morning, at the same time the woman woke, saying I had the strangest dream about a room at the back of the house. . . .


7: Recursion II

She wanted to be naked in starlight on the jetty that went out over the small lake; she left her clothes in a neat pile at the very end, where the weathered wood overhung the water, and stood feeling the warm air against her body. She wanted to be naked in starlight there, and she was, and it was good. She wanted him to be naked with her, and he left his clothes too in a less neat pile and stood feeling her feeling the warm air against her body; she wanted him to be naked in starlight there, and he was, and it was good. She wanted him to lie down on the wood, and he did, carefully, not to get splinters, and she stood above him, watching him, wanting him to be naked in starlight—wanting him to be naked starlight—and he became naked starlight to satisfy her wanting. She wanted starlight to be naked in her on the jetty, and her will was done. And he? He wanted her will to be done.


8: Sense of Direction

The angel and the daemon sat beside the bed where the man and woman were making love. They were interested in human lovemaking, always—connoisseurs, one might say, though they had no direct experience of it—and found it interesting to compare notes on the process.

Do you think, the angel said, that what they’re doing there is really worth all the effort they put into it? It seems to be a lot of work.

I take them at their word, the daemon said, and in every word they speak, even when they are not speaking, they affirm the worth of it.

But look, the angel said, he pierces her. How can that be a pleasant thing?

It’s a mystery, the daemon said, but she pierces him too. The mystery resides in that also.

But can it be a pleasure to be licked like that? He’s licking her nipples. I do not see the joy in that.

And soon, said the daemon, her tongue will be in his ear. Our understanding of their ecstasy is quite beside the point. Just accept that.

You seem to be implying, the angel went on, that there is a reciprocity in it?

Otherwise, the daemon told him, they would both be terribly lonely right now.

The woman grasped the man’s hair and pulled his head to her mouth just as he pressed deep inside her; she put her tongue in his ear and he moaned, but she whispered to him, Are those two still watching us?

He glanced over out of the corner of his eye, where the two supernatural gargoyles sat on three-legged stools beside the bed. They are, he said. And does it excite you to have them watch us?

If it didn’t, she said, feeling her turbulence beginning, they would both be terribly lonely right now.


9: Recursion III

The woman lit a candle, and then with her finger drew a shape in the air. The man appeared there. 

Of all the women in the world, he said, I invoke you.

I thought it was I who had conjured you here, she said.

So it always seems to humans, the daemon instructed the angel, at all times and everywhere.


10: The Minotaur’s Tracks

There was an inaudible, visceral rumbling in the night and the man and woman got up; they went out on the porch to see the cause. Down the hill, beyond the property line, there were explosions; spectral tanks raised their cannons in the starlight; concertina wire was strung across the road that ran by the house, and men and women wearing body armor maneuvered intricately and mysteriously in the middle distance. Meanwhile, people could be seen driving to work, walking their dogs, carrying bags of groceries past rows of foxholes; a minister performed a wedding next to a machine gun nest; children were playing, and shrapnel flew silently over the scene.

They’re at it again, the woman said.

The last time this happened, we were killed, the man answered.

The woman put her arms around him and kissed him. I think we’ll be fine this time.

When they came back inside, the angel and the daemon, who had been napping on their stools, leaning uncomfortably against each other, woke up. Another war, eh, the angel said. Looks like it, the demon said, but our two here don’t seem worried.

Why would they? the angel said. Together they are stronger than an army.

You think so? the daemon said. Weren’t they killed once before?

Oh, my friend, said the angel, even in their eternity things change, but never for the better or for the worse. They change because they change.


11: A Hallway that Narrows to a Point

He was lost in a blizzard that went on for decades. He was immune, it seemed, to the cold of which it was an expression, but he could not see through it and he could not find his way out of it. After awhile he stopped trying. It became his climate. He went about his life in spite of it, even forgetting, finally, that it was there. Without realizing it, he had become covered in snow, encased in it, and imagined that was his proper and fated condition. Within his snow skin he had a life. He did things, accomplished something. But he still dreamed, sometimes, of a spring field, of flowers in a vase, of orchids in a pot.


12: Window in a Cul-De-Sac

That landscape had been damaged; there were scars. The man and the woman walked out in the early morning and went to work with spading forks and hoes. By midmorning all evidence of the war had been smoothed over; by lunchtime, there were new gardens everywhere: herbs grew on the sites of foxholes, a burnt-out half-track provided the structure for a raised vegetable bed; there were flowers growing along the boundaries of no man's land. 

It’s interesting, the angel said, how easily humans absorb history and remake it as if it had never happened. You’d think they’d wear out with it.

It’s different for them than for you and me, the daemon said, they are able to forget because they are capable of ecstasy. 


13: In a Corner, the Spoor of a Large Animal

The woman waited. The man slept. Outside the big wind was whipping across the water, and the small broken ship was scattered even farther up and down the shore, its masts shattering to kindling. The woman walked by the shore, gathering the bits of boat, carrying them up to her woodpile. The ship that had carried him warmed the house for them, burning. The burning ship invisible behind the woodstove’s window: the ship and all it contained, all it conveyed. 


14: Chamber with Music and the Stink of the Bull

There were many children in the meadow on the hill. The man and woman had been fertile, and the children took the meadow like an invading army, in rags if they were wearing clothes at all, feral, lean, their eyes bright with hunger, their play, such as it was, like the play of young jackals, but each held an old spiral-bound notebook in his or her dirty hand, with the nub of a pencil attached to it by a length of greasy string. They moved across the meadow from every direction under a waning late autumn sun, as if they came there by pre-arrangement, as if there were a purpose in their convergence, a destination.

At the center of the meadow the angel was on all fours; behind the angel, the daemon mounted and entered, though just what angelic orifice received him or her it is difficult to say. As neither creature was permanently gendered, all the apparatus was nonce and, so to speak, home-made.

I still fail to see the pleasure in this, or any other purpose, the angel complained.

You still aren’t doing it right, the daemon replied, laying another stripe on the angel’s buttocks with a golden cat-o-nine-tails. Haven’t you watched the humans enough yet to understand?

Evidently not, the angel muttered, changing, through a mystical force of will, the nether configuration to resemble yet more closely what humankind had revealed. Perhaps we need more ichor, or some ectoplasm.

Keep trying, the daemon grunted.

So distracted were the mystical pair that they failed to notice the sharp-toothed children surround them. They moved as quietly as ferrets through the grass and took up positions at all degrees around their objective. When they all were ready, they opened their notebooks and began to draw the most beautiful, accurate, and obscene illustrations of what they observed.


15: Glimpse of an Unattainable Exit

When he woke up, the man thought he was reborn, and then he thought he had dreamed the great storm. What would he have been doing on a ship at all, much less being the captain of one? The idea was absurd. And the room he woke in was both strange to him and familiar. He seemed to remember being carried. Who would have carried him, from where, and why? He felt weak, but only from hunger; he was hungry. He desired. But when the woman appeared in front of him—had she stepped out of a shadow?—he knelt in front of her. She put her hand on his head. He thought she would ask him to rise, but she did not: she held him there with a power he did not understand, but to which he gladly acceded. He was in her domain. 

Doesn’t he know all he has to do is stand up? the angel said. She’s not preventing him.

He is choosing, the daemon said. Angels always have difficulty comprehending the nature and significance of human choosing.

Angels never make choices, the angel said. Or, well, one did, and that is why the rest of us don’t.


16: Hallway with Collapsing Roof

Having made his choice, the man turned and saw a landscape transformed. Gouts of bloody cloud rose into the sky, pillars of smoke and flame; bombs fell from unseen incunabula in the vortex of the firmament. He looked again and saw the body of the woman, pierced by a splintered two-by-four from the frame of the demolished house, framed in a bed of hibiscus; the angel and the demon too had been torn to fragments by the maelstrom, and their essences flung across the moonlit lawn.  He looked skyward and saw his own disintegration descending like a flaming airliner from the black sky.


17: Icarus Falls Through the Roof of the Penultimate Chamber

If there is no earth, can the airliner be descending? Is the wedding party waiting? Will there be champagne in the void? Will there be a wedding band? In his spiral-bound notebook, the man is writing everything he knows with the stump of a pencil. It is said a person is the sum of a life’s choices. My choices have been random, and fated, and fatal, and so this is what I am.


18: The Work of the Maker

Before time began, but after the last war, all the spirits were gathered in a great echoing vacuous space. They arranged themselves in a hierarchal circle, understanding without being told by anyone that they were about to be offered an opportunity, one which must be faced decisively and accomplished precisely, otherwise something as yet nameless and unknown would overtake that which had yet to be created. Before them appeared a large bin, painted drab green and spotted with rust, the mystic word Dumpster stenciled on its side. Inside, they all knew (again without being told), were objects, though in that time before objects existed that word had a dubious status.

One by one, in the order of their place in the great schematic, the spirits came forward, looked into the bin—which was practically speaking gazing into a future universe—and chose the thing that then became the destiny of his or her kind. First came the greatest of the demiurges, who chose a golden crown known as Kether, the topmost of the Sephirot of the Tree of Life; then came the archangels, who chose sundry wings and haloes; after them the multitudes of angels and seraphim and cherubim, who carted away robes and sandals and censors as if they were bargains at a yard sale. They were followed by the daemonic orders—djinn, foliots, devils of all kinds, Beelzebubs all, collectors of pitchforks and sulphuric vapors and the like. The gathering was multitudinous beyond counting, and the bin, though not as large as one might expect, seemed inexhaustible—setting a pattern for the future of miracles.

Still, as the ceremony proceeded and the gathered, after most of an eternity, dwindled, the last of the spirits approached the great receptacle. This of course was the spirit of humanity, last in everything, and least likewise. A meager wisp of a creature, the spirit of humanity had to borrow an ottoman from a sleepy Luciferian to stand on in order to reach the very rim of the bin.

When the spirit looked inside, it discovered to its surprise that the bin was neither empty (usually the kind of thing that happened to the spirit of humanity), nor did it contain merely a single rejected item (which is what long conditioning had led the spirit of humanity to think the most likely eventuality). To its surprise, it found there three things: a decaying brain, a bloody heart, and an old spiral-bound notebook, with the nub of a pencil attached to it by a length of greasy string. Horrified by the brain and disgusted by the heart—while only disappointed in the notebook—the spirit chose the latter.

A bolt of lightning split the sky, which before had been nonexistent, and—in punishment for having made the wrong choice yet again—the spirit of humanity was forced to take the heart and the brain as well.

Genetic

1.
Ash-good-sharp-love

is the word for needle 
the nurse says 
in another client’s language

this is for genetic testing 
she says

sign here


2. 
when we were little 
we went swimming swimming 
every day

a pond with deep green algae 
a garden spilled with weeds

Caravaggio would have seen 
the shadows I
saw only heat waves, humidity

a dog panting 
an overblown pink rose

my shirt a t-shirt 
my skin red 
peeling down to white


3. 
Now we live outside 
DC NYC LA

a set of initials 
is not a home

when our parents died 
we had them cremated

we burnt the old house 
to the ground

then like the old cowboy 
story—we got up on 
our high horse

& rode the other way


4. 
My daughter’s 
school lets out

to crows chasing an owl 
they are nothing to me—

loud caws 
shit

unless they are ravens 
they don’t belong in any poem

I have my standards

Miss Wisconsin, my daughter says, 
reading the flyer, What do 
you bet her hair is blond?


5. 
Behind the reader at one book store— 
self-help books

at this one—literary criticism

Is anything implied here?


6. 
as the plane went down 
the paper said

it was quiet as a library— 
a library hushed 
as a falling plane
how many have of us 
have fallen?

so quietly—so far


7. 
Yes I had a father, 
I tell the nurse

no he’s not alive— 
heart attack no history of cancer

A mother, dead too— 
cancer

a sister—cancer—living still

grandfather, grandmother, 
grandfather—cancer, 
cancer, cancer

my father’s mother? 
he always said 
she swam away

Ash-good-sharp-love

she sticks the needle 
in my vein


8. 
What can you say about 
your life in

so little space?

What will your daughter’s 
daughter say? 

Extra Letters

We go to Ikea and really Ikea is pretty empty. Empty as in lonely, lonely as in the news told us all to stay at home and on the freeways the traffic is moving perfectly. I say THE FREEWAY IS ANOTHER WAREHOUSE. You know how sometimes from high above you can see all the cars falling. How sometimes you want to move every brick yourself. How you want to stop your car and run up and down the lanes yelling YOU GO HERE AND YOU GO HERE. How when I do this I move all the purple cars to the shoulder and save them for you. I am lying again. Nothing purple belongs on the freeway and that’s why in Ikea there is nothing purple. We stand in an 800 square foot space for just a few moments. Everything is red and everything is shiny. On the wall above the bed I find the alphabet. I read each letter and at the end there are European letters. I say THEY ALL LOOK LIKE A’S TO ME. I say WHAT IS THE POINT OF EXTRA LETTERS. I say THIS IS SO FUCKING PERSONAL.

 

Paint Them Black

Our space is still a mess of bricks. We go to Ikea because we want something more beautiful. I get lost in the smell of it all. I follow you and for a moment you are an arrow. I think OUR MESS IS YOUR SUBTLE LINGERIE. I think THERE IS ALWAYS A SPACE THE SAME COLOR AS OUR SPACE. You find it and say INSTEAD OF HEARTS WE WILL A HANG A PICTURE OF HEARTS. There are 30 pictures and the 30 pictures are not really our hearts. We paint the wooden frames black and instead of a heart we hang the frames in a shape we can’t describe. We hang them early in the morning because the neighbors are asleep and we’re tired of their shit. You have a tack hammer in your hand and you say THIS IS NOT PASSIVE AGGRESSIVE ENOUGH. I want to be a larger hammer. I say IF ONLY EACH FRAME WAS A BRICK WE COULD PUT THROUGH THEIR WINDOWS. I say IF ONLY WE COULD BUILD THE PERFECT HEART and that night when I want to sleep I can only stand against the wall and shift the frames around so they will fall in a row and disappear.

 

Sometimes There’s a Skunk

On the way home we buy a newspaper and all the while I’m thinking NEWSPAPER IS BAD FOR THE ENVIRONMENT. You know why. We could spend all night reading newspapers and the neighbors would spend all night praying for god to smite us sinners, all the while a few blocks away on the corner there’s a party on the front lawn. They’re all drinking, burning newspapers. Our newspaper is in the trash. We lay thirty one-dollar picture frames out on top of it. I paint them black, all the while singing I BOUGHT A PICTURE FRAME AND I WANT IT PAINTED BLACK. You see how mad I get. How across the yard the neighbors are breathing very politely. How they shut the window and I go cursing like an animal. How late at night sometimes there’s a skunk out in the yard, rolling around in the grass, leaving person-sized shits. I’m worried that the skunk will dig up the ashes of your heart. I’m worried that I spent too much time inhaling fumes. That when we get to Ikea next time there won’t be any more one-dollar picture frames. I will say IRONICALLY FUCK MY LIFE. I will say I STILL CAN’T SMELL THE CINNAMON ROLLS.

 

Free from the Pet Shop

And even when we disappear for nights at a time I still think HOW MANY MIRROR MIRRORS ON THIS LITTLE WALL and I still catch myself looking through the aisles of oil stains and bushy rags screaming THIS IS THE LAST TIME I’LL DRAW YOUR FOOTPRINT IN THE SAND and the sand is Absorb-All and the Absorb-All is a dark brown bloody color that makes me sick in the morning when my mind is warped with pictures of yarn and eggs and animals set free from the pet shop across the street. You see my dreams are not dreams but walls and my walls are covered with mirrors of woven Ikea glass.

you hated me on my birthday

because I refused to dress up
or because I wanted to drink in
dive bars while wearing too
short shorts. you rolled your eyes
at me and I couldn’t help but
drink more gin even though I
really hate gin. you didn’t even
notice that one, but you did
see whenever the bartender leaned
over a bit too far and touched
my cheek like I was a walleye.
you hated me and sent texts
to your new man about how much
you hated me. if you ever look
back and wonder why I got sloppy
that night think about how many
times I watched you and thought
about how beautiful you were then.

 

before you I never

second guessed whether to tuck in my shirt or whether to look like a Spanish soccer star which I always assumed would be like a telenovela bit actor, but you always looked at me with those eyes that did not undress me but undressed me and redressed me in fancier clothes so when I looked at myself in the mirror I could only see myself naked and while I liked me naked I liked to pretend you liked it better

before you I would always wash my face not scrub my face like you said I needed to do because I had pores that could lose Chevrolets or small battleships so I always felt just a bit dirty and not dirty like I needed my nipples pinched but dirty like kissing me would be more tithe than titillation

before you I thought I would always be who I was but I somehow lost those directions or pushed them somewhere deep in the old dresser drawers that you relegated my old tshirts and baseball card collections because you didn’t want to deal with either of those since either of those reminded you a bit too much of what you left or what you wanted to run to

before you I could never figure out which direction was the past or the future
                                                                                                       
since you I haven’t figured out those cardinal directions anyways

 

I wish you had ruined sex for me

because there’s something endearing about wanting
nothing but the feeling of me at your cervix

like I am always knocking at your door, always
wanting to deliver pizza, presents, presets

but you couldn’t do that, couldn’t imagine yourself
outside of yourself enough to do more than lay there

and be introspective about how my cock, constant
reminder that you loved the patriarchy at one point

made you mess the sheets more times than we
could wash them, or I could wash them since I

always did the laundry, but you could never make
my tongue loll around like my eyes could never

make me want me more than the desire for
my own pleasure, you couldn’t and wouldn’t try to.

 

Misplaced Deities

You refused to touch me
anywhere I could wear clothes
because you talked a big
game about how you adored
the feeling of getting fucked,
but your idea and my idea
were so far from different.
You rocked your hips back
and forth and back again
like that was enough for me
to lose all control. It was not.
You refused to touch my
cheek whenever I was inside
of you, you pushed my hands
away from your neck, and
heaven forbid if I tried to roll
you out of missionary and out
of the eyes of the god neither
of us believed in. When you left
there should’ve been a hole,
a space left for your occupation,
but instead left was that goddamn
god, staring back at me like he
had something to say. I’m best
left without deities in my bed,
with the only name left to call
not being yours, not yours at all.

 

The Art of Postcards

We taught the cat to write.
She can’t write much, but enough
to send post cards. Whenever we
go anyplace, we bring the cat
post cards. Whether they come
from Las Vegas or just a local
tourist attraction she digs her
claws in and flips them. She 
doesn’t care about how kitschy
they are, how big the block letters
are. She writes about how
hungry she is, about the birds
just outside the windows, about
what it means to dream about
napping. She looks up at us
whenever she’s done, sits down
on the back of the card, and 
blinks until we recognize her
genius. We wait, just a moment,
only to emphasize our surprise.
These moments are when life
feels completely surreal to me.

Of the Limited Amount of Touch Apportioned to Each

In the first days before we noticed and started
to protect ourselves in our homes small objects

began to cling to us pebbles leaves little animals
then we heard that some were injured in the streets

by flying pans garden tools nails that collided
with great velocity with any one still out and about

it is now impossible to drive a car or lie in a metal
bed since there is no way to extricate oneself from it

we had hoped this was only a temporary
geomagnetic excursion but it is now clear that it is

a cretaceous superchron of unknown dimensions
we can see cars with drivers magnetized to their

seats crying for help that is no longer available
babies are no longer born only very young children

are able to approach each other to an arm’s length
of distance before the two small bodies abruptly

swerve aside and apart each is driven back by
the hand of the one reaching out we are so far

apart that we only conceive of each others’ lifted
arms as signs hard to read across the distance

we lean toward each other and stand tilted for
hours our hands outstretched like those of beggars

 

Of the Limited Number of Deaths Apportioned to Each

                      . . . considering the thousand dores that lead to death [I]
                      doe thanke my God that we can die but once.
                                                                            Sir Thomas Browne

Although we have long assumed that each of us has
to have only one for some of us it is easy to lay

claim to it several times over by the accident of
birth or by the secret cryptograms of weather work

or war while for others it seems hard to come by it
lingers in wounds and disease and comes a little

at a time but otherwise we think we ought to be
grateful for the single ration of it in proportion to

the unlimited allowance of suffering that is daily
dispensed if we carry our death with us like

an unopened gift if we wait for an anniversary or
the celebration of an appropriate occasion to open

it anxious that it will be the right one since we seem
generally disappointed about its size (it is either too

large or too small) and most want to return it for
another one it is now known that we may have

an allocation of two or three deaths (though some
have as many as dozen and some have only one)

we often recklessly waste the first in a wholly
avoidable accident and then thinking that we

miraculously survived (which is nothing other than
having spent one’s first death) live our lives with

utmost prudence or fear only to find out at the end
when we are tired that we have one or two more left

 

Of the Disappearance of Size

In these days our bones shine through the body
like elongated fluorescent lamps and the skin
hangs on it like washed paper these are the signs
                                   then they insist they have
seen it all they will stubbornly continue to see us
for a while but without the illusion of grief it is
clear that we disappear every day
                                   right before everybody’s eyes
one cannot see it not because it always comes too
soon or unexpectedly but because death is tiny as
the sharp tip of a needle we will fit into it our size
has been taken

 

Little Fugue

They weighed the wind in scales made of the flight
of birds they weighed the flight of birds in scales

made of glass they measured the circumference
of the light in the glass with a compass made of

transparency they weighed the light in the scales
of the silences between women and men and

the silences in scales made of words and they used
the remainder of a silence to find happiness or

bitterness they found happiness and they weighed it
in scales made of lost time then they weighed lost

time in scales made of hands cupped to hold water
they walked to the end of a long river to weigh

the river in scales made of water they weighed
it by holding it up to a window and its light

and they weighed the light and measured
the circumference of the light in the glass 
with a compass made of transparency

Untitled I

That’s the ticket,
I think Romains will gather more people, more writers,
just like Yeats on his ghosts.

Early changes in the human pelvis reduced the size of the birth canal,
so that it was not big enough for the large-brain babies that would evolve.

My elderly neighbor had only recently stopped riding on buses.
Bad news did her in,
the voices on the radio soothing her through another sunny afternoon.

Crust, mantle, outer liquid core, and inner solid core,
an earthquake top,
in the right hemisphere S-waves,
waves that travel as a sequence of compressions and expansions
along their ray path.

The first certified deprogrammer of Jesus freaks.
After years of “Inna Godda da Vida” Moon’s rhythmic
Manchurian Candidate seemed a relief.

Much is made of her blouse with its blue bow and elaborate lace collar,
but she was still in what we call the ungrateful age.
It’s a real treasure in bluish tones and white,
pleasant subject, alive, beautiful coloring, and well drawn.

We say that pleasure is the beginning and end of a happy life.
Perfect acts are successes, 
what adornment can a household enjoy to compare with the companionship
of a man and his wife?


Kulch.

To run the New Yorker gaga you need Kumrad Kumminkz.
When they look at them nice old-fashioned engravins they can see a park bench
anna brothel, and besides the bloke iz in jail.

After Leib. we have either trype of derivatives from material science,
nothing a man with any real brain cdn’t do better with half an hour’s thinking
than with mucking around with printed material.

Why tax money?
Why just not issue 1/8th?
They mustn’t simply multiply and accumulate.

Cock cannot be mentioned in America.
All Americans are shocked by the English use of it.
Don’t worry about what I know.

I am afraid my popular style is rhetorical, just broad,
simple old-fashioned songs, I can no other.
Note “saxpence,” Lowland Scots for “a tanner.”

Dozens of soupeaters merely yodel about hope of ha’pence.
As to the literary reward!
Merely derivative writers with active wives are not idealist in the endowment.


First, the Chimpanzee

If 10 genes affected weight, they could combine in enough ways
to produce 59,049 different weights.

Inheritance is particulate.
Pea plants, each on a separate chromosome.
Monstrous birds of 1,000 grams down to some that were tinier than bantam      grandparents.

Yellow body,
white eyes, 
echinus eyes,
cross veinless,
cut wing,
vermilion eyes,
miniature wing,
sable body,
garnet eyes,
forked bristles,
bar eyes,
clipped wing,
bobbed bristles.

Of all the great apes, the chimpanzee is the least specialized.
In size it is a neat compromise:  
small enough to get about in trees,
big enough to take care of itself on the ground against predators.
As a result, it is at home in both worlds.
It is a generalist-opportunist
and will eat a wide variety of fruit and vegetation.

The first herbalists?

Males have been observed setting out
as a small group with the clear intention
of stalking a neighbor.

The chimpanzee is scarcely a star athlete by human standards.

Brain size and tooth shape and length of leg
all evolved at different times and different rates.

A life adapted to eating large amounts of coarse, tough vegetable matter.
What is the gracile type that appears at Koobi Fora?

Combine the peculiar attributes of a hominid
with the cooperative hunting and food sharing of a social carnivore,
and the result could be a very successful hunter.


Tawana Brawley

“Kill the niggers.”
Tawana Brawley was found in a trash bag in the courtyard of an apartment      complex,
covered with feces, her hair cut and matted,
the words nigger, bitch, and KKK scrawled across her body.
“Roving bands of wild criminals” 
who “roam our neighborhoods”:
Yusef Salaam, Kevin Richardson, Antron McCray, Raymond Santana, Kharey Wise,
rape, sodomy, sexual abuse, riot, assault, attempted murder.

The convictions of the “Central Park 5,” as they were called, were overturned.


The Impossibility of Life

O to M
Oh Be a Fine Girl (Guy) Kiss Me:
effective temperature of roughly 41,000 K,
radiative flux,
Kuiper belt objects
between jovian planets and terrestrial planets.

HZ, gray
photosynthetic bacteria,
first 2 billion years,
greenhouse gas methane,
inclination of 90 degrees.

Water,
70% of a cell’s weight,
one amino acid is joined to the H3N+ end of the next amino acid,
fusion called polypeptides.

Always d-ribose,
doexy-d-ribose,
CMP, AMP, GMP, UMP, and TMP,
where MP stands for monophosphate.

M. genitalium with 468 genes.
M. genitalium and Haemophilus influenzae.
Last Universal Common Ancestor (LUCA).
Minimal organism,
Los Alamos Bug:

fatty acids that in water self-assemble into a container,

peptic nucleic acids (PNA) for memory,

a fatty acid and PNA producing a simple metabolism,

and light to power the metabolism.


From Hot Pants to Hot Tubs

Drug-culture candy,

Drug toys,

Earth tones,

Hamburger Helper,

The Happy Face,

Herbal teas,

High tech,

Incense,

IUDs,

Kahoutek,

Laetrile,

Macramé,

Musk cologne,

Mysteries of the universe,

Natural foods,

The organic bathroom,

Patchouli,

POW bracelets,

Puka shells.


Onions

The rhyming shapes of the onions and garlic,
set at different angles,
create an ebullient effect:

the warm reds, yellows, and pinks on the onions 
offset the softer, cooler hues in the background.

Onions and garlics are loosely arranged
across a tabletop, placed on and off a crumpled white cloth
with a red and blue border.
They belong to a modest, relaxed southern way of life,
contrasted to the artifice of Parisian culture.

A personal sense of relief.


Caesar

Caesar attempted to secure smooth passage for his legislation.
Caesar solicited the support or at least the silence of the best orator in Rome.
Cicero confirmed Caesar’s worst fears by indulging in critical remarks.
Caesar, with the co-operation of Pompey, retaliated.
Cicero refused invitations from Caesar to serve on his agrarian commission.
Cicero paid for his refusal by being sent into exile.
Cicero’s political importance was not a figment of his own vanity.
Caesar attempted to impress the body of the Senate with his sweet      reasonableness.
Caesar took all of his subsequent proposals directly to the people.
Caesar was eager to gain the province of Gaul from the Senate.
Caesar was aware that Pompey was an unreliable ally.
Caesar was tied up in Gaul and unable to cross the Alps.
Cicero lamented that neither Pompey nor Caesar had any aim but dominatio.
Caesar’s victory destroyed the system within which he wanted primacy.
Caesar achieved enough to show how widely his mind ranged.
Caesar applied traditional remedies such as the abolition of urban clubs.
Cicero complained that his own name was attached to senatorial decrees.
Caesar knew his peers disliked being kept waiting in his antechamber.
Who was there left who had seen the Republic?  Who was going to find a way out?


Instigations I

Have just bought two statuettes from the coming sculptor, Gaudier-Brzeska.
He is the only person with whom I can really be “Altaforte.”

The band’s first choices for a name were the Mad Dogs and Whoopie Cushion.
Page suggested changing “lead” to “led” so Americans wouldn’t pronounce it 
     “leed.”

Yeats is much finer intime than seen spasmodically in the midst of the whirl.
He returned $200, hence the sculptural outburst and a new typewriter of great      delicacy.

Hot pants, leisure suits, fake leather, fake fur, rabbit fur, wedgies, clogs, Earth      Shoes,
platforms, safari jackets, spandex disco pants, leg warmers, bow ties, lycra stretch      pants.

It was Tagore who poked my “Contemporariana” down the Chicago gullet.
I am profoundly pained to hear you prefer Marie Corelli to Stendhal, but I can’t help      it.

Chocolate brown double-knot blazers, “Lurex” sparkle T-shirts, Qiana scarves,
Vibram-soled hiking boots, Levi’s Pamela suits, “Afternoon Delight” sparkle T-shirts.

Besides yourself and Mrs. Henderson, who takes the art of poetry seriously?
Who in America believes in perfection and that nothing short of it is worthwhile?

Seen in hindsight, Hearts and Minds is a remarkable document of American 
     self-loathing. 
Scenes of football games are portrayed as warfare rituals leading to My Lai      massacres.

I have sinned in nearly every possible way, even the ways I most condemn.
I have printed too much.  I have been praised by the greatest living poet.

Burt threw himself into the talk-show circuit and had an affair with Dinah Shore.
A man who looks so macho, almost too macho.  Down-home, good-ol’-boy 
     self-deprecation.


“Ford to City:  Drop Dead” 

You could say it started on the subways:
unfilled light sockets, long dark shadows,
old cars painted battleship gray and flaking away.

The “collapse of critical standards,” lifelong Cold Warriors
envying the USSR where there was “no nonsense
about freedom of expression,” where the state 
could arrest kids en masse and bury them in labor camps.

IF ART IS A CRIME, MAY GOD FORGIVE ME.

WAR IS SELFISH DEATH, MAN IS ALMOST EXTINCT.

Don’t hold your breath, kids.  It wasn’t the kids who failed.


Bear Cult

Seven bear skulls,
all arranged with their muzzles
facing the cave entrance.


Interrogation

Why did inflation hit $9.98 with a $10 bill?
Because the Seattle Mariners were making more than the President.

Should Bernie Goetz (a hero) have the tip-off?
The film found another unwitting press agent.

Is Village Voice critic Jerry Saltz this generation’s Robert Parker?
In fact, he started acting like a leather-jacketed Ward Cleaver.

Did the mayhem and filth of the Bronx have lyrical names?
Rockefeller was clearly miserable as Vice President.

Have bartenders supplanted DJs as star mixologists?
Springsteen was a creation of Columbia hype and fawning critics.

Is Jamaica, Queens, far from its namesake Jamaica Bay?
Divine Light: Pain caused by pressing hard on your eyeballs.

Is ripeness all? Could we have predicted AIDS or the crack wars?
Annie Hall burst on the scene like a dizzy pot-smoking Hepburn.

Why have homeless New Yorkers been pushed out of their self-made dwellings?
McGovern’s genial running mate had undergone repeated electroshock therapy.

Will DeLillo return to New York for Cosmopolis?
By 1976 an estimated six million viewers were tuning in.


Impressions

this means of unifying a canvas [canvas as the basis for landscape]

rocks at Yport at low tide looking directly out to sea [the theme of a woman reading Emma Bovary]

the distinction between blue and yellow [admirable head of golden-blonde hair]

five louis would have been so useful [beneath the fluent and informal paint surface]

the play of reflections on the water [the horizontality of the water surface]

blue, orange, and cream in the sky [and some of the whites more pink]

like that of the cat on her lap [often naked or partly naked or ceased to pose]

the aesthetic of the voyeuristic [her colorful slang and implausible storytelling]

exhausting night and Zola’s true praise [a very beautiful study of flesh]


Art and Ritual

to become bigger as hearths abound 28,000 to 10,000 B.P. a talent sprung blown out of nowhere caves have subterranean pools dark mysterious and very cold made livable by adding barriers of brushwood or animal skins signs of many generations of occupancy in France alone true caves the cave called Le Tuc d’Audobert paintings or engravings made in the least convenient places for viewing sympathetic hunting magic prowess spears and knives incomprehensible events impossible that this art should have been invented mysterious secrecy animals they wished to kill magic could dodge misfortune mortal wound during the hunt rectangular enclosures with animals trapped enormous tusks thrust beyond the snare forestall misfortune and injury and perhaps death fresh dart symbolizing actual or ritualized killing a horse’s pelvis symbolically killed 27 times a pregnant horse and lengthy notation possibly on the brink of developing arithmetic and perhaps very primitive writing every animal is an individual portrait 20,000 years to forestall misfortune injury and perhaps death it is impossible that this art should have been invented they walked always in the shadow of unpredictable and incomprehensible events seen as malign forces


The Increase in Solar Luminosity and the Continuously Habitable Zone

time is measured from the start 
four hydrogen nuclei into one helium nucleus
a less massive star spectral type G5V
a life-carrying planet must orbit
while the sun has increased its luminosity
today’s habitable zone lies between 0.7 and 1.4 AU
the sun will leave the main sequence phase
at this stage present forms of life will no longer be possible


Occupation Levels

Blown dust, rising water, layers of sand and clay,
what did homo habilis find there?
Tiny shrimps flamingos eat.


E. E. Cummings

Because I want it in my profile if there lacked abundance of prudukk.
Because it may be the only way to get the Red Front printed in Eng.
I want to ram sodden mass of half-stewed oatmeal that passes for the Brit. mind.

The normal or average eye sees a certain width without heaving from side to side
he adds, whatting and becoming his raven mane
mebbe there is wide-angle eyes.

If I said anything about obscurity, it wd. fare ridere polli.
I don’t think Eimi is obscure, or not very,
obviously NOT to the Edgar Wallace virtue of the opposite hurry scurry.


Meaning of the Fossils

Piltdown man was a complete surprise.
The brain had evolved more rapidly than the body.
Piltdown man was a hoax.


Patronage

It was all craft (techne).
Crafts were practiced in families.
A sculptor might prefer modeled bronze to carved marble,
and he might also be an architect (Scopas) or painter (Euphranor).

Some crafts were easily mobile.
The desire of the vase-painter to sign his work might seem unusual.
The artist’s name may be as prominent as the deceased’s.

The world of men was the gods’ proper place.
Man, the potential of a truly popular art.
Art for art’s sake was unknown and unnecessary.

A tyrant court, 
concealed nationality, 
immigration and inscriptions,

irrelevant to the scenes they accompanied.
Handsome well-born youths of the day
practiced lesser arts on poorer works.


Homage to Plato

A long set of arguments about the Eleatic One,
a theory of society,
a cosmology

rejecting the established media of prose or verse,
for good reason.

Self-knowledge on variations.

After Easter

Pastor says the church reeks
            like a funeral parlor, so we troll
            the narthex and sanctuary, pull 
                        stems from murky vases,

brush petals from the choir loft. 
            This year, the lilies, each named 
            for a dead saint or the “glory 
                        of God,” refused to open,

despite the furnace, despite the heat 
            lamps we held over their folded 
            bodies, despite prayers shed 
                        over clenched veins.

Since I was a child, I dreaded Easter,
            since we held sunrise services 
            at houses of the dying, since
                        the early hours clawed

at our throats, flattened our hymns
            against hills stricken with dawn.  
            I would wander into the weeds,
                        gorge myself on fistfuls

of marshmallow birds, craving 
            their bodies’ grit, aching to gag, 
            aching for our dead Christ
                        to rise from my green body.

 

On the Feast of Epiphany

Tonight, the peninsula in lunar glow revealed: 
               stripped maples a darkboned host 
                              against the bluff, tin shanties like magicians 
          fishing visions from ice. As children, here,
                     mothers coaxed our tongues into prayers 
for mild winters and taught us to cull from them our grim deliverance: 
                     cellars filled with coldblood cherries, deer strung cruciform 
     from shed rafters. We learned to play dead,
                              our small skulls clustered 
               like dry milkweed on the classroom floor, faces curled to knees, 
fingers knotted to protect necks from wild beasts. 
               We carved hard our fingers to chisel breathspace in avalanche,                               learned to trail the North Star home. 
          Years later, my brother studies clouds, tells me storm 
will break the next morning. Once I, too, could divine first snow, 
                              but his predictions are miracles to me now.
            The horizon, wool-gray, folds silence                               
                       over silence. The firmament refuses to speak to me. 
I’ve forgotten how to interpret sky, to read revelations in its starless signs.

Flyway Lover

In this beach house, only the top socket
of an outlet is live. Except for one.

And what of the egret who brings me
a fish each day, poises on the deck five

feet from my bed and lets the still-living
victim twitch so its scales flame in sunlight?

Desperation? Dominance? Courtship?
Electricity folds mystery within mystery.
 
Why else would I consider poking my finger 
in a live socket to throw off sparks,

continue, though already caught, to 
wriggle, struggle, and lust after shine?

 

Recipe

Nature traces flesh, burns the tongue,
Eats and excretes.

Within there’s a monster who devours dreams.
Pasty, poisonous, bloated. His poet child
Gnaws at curiosity 
As larvae in his fur catch fire.

Holy accord is always subject to accident,
Making room for cheats and thieves.
Will that. Eat that. 
Seethe. Kill the monster but save

His child. And always—god damn—
wax and burn.

 

Ripeness is All

Fruits plump like ruddy breasts, stems rippling.
See these tomatoes, the old woman says,

holding stubby-fingered hands toward me.
They are my grandchildren.

You pamper and spoil, Old One, you last of 
the fishers of men/women. You nurture nature,

pray/prey. No loaves or fishes—
oh Lord, just ripeness. One day, you’ll twist

them free. Offer them as hymns, your love apples:
handfuls to the living, eyefuls for the dead.

 

Non-Sequitur of MFA-Speak

Chimera of catatonia, semaphores of alarm,
or snow-gauze blooming

The sky drags chains of disembodied 
eyes over foxes’ shoulders
a pulley dredges up the ocean in your chest

An Atlantis of noses or body crop-dusting sweat 
Read the signals, we’re all in distress

In our schools, we said brown gravy came
to dining halls, nests of neural readiness,
through the sewers

Now MFA-Speak, spread by a shared needle,
must be the antidote for diabetic lines

 

Color Coding

Some women are not meant to be gift-wrapped.

Remember when other women had their colors done
so they could say with authority: I’m a Winter?

My mother never dressed me in pink. Always blue.

A Winter, they say, dark hair and eyes, should wear 
black, with red and white. No warmth but starkness.

Fuschia, plum, siena, ruby, grape, olive, magenta.

Now, as I sink past autumn, I see some wisdom in
colors; but I am not yet ready to consider winter.

Epithalamion for Sommer & Noah                           

Bobby’s Lubbock spins a 
crack dealer into the mix,
& I’m eighteen reading
Carver out of an anthology in Tucson.

There are many beginnings to
each self, I guess,
I’ve hid some things for
shame—because I have
a conscience or because
something else got the better

of me? A vouchsafe, 
secrets on the stairwell,
I like the story where
you nearly opened some
kid’s chest for throwing shit
on your girl.  That was

then—my past too
comes up as a serpent
under a dinghy—funny
what honesty does to
you & the parallax.

Some snitches are still lying
& trying to remember how
to keep a tone righteous
while their kids doze on
a texting babysitter.

I like the letter where you
can’t keep a plant alive to your dad
the most. But vulnerability
always risks a brittle scone
& cold coffee in return.

It’s painbreaking soul madness,
I’ll go all the way back to an historical
starter shot. Fuck the white
guild faction composing
me, composting me.

I’ll say it like I sometimes 
talk under you: yes, I love
you both, but let’s keep it
softcore for me on the phone,
babybitches. Love poems to
a Brooklyn library.

 

Poem for Kate Bernheimer

I took a picture of one of those
handwritten staff pick cards
at the Booksmith on Haight Street

to send to Kate Bernheimer, Economist,
on Marketplace in the kitchen to hear
you on about the history of the silver
bullet in the fairytales of yesteryear. Some
of the strange ones come back to where?
The Tap Room? Yes. The Buffet
with Brenty til we get back to Dots 
in Southeast? Well, we’re glad you did.

 

Poem for Tim Rutili

To Silverlake & Koreatown,
I like what you’ve
done with the place.

What’s a movie but
some suggestion of 
a collapsed ocean of
pasts—a possibility
re-articulated, selected,
& laid into light.

I’m on the plane to
LAX hearing you work
in my mind. It was
nobody but you, 
Anne Carson’s red, 
that northern feel,

& the projectionist adjusting
the levels in the booth
at the Grand Illusion last
night until Solan came in
& I got to smiling again.
So, how’s tricks?

 

Poem for Aurelie Sheehan

The moment we were on about
the process we were lying
& realized it both later
but it’s good conversation,

Aurelie, from Bluets to sort
of making up what it is
that we think we’re
remembering about
what we try & do.

A Very Young Man, A Very Fair Woman

                   At the same moment
the night cries of the man and the street cries
of something that may be a man,
so the man in his drawers or half out of them
leans out the fire escape to see
whether there is something out in the darkness
as terrified as he is, and there is,
                   a woman,
she has been leapt on by a cat,
and he in his dreams has been leapt on by a cat,
and this is what cats are, 
                                  everywhere. In the morning 
the man has ideas about women that are deadly 
inaccurate—
for the man who has nicked himself in his sleep
with a fingernail
has an imprecise sense of all things. And the cat,
who’s been nicked by the point
                   of a lady’s umbrella, 
has an idea about rain that is more weathercock
than a windfall. And the wind continues its exit 
between them all, between the man and the cat
and the woman
                   and their dreams.

 

Lecture

There is no such thing as empty.

He maintains there is an always
he hears.

Apparently, my blood.

I am sufficient to be heard.

Some text.

There are no blank pages in texts.

Your fundamental point is
an absence, a kind of whispering.

One conclusion is that we never
get away from either.

We confer activities on space.

The absolute of 
presence is impossible to ignore.

There is a process in which habit
is not controlling.

In the middle of page forty-six.

To attend to every reflection is 
an ethical responsibility.

You see it writ large in this space.

I leave it to performers to choose 
the sounds. 

Before the Party

How often one is not asked what one is, where one is from.

I study waterlines in the river,
count off the boats as each passes with strangers.

Melody out of its context, 
some unanswerable figment or fragment that hangs 
over the soon-on lights.

The way afternoon lays them all out together, 
a vased forsythia ready for more water.

To dream of being elsewhere and here at the same time.

To know that the party is difficult at first for everyone.

                                                        ~

Out the window, they were throwing plantable hair, bundled grass-like hair.

Grass sparkled grass blue down to the East River,
Hasidem in Burberry high-necked blouses 
chased their kids and their kids’ yarmulkes and curls.

I was trying to solve the problem of where to begin
here where each cable of the bridge needs replacing
where the necessary trains run rarely, these
arms the gesture of futility where the woman 
and man walk the street in a bridal gown and tux.

Getting married, taffeta strong, concrete as hard.

The sign covered with white. No one down 
with a supposition that time could bend back to itself 
in the river where we’d been before.

I see you announcing nuptials and hurrying at the window 
to let in everything, doors open for normal life.

                                                        ~

From here the Manhattan Bridge throws itself across.
White wire frantic in tension, the arcs laddered. 
Remember Brett, drunk, climbed the pilings, called
seven states at two a.m. from the cold metal 
between his legs, wind lashing his hair?
A total vertigo and that’s enough. Grand piano 
overlooking the East River, some gunwales, 
Whitman’s firehouse. Jared plays the piano.
The gasoline-fire-sunset extinguished hours ago, hours—

                                                        ~

Maybe a chord throws you into the sky. The next tethers you back again.

My friend’s insistence on never being on time to parties, 
but playing one last stormy song on the piano.

I imagine the composer thirty years before capturing 
a kind of spontaneous aesthetic curl. A nap coming.
The maker made, the new man plays it.

Zero sense that a pianist loves the climb of notes: they appear into air.

They’re late for the party. People as notes. 
Long walk to the closet. 
Long walk to an arrangement of clean water glasses. 
Long walk to wash hands.
My friend has brought a coral sheet to throw over this afternoon.

                                                        ~

The recalled cartoon: a man on a cell phone says,

“I am on the train, I am getting off the train, I am off the train.”

I am on the platform, I am getting on the train, I am on the train
and befriending the old skinny couple taking 
the same re-routing I had to take.

How about this air-conditioning? the old man asked. I remember 
when the train would run from 6th street with the doors
                                                 open and one fan blowing at the end?

He and his wife look like senior citizens robbed of their clothes 
and given the street-wear of hipsters, keeping up.

                                                        ~

I recall reading at dawn102 comments on an article about regret:
 
The man who left his father’s deathbed to finish a report at Morgan Stanley; 
how he wishes he had just walked out of the office that day.

The woman who stayed with her terrible boyfriend 
who then left her childless forever.

Something like reading through essays about mothers who 
slap and handle their grown daughters.

My student who writes about a friend making her promise
never to tell and showing her 
a garbage bag that stinks and saying I had a baby 
and I look up from the essay
and don’t know who to tell or whether to at all.

                                                        ~

I think of thinking-on-the-subway. 
Farrah throws the butt of a scarf over her shoulder before me.
I decide to make schemata on being in two places at once.

Liminal space of telephone talk, 
walking the beach, standing in the doorway.
Lintel and handset.

Is where the land and the sea meet really 
literature, like Bishop said?
Is half of one thing and half its opposite tossed together
really a story?

All the photos trying to tell a story 
rather than simply showing things as they are.

                                                        ~

I think of Chopin, I think of Satie. 
My friend’s hands press out notes. 
Home mists to omission.
 
The almost-pain of saying goodbye quickly, 
the other person’s eyes already elsewhere. 
 
Not counting on the sound of 
reeds ticking together, the white gulls 
planted in the green. Right now, in the city.

They say browns and blacks against mostly white 
trick you into thinking 
you are looking at a dream.

Thinking of the great paintings of snow: what symbol 
          underneath? 
A symbol of white over symbols of everything.
 
A gray nation floundering down until it gets a spray 
          of bright orange at its throat.

                                                        ~

When you first arrive and stand 
by the forty-spice party hummus, you dream 
of an alleyway where no one can notice you.

This wisdom of taking forever to get out the door. 
Opening and shutting of drawers.

A word is a drawer. 
Scarf. Subway. Recollection. Leaving. Melody.

A limit, a border placed on the river edge, on the park boundary.
The edge of diesel-cigar-coffee-pigeon orchestrated scent. 
This game of guessing which composer wrote this.

Reading sheet music floating on the past, 
from memory placing the notes, silver and lilting.

                                                        ~

I doze. I don’t know what happened in that dream except 
my brother gave me advice while he was 
a panda drowning in light. An almost Buddha.

The field stood still and rippled its reeds.

                                                        ~

Thing itself a blueprint 
River never the same river twice, they say:

I ask Jared with his fingers tinkling out on keys 
who wrote that— this friend who knows every writer, every painter.

Out in Manhattan, the clouds shade something unseen from here.

He says I was making it up as I went along.

 

Hand Diary

An animal a little girl had 
seen and tried to talk to, 
crumbs held out on her hand. 
Five maples extending their 
hands up before the big drop.
Then, a grown woman needs 
a place to log the left from the 
right, a stubbed thumb versus
a palm slammed between the 
chair and table: A different 
day, a cleaver at the wrong 
angle. In the porch light, the 
animal had lain in the middle 
of that driveway, blinking 
and whole, licking its paw. 
These lush woods eventually 
took in a neighborhood. We 
pulled the door open by its 
knob. A woman used to drive 
into these woods and pull up 
plants and shrubs, stow them 
in her station wagon, then 
dig holes with her bare 
hands and plant them in her 
yard half a mile away. She 
never worried they would 
flourish because they were 
already where they belonged 
more or less. These woods 
stood all the way back
as far as you could see.

The Devoted Cloud

The wounded grass woke up as snow. The word ghost asked for 
bread. The dust nodded. The house combed the attic. The speaker 
closed in on a sister’s lids.

 

The Eagle’s Doubles

The camera allowed two small children to try on the flag’s new fangs.

 

The Exposed Storm

The film of a glass of milk flooding the building filled the torn apart 
piano filled the closed casket of a demolished photograph of the sea 
in the child’s chest.

 

The Marionette’s Casket

The crossed out clone minus the wooden organs minus the puma 
projection minus the splintered mirage minus the orphaned eyes.

 

The Membrane’s Collapse

The sleeper orbited the topiary ocean. The glass arms swam into 
the branches of a swan. The outstretched stranger dissolved. The 
solution steeped. The cornered squid stormed the shore.

We’re Always Getting the Story Wrong

            The film tells of a gigantic, island-dwelling ape called Kong who dies in 
            an attempt to possess a woman.

They’re out there flying, those tiny machines, 
the wind-up birds that want to carry my love  
from the cradle of my hand.  I hear them rushing

in the shiny distance, see them buzzing 
black rings around my head, trying to calm 
the shrieks of their metal wings by diving down at me. 

I think how my thumb swipes across her body
and something thumps inside her chest, how 
if those machines would let me, I’d pour oil

along the noise of their necks and clear 
the caked ore from the engine of their jaws.  Instead, 
I hear the sound of their biplane wings shearing off. 

How I marvel at their speed as they ping past, my hands wanting
but so useless to hold them.

 

To the Double Helix

I’ve climbed up to the attic to stare                      
into the crib I’ve taken up here, its emptiness
no different than the womb that waits for me

downstairs.  I can’t conceive of a higher power, so I pray 
to you, Double Helix of Our Children Unraveling 
in the Womb, Our Saint of Apoptosis.  Look

at the candles I’ve arranged and lit, the diet 
I’ve given myself over to, the miles I run 
in bargain for your favor.  You, from whom

all paternity proceeds, it’s on nights like these 
I try to hide, creep farther across the beams 
whenever she calls for me.  God,

how I fear the grisly machinery inside of her—         
blood  in the spokes, miswelded DNA, another 
month of trying.   But Sir, she’s waiting

and I have to go.  Please fill her basket 
with your whisper, your perfect winding ladder.  
There must be rust inside of her to account

for all this dying.

 

For the Man Waiting by the Monkey Bars

Thirteen was never easy for a boy whose mother 
never wanted him home.  So I let you. 

And afterward, you lit us cigarettes and let the latest 
AM hits sing from their black bed of scratches. 

I wondered if this was how all grownups did it—dizzy 
with nicotine and Top 40 circling on the stereo. 

Still unzipped, you said you had to show me how 
your Ouija board worked— fat fingers sliding

over letters that spelled something horrible 
if I ever told.   For weeks I climbed over signs

that warned to keep out after dark.  I walked slow 
through parking lots, waited by the monkey bars

for your return.  In the nights that flickered 
in front of the television, I wondered if you ever touched

your room’s brown paneling and thought of my hair.  
Did you see a star’s slow fall and miss me at all? 

When police tugged you ducking through their lights,
was I the only name on your lips?  Tell me

you were listening to those records to remember how
the sweet tremble in my voice brushed against your ear.


Edward Hopper’s Office in a Small City

Maybe the man isn’t looking out but he is 
            looking down even his desk looks
      down on him his desk lies his desk tries to make 
                  him look busy but there are no stacks

of papers to make him sick the man 
            and the desk have nothing they have a 
      view with no people the man has no computer 
                  no keyboard to shoot words onto a

screen no keyboard that competes with the tap-tap 
            of his heart the man has no spreadsheets 
      with little rectangles filled with numbers the 
                  man is numb the man is

sitting in a building staring out of a rectangle 
            from the front the building looks 
      like a giant spreadsheet there would be 
                  thousands of rectangles

thousands of workers staring out like 
            little numbers waiting to be shifted up 
      shifted down summed up averaged 
                  deleted

 

Are we wrong yes we are wrong or yes

Are we wrong yes we are wrong or yes 
            we are wrong about being 
      wrong does it really take two to tango or 
                  can a person tango by herself leg

twirling even a lift can be copied by jumping 
            into the air but an abuser needs an
      obtuse one a victimizer needs a victim 
                  we are wrong the boss is

wrong the boss is right is height is higher 
            than us on the ladder our fingers 
      hurt our fingers are stepped on can someone
                  be all right or all wrong

a tree is just a tree an ocean has salt a lake
            does not my father used to believe
      in black and white now he calls black
                  white and white heart

 

I only knew dictators I loved the unilateral directions

I only knew dictators I loved the unilateral directions 
            the high diction my father sat 
      in his office dictating his thoughts about 
                  meetings with bosses my father dictated

to me to eat tomatoes my father was dictated to
            by his boss the bush blooms flowers 
      each spring pink ones open then the blooms fall 
                  the bush resumes being a bush

a boss changes seasonally too a boss can turn into 
            a dictator and back again the boss sees
      everything we play hide and seek with 
                  the boss but she always finds

us we always hide in the same place 
            my office faces the boss’s office but our 
      doors don’t align some days when I can no longer 
                  lie I shut my door and cry the rain

always gives me away when I play hide and seek 
            with my two-year-old she lies 
      on the ground and covers her face she thinks
                  I can’t see her

 

I once had a good boss a National Guard kind of boss

I once had a good boss a National Guard kind of boss 
            soft as a flag tough as a pole I once had a 
      good boss a god boss who played me like 
                  a good bass plucked all my strings now

my good boss is gone is a goner boss is a no-longer-
            mine boss he is someone else’s boss I once 
      had a good boss but didn’t know he was a good boss 
                  until I met my new boss my

good boss called me V the letter looks like a check mark 
            he checked me off each day with a soft 
      charcoal pencil he said V with such kindness the way 
                  a cement sidewalk lifts itself up slowly year

after year for ficus roots if only I could hug 
            my once-good boss bug him each day once again 
      exceed his expectations set my objectives around his 
                  goals be his shoal but it is too late I am

old now the land is cold now the owl on some nights opens 
            my window and waits for me to wake 
      in a wet sweat its gold eyes staring at me like 
                  two ticking clocks

 

[I don’t want to be a boss I do want]

I don’t want to be a boss I do want 
            to be a boss I want to be 
      a mother I don’t want to be a mother sometimes 
                  I think the lash in my eye is

my daughter running away when I look 
            to see the image shifts she runs 
      away faster what does she know what do I 
                  know the boss knows how to say no I know

how to build a Lego office building how to 
            cut grapes into four slices how to be nice 
      twice in a week no one is nice to me this week 
                  no one nices me twice even

a school bus driver honks at me 
            twice gets the principal to come out 
      to boss me to boss my car to move
                  who does the principal

believe who does the world believe when 
            the man says he didn’t pour 
      the acid on the wife’s face her skin patterned 
                  like a piece of lace

Furs Not Mine

The Russians have a way of saying
what must be said, and one

need not be or speak Russian
to comprehend the sense

of furs not mine. One need only
to have known deep cold, an inmost

Siberia made more Siberian by one 
who basks nearby, oblivious in her Bolivia.

 

Italian Guard Dogs of Peterborough

The Italian guard dogs of Peterborough guard
sheep, and if you’re me, one of the three
Maremmas will catapult himself between the wires
of an electrified fence to escort you past his pasture.
Next week, a borrowed dog, a shepherd,
will lead the sheep and lambs across the street
to another pasture. It’s easier getting the sheep 
to buy into decampment. They’ve made 
the crossing before, whereas the lambs haven’t 
and lambs are skeptical of migration, and rightly so.
There’s considerable history of going
like a lamb, but the lambs need to go
and come back because it turns out
you can only live in your own crap 
for nine weeks before the parasites get nasty.
But that’s not the point. The point
is Aldo, the point dog who sidles up 
to me because, in addition to guarding sheep
and lambs, an Italian guard dog guards
his future. He does this as we all do: by 
dreaming of expansion. His flexing in my direction 
is how Aldo applies for the select position 
of guarding me, and though accustomed to living 
outdoors, in mud and blizzards, Aldo retains
the regal countenance that is his birthright.
He ambles like an Italian god beside me,
the length of the electric fence. No hard
sell here, just the demonstration of jumping
through fire on my behalf, providing an inkling 
of what being guarded by Aldo might feel like. 
It feels good. I’m wondering what I’d need
to give up to be guarded by Aldo when his owner 
and handler, an eager, petite woman 
named Francis, rushes toward us with a choke chain
and an apology—the former for Aldo, the latter
for me. Clearly, she and Aldo have not discussed
his plans for expansion. But Francis discusses much
with me: how she grew up in Turkey, the daughter
of missionaries, which explains her tendency
toward flocks, and how she’s moved from pasture 
to pasture, from California to Durango to Maine,
where she cared for Phyllis Wyeth, whose accident 
happened when she was still a Dupont.
If only she’d had an Italian guard dog!
Francis and her husband got the Maremmas 
because the coyotes were getting the sheep, despite 
the best efforts of the guard donkey, since retired.
Behind the L of the farmhouse, Francis shows me 
where the pasture drops off imperceptibly, hemmed 
in by a hidden stone wall that keeps the sheep below
but lets the eye graze continuously. It’s genius, this
bit of British landscaping and it must be what 
it feels like to be guarded by Aldo—walled 
in, without knowing. I’m guessing that my favorite
Maremma, back with his sheep now, is inking
a contract for me to consider. The terms would be favorable
for Aldo, for me: a win-win scenario at half or twice the price.
Francis explains the complicated lineage of the dogs, 
how she breeds but won’t sell them to anyone who can’t
pronounce Maremma properly: like the mare
that comes before an Emma. Aldo is less concerned
with pronunciation; he’s a cloud summoned
to earth and he means to stay busy, to ensure
that the guard dogs who report to him aren’t idle either.
Francis shows me an allée of grass close to the house,
where the road once ran before a deadly turn
further east caused them to move it. Aldo must 
sense that legacy of risk and loss: Italian guard dogs 
have long memories and a far better attention span
than I, and by the way, Francis tells me
they keep their Bugattis in the barn. Bugattis. Plural.
These are another kind of Italian guard dog. They
guard the goddesses of opulence and speed and La Dolce Vita.
We drive them, Francis admits, sheepishly,
in the rallies. It’s elitist, but we like it.
I’m invited to return soon, when her husband
will introduce me to the Bugattis. I think I will
dress for the occasion, maybe even wear a shirt, 
or a shirt with a collar. I should come 
with an answer for Aldo, too, who is too 
proud to beg. Instead, he splendidly patrols 
his side of the fence, in a town founded in 1760 
by Italian guard dogs, a hamlet that relies on stealth 
protection, fortressing its borders with a sign that reads: 
Peterborough A Good Town to Live In—a greeting
humble enough to defend against fatal flaws
such as hubris or too much tourism. 
I will return with an answer for the Italian guard dogs
of Peterborough, who race now like three clouds
beneath a cloudless sky, implying
among the stones and grass, among the lambs
and sheep, that all this majesty and safety, 
for a limited time could be mine.

 

Acorns
 
When his son—née
Rosenberg—began 
to mow the lawn,

he cried out 
for the acorns,
rescuing and planting

each in a coffee tin
beside the house.
122 saplings. This

was a small house, 
the one to which 
the boy and his brother

came home after the bomb-
shell of the execution.
Unable to kill anything

in his own garden, someone 
said of Abel, who, seeing 
Thomas Shipp and Abram Smith

lynched, couldn’t look 
away. Nearly any tree 
can be a hanging tree,

nearly  any garden—
tilled or pillaged—  
could be one’s own. 

Muddy Hymnal

            and the photos   I don’t  have
of   women  I kissed  and places  I left
  before I knew   where to say I was :   the
half life  of  rot :  somewhere there’s
 a picture  of V staring   into the camera
wearing next   to nothing  :  this  picture :
I was   then elbows-deep  daily in bike-grease
+ convinced  proximity to the machinery
  of movement would  ease the ache of 
  stasis :  there’s always  more  that needs
                  doing  : this picture   she sent
  wrapped    in purple underwear   :  soft
  + heady  as the way  one   in winter
  imagines lilacs  will smell mid-May :  this
picture :girl in    purple underwear,  her
  body  frictionless because  the   liquidity
 of youth,  how she cocked   out her hip
                        ditto  her chin,   haughty
the way   only those  who’ve lived   inside
a great beauty’s chorus can be : + me : that
                        she chose blah-faced
 smoke-hungry  forgettable   me : : : :  how
her  lips   parted in the photo,  the  length
   of her back   reflected  in  the mirror
behind her : everything : every : thing :  she
sent two prints : just in case ha ha : I carried
   one, kept it   pocketed  as  I   pulled
broken spokes   recabled brakes   trued wheels : I
   snuck looks at it   on smoke breaks :  this
was  that   long ago,  when standing next to
 a dumpster’s  stink  smoking  was   among
the day’s  best  moments :  she’s looking at me
I’d  believe,  my head  light with breathlessness
+ faith : right at me :  I told  myself  to believe
which  meant  I  never  would : :   later she
said I thought I’d  spend my life thinking every camera
was your face : more  at home  with  her  desire  than I
 could  possibly have then  been :  with mine :
 she must have been even   more beautiful  than
I recall :  as perhaps was I : as perhaps  is any
river one either  jumps too much  or not enough in to :

 

eating the fake everything

                   : wife upstairs asleep with life inside her
the size of a lemon and growing daily, deeper DNA
            + the thick selfhood it’ll someday blaze as it
on these very stairs I sit within yards of will stand
            + shout how I don’t understand, that that’s
not it, that’s not what I meant, at all. History is every
                        joke we tell ourselves when the reruns
get tiring and when my niece pointed to the fake
            apples atop the too-expensive table at the
furniture store and asked do they taste real? I said of
            course with the same laugh my mom laughed
when I asked if the Picasso on the wall of her classroom
                        was a real copy. Food goes in, words
come out, the dog whimpers as he chases squirrels
                           in his sleep : after arguing, my wife
and I sit in softer light recalling earlier meals when
            glasses were less freighted, each knifestroke
easier to swallow. At home my dad sits at his bench,
                        loupe looped over his forehead + he
pulls the back off another Rolex + I ask, again, how
               can you tell it’s real. He holds it to to his ear,
its cluster of golden gears like a most beautiful secret,
          then looks over + winks, says tick tick tick tick.

 

The Visible World

Now that the year nears
its end when you turn back
all you see is rim. To think
it could’ve been so easy
this whole time to fall in, that
you were never as snow-stuck and/
or tucked-into warmth as you
believed, that Februarycould’ve
been anything. Looking back’s
like this: yesterday in line for
a coffee I didn’t need I spoke
to where my love’d just stood,
            asked what’dyou want +
a man replied more than I can tell
a stranger. In October I’ll have
to rake leaves donated to my own
front yard by my neighbor’s trees
while wearing a shirt which sports
holes from who knows which night
            I borrowed loud cheer, in
my tatters I’ll drive to the town compost
+ dump my post-colonial trees-
without-borders leaves, glad
to have finally found a place
where everyone can come to leave
themselves in pieces, the road
washboarded by rainwater, patterns
we move unknowingly among and
/or through, the dumped leaves
+ lawn detritus tended to by
the mutiny of season because every
thing’s a vessel because friction is
the world’s father because each moment’s
full and empty as the mug next to
the blind guy two booths down
whose face registers nothing
as he raises his mug and appears
to drink deep.

Waiting Area Atrium

The grapes we fed the baby kept her occupied and smiling, and let us talk the way adults do under pressure, with food and forced good humor. But when we discovered the grapes had seeds, our palms flew instantly to her chin, our pleading voices kicked in: Spit it out. Spit it out. Did you swallow? Swallow? Swallow? She had. Then swallowed again, mutely, to prove her point. The silhouettes of swallows kept real birds from crashing into the windows of the atrium, where I’d been directed after leaving my lover in pre-op. Who knew where we’d be after? I was to wait in the Waiting Area Atrium, while they took off her breasts. The windows were too tall to see through, but surrounded us on all sides. East and west allowed light in above mountain ranges laser-sketched into the glass; I thought of them as the Appalachians and the Rockies. North and south were dark, like the poles. I’d come from some direction and could now wait here, as if I had traveled a great distance, over both sets of frosted mountains, the pack mule I’d long suspected I was, picking a path through the valley. One hears the phrase, Can’t put one foot in front of the other, but never expects to feel it. Can’t or won’t, my parents would ask, but what was the answer? Your baby girl ate the grapes. She swallowed the seeds; she didn’t choke. A year from now her brothers will be born behind the windows of the North Pole. The scars on my lover’s chest, two seams in a quarry. But we don’t know any of that yet. We tear the grapes to pulp before we eat them, though they’d tasted good as they were: small, hard, cool, the seeds sliding down our throats or cracking under our teeth. What had we been so afraid of, hands covered with juice, seeds piled on our plate? The world was already rising around us; all we had to do was wait.

 

Split

And then, on the thinnest day, I wrapped our shadows
Around me for warmth, the tail-end of orioles like embers
And the ashes they become, nectar left bubbling in a bottle
A reminder of all I never saw coming coming true: field stubble
Alive with rabbits, and the dark above our bed made one breath
And two wings darker by the bat that entered under the window sash:

                        What dreams did it hear to find us,
                        To what hunt was it drawn, to what murmurs like prey?

                                                Old love, I forget faster and faster—
                                                You always parted my legs with your hand—
And still I understand 
Almost nothing.

How to Write a Poem in Toledo, Ohio

Start with the churches, those brilliant buildings
standing at the center of every neighborhood.
Forget about the priests, except that geezer

who murdered the nun thirty years ago,
his retrials repeating at least once a decade.
Hang out with your union-hating buddies,

get them drunk on Buckeye Beer and spend
three hours calling them fascists. Learn how
to hop fences as a child. As an adult,

learn how to hop curbs in your 4x4.
In high school, excel at earning Cs.
Then get straight As in college before

dropping out like your father (if your father
wears a suit like my father, find another hero
to satisfy your bullshit bohemian worldview).

Eventually, you’ll have to park at the K-Mart
where the toughest kid in school admitted
he was in love with me, a light from the bell tower

of a nearby church shining halos on us,
or so I like to remember it. Tell your teachers
you’re making films about your suicidal friends.

Always use the word film so they can see
the New York skyline in your eyes. When you talk,
talk a lot about Jean-Michel Basquiat,

even though you can’t correctly pronounce his name.
Only shop at local stores that still wear
the Toledo Pride stickers because, here,

pride is a bumper sticker you can brand your car with.
Become addicted to something that reminds you
of sitting on your father’s lap. If you manage

to leave, don’t forget your blue collar genes,
tight as denim, sharp as a vinyl needle.
Here, we fray. Here, we rust. Remember that.

Revolution

Though I was never the dunce 
I lived through the time of dunces, a child on a chair 
facing a corner, a child wearing a paper cone 
on his head and the sun wearing a shadow cone 
on the wall, for the crime of thinking 
“Washington Crossing the Delaware” 
was a dance craze and not a painting, 
for answering hatracks to What makes us different 
from the apes, finally a little girl

slashed her wrist in the back, everyone mock-screamed 
and mock-swooned, it was Catholic school, 
we’d all cut our wrists before, the blood was real 
but we knew she had lots of it, and in the midst 
of the hullabaloo, three children in black, tiny ninjas, 
snuck the dunce out of the corner, the room, the building,

out of town, they put him on a bus 
to being a sculptor, a divining rod, they put him on a bus 
with a sandwich pinned to his lapel and told him 
to stand up for music and sit down 
for nomenclature, and returned calmly 
to third grade, where the rest of us 
had burned the four corners down

 

Life

The more things I build, the more scraps of wood 
fill the garage, the bed, & the more I need to build something 
to hold them, creating more scraps of wood in my car, 
my wife’s purse to cherish, she is half a magician’s assistant, 
the top half from the saw trick, when people ask, how 
do they do that, I explain how honest magicians are, 
much in the way Godzilla is real if you think about it, 
a monster did knock down buildings in Japan 
breathing fire, I’m telling you I love you

but it doesn’t help much, the world is painful 
when I look at graveyards, but also touching 
when I stretch across the graves, in one case of a boy 
who lived three hours, one hundred and eighty minutes 
give or take, obviously we should gather clocks 
and blow darts and everything we own in a field 
and burn it, dance and in the dancing, start over, you

with just a hoop skirt, me with only the rattle 
of words in my head, purity, it’s about purity, it’s winnowing 
versus piling up, it’s digging a hole 
slightly larger than the hole that will be dug for you 
and putting the hole that will be dug for you 
into the hole I dig and burying the shovel 
at the bottom so none of this will have happened 
in the future of the first place.

 

Silence, a definition

This woman who loves me, 
who has memorized the birthmark of my face, 
who invited my sperm 
to become a sea monster in her fathoms,

she’s never said my name, and I never hers,

like why would a horse call another horse 
            horse 
when it can lean a neck to its side,

such a thorough alphabet in the rain 
that the ground knows exactly 
what’s being said, and replies 
slowly, replies green, with shade

 

Love and armed robbery  

One teller described the robber as resembling Winston Churchill.

Another said he was wrong, the robber looked like Neville Chamberlin.

To be safe, the police put out an APB on all mid-to-early 
twentieth century British Prime Ministers.

At the line-up, one teller said the robber didn’t seem 
as well-dressed as these men, the other, that the robber didn’t appear 
so prone to Imperialism.

After the line-up, they were asked to wait.

The coffee at the police station tasted like the Diaspora.

One teller told the other teller he was having a nightmare 
in which the aristocracy put a gun in his mouth.

The other teller told the first teller she was having a nightmare 
in which her husband wore a mask of his face over his face.

She showed him a picture of her husband.

He showed her a picture of his wife kissing her husband.

What a small world, she said.

Actually, it’s pretty big, he replied, thinking of walking
all the way around it, how long that would take, how many pairs of shoes, 
the difficulty of oceans—yes, he added, having done the calculations,
it’s a very big world.

Hours later, the police told the tellers 
the safest approach was to shoot all the suspects.

To shoot one would be favoritism.

To shoot half would be slipshod.

To shoot three quarters would involve too much math.

One teller said, the ways of authority are inscrutable.

The other teller said, you have lovely incisors.

Really, he replied.

Like a wolf’s, she insisted.

Gray or red, he asked.

She closed her eyes and thought of wolves.

You’re beautiful when you close your eyes and think of wolves, he told her.

Beautiful like a rain forest or beautiful like the Fibonacci series?

He closed his eyes and thought of Brazil and the shell of the chambered nautilus.

Can it be both, he asked.

It can be anything, she replied.

 

To one person only

The woods I got lost in as a child 
are gone. Trees meander now


miles apart. I walk from one 
to another, connecting them with a touch


into pairs and quartets, squadrons 
flying below the radar


of improvement. The woods 
of my neocortex go on


for years but the woods 
I learned to say woods in


are gone. The woods I lost 
my virginity in were chopped down


for flower boxes and bungalows, kindling 
reminds me of what I see


in the mirror. The mountain 
is hairy with trees but bereft


of you, we never walked there, my chance 
to walk there with you


is gone. Woods in fog with you, rain with you, 
in snow listening, snow listens


to footfalls, breaths, it’s the spaces 
between crystals: almost forgiveness, ears.

Evacuated

Slice of rhubarb the color of the inside of an eyelid—
it shimmered at the House of Pies as we sat in a maroon

booth in the back, as you moved a satellite picture of Hurricane 
Ike across the Formica. The best time I spent

in Texas was when the evacuation lanes opened and we 
drove from Houston to Austin and lived

in a motel for a week. We wrote a sign for the door
in English and Spanish, drew a cartoon of our black cat

so housekeeping wouldn’t let Jellybean bolt out 
into traffic. You posed like a Buddha in front

of the motel’s blue-spiked agave shaped like a giant 
lotus as I snapped your photograph. This was

the best week we had left together—though we 
didn’t know it then, entering the shop of oddities

and taxidermy called Uncommon Objects. I wanted 
to buy a glass eyeball with delicate red veins

and a violet iris from a brass bowl of vintage 
ocular prosthetics by the register. You shamed me

into leaving it, saying, Save it for someone
who really needs it. We haven’t spoken in three

years since we split. But who would ever 
buy a used glass eye, and in such a color? Until

that stranger shows up at my door, having hitched
his way from Austin to the West Coast,

only then will I believe you saw something
I didn’t notice: ghost with one violet eye

who wavered in the storefront’s window. Did you see 
the end of us playing in the shadows of his empty socket

as it deepened and led back to Houston? You
finding out about the affair, me taking

the cat. Did you believe leaving that 
glass offering that stared from the bowl could stop it?

 

Blue Honey

When I read that French bees
had sipped the sugared waste

that dripped from an M&M’s factory, 
carrying the candy-liquid back

to their hives, and stoppered
the round cells with blue honey,

I knew you must still be
thinking of me. Why else

would the honeycombs clot 
their golds and blues in layers to shape

those shades of the stained glass sky 
in that Baptist church’s window

that overlooked our former street 
in Texas? The bells

wouldn’t let us sleep in 
on Sundays, which was
 
my punishment from the swamp 
each time I cursed

its heat. Like me
the bees don’t speak

French, though they’d recognize
the uvular r’s of my old

Cajun neighbors in the whirr 
of their wings. Like me
 
they keep going back 
to a crack in the stained glass,

to the factory. They keep 
moving toward sweetness, they

keep carrying the weight of
the deepest blue.

 

Blue Honey (2)

Since the beekeepers in France refuse
to sell it, I only want it

more: that store of blue honey
produced by bees who’d fed

on the colored pools 
of sweet waste leaked

from an M&M’s factory. An accident 
thick and waiting in rows

of stacked mason jars 
whose contents no one

will taste. If I had
a say in the matter, I’d auction

those freaks of nature as a way 
to remind ourselves the winters

grow colder each year, 
the bees disappearing, driven

to seek sugar in the strangest
of places. In Houston

I once tried to leave a man. I tried
to leave town only having

exacted the smallest damage, but it was 
like trying to swim

in a dark swamp
thick as a blue

mutant honey. Once I tried
not to hurt anyone. I tried. And if I

could buy a single jar 
of the bizarre stash

before the beekeepers flush it
into the sea, maybe

he’d believe me. Or maybe I could 
hold a spoonful of gold

honey on my tongue, 
close my eyes, and deepen
 
the substance. Maybe this way 
I could summon the darkest blue. 

The Body Itself the Narrator of the Message

In the days of my healing, they sent a mystic,
carrying the scent of incense on his skin.

His tunic whispered well-washed spells; his hands
the beaks of two fast birds that weaned me

from the machines one needle at a time, ungentle
with the work. Red skin flared beneath his fingers

as he swiped at the adhesive. He lacked conviction, 
offered little consolation beyond a raised brow.

Yet, I have begun to see the magic of his work. 
When the night nurse slips under the charm

of the late hour, I sneak past her white nest 
to enter the closest whitecoat’s den. In the dim,

I touch his photographs, his bronze and silver 
paperweights, the luxury of his leather chair. I leave

my offerings, a fingerprint placed over his name, 
threads from the loose noose of my collar, a cuticle

torn with my teeth, the faintest drop of blood
still wet at the edge, proof of my newly mixed life.

I make a small prayer for early release, for the day
the tests no longer detect any trace of donor or of fever.

 

Health, an Expanded Definition

Sound condition of the body
            as in able to lift the wet laundry, to pin
            the full-grown heft of it to the line;
            as in legs that could brace for & bear
            the weight of any ordinary burden;
            as in the will to scab, to seal over
            the minor wounds rather than to fester.
Freedom from disease
            wherein the body remains temperate,
            modulating the heating, the cooling airs;
            wherein the throat refuses the hoarse voice
            of swollen glands & fever flush;
            wherein joints prevail, smooth movers
            well-oiled, the stiff seizing curtailed.
Vim & vigor
            the three-pronged pulse, a steady study
            under normal conditions, fit to rear up,
            to race when stirred by the beauty
            of another body, capable of calming
            to the languid slur of well-earned sleep;
            a zealous mass of cells at the ready.
Spiritual or moral soundness
            what was feared given up or lost
            in the inertia, that loosening of the spine;
            what will be a crucial element of the cure,
            the reason for the mystery & the mystics;
            what the body bends to pray for,
            daily oblations to a tight-lipped god.

Violet Vivian Escapes The Devils Island

what day is it today drunk dried in my glass
air could not break loose
I slipped sideways into my blue dress
all of night shushing a dry biscuit in my pocket
floated down that hallway 
does it hurt?
a warm body mouth-deep in water 
Henry said GOOD SON said BABY
applied the Host spit and mud 
bounced me up and down 
up and down 
I knew better 
stuffed my red shoes
under the itch sweater raised over my belly
seared in an iron pan
tippy-toed like coals and speech I could not
and school I never frost along my sides in the dark
run Violet run run run
my sisters three to a bed left gaping

outside I saw a wheel in the sky
and a bunch of cows with light shooting 
out their mouths in the bellow pasture
heard Henry caterwaul in his secret tunnel 
YOU DON’T HAVE A TICKET but I did I DID
and red shoes and a hole in my slipsy-slide
aching lay me down in clover 
I became a spirit called Holy Holy
my Jesus name
I was the first

 

PICTURES OF FIRES ‘BIG AND SMALL’ IN WHICH FIREMEN OR PERSONS 
   LOSE THEIR LIVES
        

Leaked an ancient barrel on its side lost my hand-folded self bursting bees do you want to play? breath punched low in Downers Grove past Pickle Farm Road in a wheat field I dreamed of clam flats at large in time a rootless roamer a black thread spectral and ignored I pounded my hobnails like a bolt of sailcloth thumped on Father's cutting table scissors sluiced their glint blades their eye and angry beak jealous as a hornet in a junked up jalopy a pock-marked boy a zipgun stark and strange a knot of boils lined my spine now I lay me down to sleep in trout lily adder’s tongue carrion weed pearly everlasting rough stretched taut from end to end like the way polka dots slapped her legs atop you up what do you think about that for lucky and inside as if it meant something brighter than a sharp bite on the thigh Little Annie Rooney beset by shame it was my saint day June 1 come again come again I have a box the sea’s whore inside pleasure pooled between episodes empty as a fiddle case giving away its quick

The Bossy e Meets His Match

e, nothing but a masked c,
slack-jawed bandit,
scrabbles on the roof

of the train as the music swells.
Below, through the dusty 
window, o and a cling

to each other, skirts rumpled,
mouths circled
in single terrified moan.

At the back of the car, e kicks 
open the door, pistol poised, 
shouts Freeze. Empty your pockets.

The train rattles on.
A requisite close up: 
the bad guy’s boot heel,

each step, a thump
doubling the dust. 
He was playground bully,

putting the a in shake.
Now he has a shack,
a hidden stash, a posse

that has his back.
Vowels murmur, mutter, 
stutter, shuffle, drop

their names into his sack
while x unholsters, rises
at the front of the car.

Both feet planted, 
taking aim,
he demands

What sound does x make?

e’s forgotten, hisses kiss?
question mark stuck just
behind his teeth.

Then he remembers the axe 
defiant, wedged in the block,
hears the shot, lets the sack drop.

As if in a tunnel, the screen fades to black.

I Used to Be Able to Listen to Sad Songs

but that was before they started strutting 
around with billy clubs in their fists, started 
kicking the backs of my knees so that I 
crumpled right there on the asphalt, 
their faces streaming tears all the while. 
That was before they started showing me 
the switchblades in their boots. Before 
the twisted arms and sucker-punches.

Once, the songs slept soft beside me. 
Their eyes were like the moon then 
and they never closed them, so all night
I dreamed under lunar beams and woke
each morning glowing. But then I learned 
that the earth is infinitesimally slowing 
its spin. Then I learned that we’re born 
with more bones than we die with. The songs 
started growling sometimes when I wanted 
to cuddle. The songs started cracking their knuckles. 
One morning I caught one filing its teeth. 
That was when the problems started.

Now I armor myself in hand-claps and tambourines. 
I’ve honed a trigger-instinct with the radio. 
But sometimes I’m walking down a boardwalk 
in the safe, bright sun, seagulls dipping overhead, 
cotton candy spilling from every hand, 
and there they are, locking step beside me 
past the ring toss, the arcade. It doesn’t matter 
how fast I turn away. Hello again, they whisper. 
You can’t run forever. And then I know the ocean 
is there but damned if I can hear it anymore.

 

Horseshoe Crab

Dear ugly one, I remember you. 
You, over and over, pocking the beach 
like so many war helmets, the soldiers
long vanished. Your many legs 
curled hard. Your spike tail that I 
always imagined as a beak, as if 
with it you might taste, might smell, 
might speak. You had things to tell me. 
You had seen the depths and the sun 
and then you had died. You 
were dignified even in ignominy 
(your legs scooped by red-bellied 
children, your tail popped out 
for swordplay). I'd heard you called 
a living fossil. I'd heard your blood 
was iceberg blue. None of this 
could be true, but it was.

I was a child already tired 
of facts (cumulus, stratus, cirrus; 
in 1492; Betsy Ross, always 
Betsy Ross). I wanted a space flight
that didn't explode. I wanted
a clarinet that played colors.
I knew you were dead, 
and even so, I picked you up 
every time, your tail a long tooth 
against my palm, and swung you 
into the surf. And then 
I imagined you restored. 
Your crisped legs waving. 
Your dull brown carapace
burnishing to burgundy gloss. 
Your impossible blue blood sweeping 
through your impossible appendages 
like I had felt my own sweep 
through mine. Your beak-tail swiveling 
of its own accord, pointing back 
into the deep, into the mystery-
country, where lived glowing squid 
and fish with mouths larger 
than my body. I willed you to swim 
faster, to go go go, your beak-tail 
pointing you away from all 
the idiot children who knew nothing 
of reverence, away from everything 
in the world I knew to be true.

 

The Unabashed Tourist Meets a Man at a Bar Outside Reno

You like my boots, don’t you? I like yours. 
I don’t have a dog yet, but his name is Horatio Alger. 
I’m looking for a ghost town with swinging doors.
Whiskey, thank you. Whatever they’ve got.
Your sky is so blue it glares. 
The dog I don’t have is missing one foot but scales Mount Rose like a goat. 
That pine-and-sage smell makes me an entire inch taller.
I belong above the tree line. Like a pika. Oh, I’ve done research.
It feels like the sky is closing its jaws around me. 
In a good way.
If the coyotes lure my dog away, I’ll hunt them down myself.
I’m practicing shooting at rusted cars. 
I spent today hiking. Tomorrow, too. 
Yes, I’ll have another. 
Why would I slow down?

 

The Unabashed Tourist Chats With Diner Patrons in Missouri 
                    While Waiting Out a Tornado Warning

It’s thrilling, isn’t it, the siren’s howl? 
Nothing in my life has ever been urgent. 
Sirens say the world needs you enough 
to holler a caution. So why the grim eyes? 
Why the coffee-mug-clutching, the parking-lot-
watching? I know I shouldn’t say it, but 
I hope it comes close. I’ve never seen a tornado 
and I want my own narrow escape. 
This is outlaw country, you know. 
The James brothers, Hoodoo Brown—
I’ve got the book in my car. 
They wouldn’t watch from the windows. 
They’d gallop at the horizon, hooting. 
They’d tie the tornado down and make it beg. 
In the movie I’m writing in my head, 
I walk out into the rain and wait, and when 
I spot the tornado churning across the fields, 
I grin and spit and stay rooted. 
That’s the whole movie. But if I know
one thing, it’s that the sky will stay empty.
Oh, why the moan, why the stink-eye?
I know I shouldn’t say it out loud, but 
aren’t we all thinking it? We all know 
nothing ever really comes close.

Department of Purchase and Disease

Ghost in the yard, early morning, 
the hammock swinging on its own. Rather, 
I saw myself reflected in the window 
and wanted it to be a ghost, early morning, 
the hammock filled with wrens. 
Any sign would be enough. 
The childhood fear returns, you’re thinking, 
nostalgia buried within, held to the shallows
but it’s more complicated. 
This is 1900. 
There are many things to purchase. 
There’s more than just dying here. 
Disease is a good enough excuse, 
but this isn’t disease. 
We just don’t know we’re changing, 
or what we’re changing into.

Department of Taxidermy

                            The land is an incarnation
                            Like a hand on a hand on an arm asking do you know me?
                                                                                    —Fanny Howe

Sometimes I try to see the city as a taxidermist would: the wind as armature announces the skin, pigeons stain the air, graph and vein in the bread factory’s cloak. Underneath it all the landscape, orphan tissue, pelt trussed with rebar and lung, arsenic bodies where every parking lot used to be a house, every foundation a grove of elm. Here, the buried cobblestones are coughing through the asphalt. Here, the buried slaves are coughing up the graves that built them.

~

To make a dead hill mimic a living one there must be some minor immortality. One thousand glass eyes down the sleeves of the Confederate re-enactors guarding the Lee monument, an implied movement of wing, of tail, but even movement is a form of property, the anarchist says. Herons mounted on the island across from the old hydro plant could be mistaken as malfunction. Ownership congealed with nonbeing. I own yet I am nothing.

~

This neighborhood could still kill me if it wanted to. The dealer with the blue eyes of a foal. The old woman with the Army pack and the hunting knife running for the bus. She said hello to me yesterday and it hurt to know her like this. My neighbor found a human hipbone in his crawlspace. Not mine, but might as well be. The grackles mouthed chicken bones in the street and brought them to my yard to invent a finer bird, coaxed from the gristle, the hydrangea.

~

There must be a better way to keep the animals with us. Aren’t ghosts enough? The fur-rimmed shawl of night is a warmth, not a darkness. When there is another darkness, I’ll admit it. What makes you think I’m enjoying this? I say arsenic but I mean memory, or governance, some kind of control over the night. I mean childhood.

~

Sometimes it gets lonely here. There is rain, and there isn’t. The river tells us nothing, absolutely nothing. It floods, it dries. It does what rivers do. I want more from it, it’s got to know more, smuggled under the floorboards. An animal bed in a holy room. All those years underneath it. There is no better life. There is this. The dogs bark, but not for us.

Even though California is forever
California, we’re still stunned
reverent by the sun, for days under
the influence of the amphetamine
blue body with fried-egg mind. 
Wholly without margaritas we are
happiness-drunk and pink-skinned—
refraction of the strangers 
we once were. But we know this
story—rapture we’ll survive—
and after a buoyant lime-gold day
lapping Pacific salt, we hurry back
for our private indoors, stripping
for the sacred lulling shadows
of a shower alone

Prayer of disappearing: 
o, let me return someday to California 
after I am dead, transformed 
to a succulent on a bed of black 
stones, my world entire as far as 
I see, roots deep in a terracotta
pot with other hoarders 
of water, where we sit still 
day after day, not looking to each
other but up, up to the sun god 
who never lets it rain,
we never spill 
we never know
we’re not responsible
we bloom as if by
accident, terribly free, 
and we hardly grow
thirsty

Here where bugs exist
only in software, I can see
you growing old, mottled
shepherd dog sleeping 
at your feet as you face
a picture window, watching
the peach streak of dusk
warp to rose to violet to
black. California’s currents
so capable, they threaten 
the East Coast where you’ve 
thrived all your life. Here
we absorb light like words
to a song, where it seems 
the very sky is ether 
to waves of pain. 
But wherever we go
we return to ourselves, 
simple logic of being. 
Even if your gypsy
mind rustles you farther
in—away from the swallowing
coasts to the desert’s red 
blooms or to the Plains’ wheat
stalks that lean against 
wind—I’ll go. We are
we. I will follow. 

Birdwatchers

My two surgeons climbed trees, 
           trudged millponds in Arkansas

for the white-billed woodpecker, 
           that lonely myth. And on Monday,

they gathered their Sunday finds 
           and their life birds—

elusive warbler, scarlet tanager—
           over the operating table.

They barnstormed my body 
           with talk of crows and ravens,

repeating Corvidae in the cornfields, 
           Corvidae with the prism-tinted wings,

while they cradled organs they removed 
           like baby birds fallen from a nest.

I slept to murders and unkindnesses, 
           to the lull of Corvidae—

That’s -dee, not –day, and not -die. 

hungry tsunami / tsunami as galactus

the hunger of trying to hold back
the hunger a little bit longer

the hunger of restraint and pullback
churn and growl of beached fishes
in an agitated bouillabaisse
liquid silver squirming on an empty shore

to lick the gilding from the buildings
like golden drizzles of caramel

to take the cake / flick off the crumbs

to raze the fruit / spit out the pits

the hunger of sucked-out marrow
the unwillingly pried-open oyster
the cracked and pillaged lobster claw

to shuck / to husk / to unshell
her way to what’s most tender

to dismantle the protective scrims
that signal a cache of rawness

to demolish defenseless succulence

the hunger of the liquid center
squirt of ganache in a Lindor truffle
chocolate lava cake’s molten fondant core

to feed past the end of greed

to feast past the end of want

to gorge past the borders of voraciousness
until she becomes the monstrous goddess 
of binge / pure mercenary lack

the blooded face

blood in the water

the blood moon’s exposed sweet throat
with its lipsticked jugular bitten clean out

 

tsunami’s debris

her terrible radiance

snaking in a clockwise gyre
spiraling the North Pacific

pulverized cities flung back
to water like sprinkled furikake

her radio-waved wake
an awful flower blossoming

what sinks sinks / what floats floats

snarled tangle fronding the comb’s
tooth of Midway’s atoll

plastic bits clogged in the snag
of the Garbage Patch

she’s an unsubtle thief
a cryptic giver of gifts:

All Joy Air Freshener’s
diaspora of aerosol cans

a boy’s lucky soccer ball 
head-butted from the waves

Harley Davidson wrecked
on the shores of British Columbia

Misawa Port’s 165-ton dock
washed up on Oregon’s Agate Beach
studded with the tiny garnish
of a stowaway Japanese starfish
                   
Ryo un Maru / empty ghost ship’s
uncanny drifting across the Pacific
into the Gulf of Alaska
like a child’s paper boat

Ryo un Maru / good-luck ship
machine-gunned down
by a Coast Guard cutter
into scuttled blaze and flame

running shoes swift with bones
marathonning the waves
because everyone knows a ghost
is a ghost if it has no feet

heralds for colonies / of ghosts to come:

a bloat of oyster buoys
a landfill of washing machines
a traffic jam of cars
an armada of ghost ships
a siege of rubber ducks

her terrible radiance

mushroom spore / dandelion seed

shells of nebulae / shed by a supernova

what belongs to you / doesn’t

in the shattered absence
of an unraveling cosmos

what tiny bits of debris will you
unexpectedly ache for?

what small particles will you
cling to / as if you actually could?

 

origami of tsunami: a technical manual and glossary

a
 
all clear:	after she’s swept it all away / even the sirens
amplitude:	the rising tide of her hips
arrival time:	when she rolls up to your door with seaweed salad 
and fresh tofu in a bucket / a pulsing bouquet of 
jellyfish bubbling like mylar balloons atop their 
stingers and bristles / ready to sweep you off your 
feet

b	 
bathymetry:	tsunami’s background check / her fbi file / her
origin   myths / her ground zero
bore:	what she secretly thinks of you and your 
milquetoasty efforts to salvage the world / your
heroic inspirational speeches and your blah blah
blah / what she thinks on the brink  / of
unleashing tsunamigeddon

c	 
crest:
(consolidated reporting
of earthquakes and tsunamis) 
spyware that tracks her every point and 
click / blue-gloved sack and pillage of her luggage
at the airport / her seismic four-square / her fb
check-in

d	 
(empty)	 

e	 
eta:	slo-mo time-lapse between bullet’s impact and
psychological trigger / arc between collision of
wants and teapot’s tempest sloshing / hard line of
the other shoe dropping / nanosecond between
threat perceived and the limbic’s panicky spill of
adrenaline
evacuation zones:	you you and you

f	 
first motion:	trauma’s ur-text
free field offshore profile:	her glorious measurements undiminished by
corsets / or girdles / or dexedrine / or slim-fast /
or atkins / or slimvox / or ambislim / or dietrine /
or slimquick cleanse / or stimuretix / or colonoxy /
or ayds

g	 
(empty)	 

h	 
harbor resonance:	shame spiral / negative reaction formation’s 
fibonacci of nuclear fission / negative thought
loop’s slow gyre of radioactive decay
horizontal inundation                          distance: 	
tsunami tries out for the olympics / maybe shot
put / maybe javelin / possibly high jump / not 
curling / not ribbon twirling 

i	 
icg/itsu: 
(international 
coordination group for 
the tsunami warning system in the pacific)	tsunami’s hmo sans aflac
inundation: 	tsunami’s inbox / tsunami’s complaint box / your 
box / how wet will it get?
itic:
(international tsunami information center)	tsunami’s human resources file / tsunami’s bio / 
tsunami’s cv / tsunami on wikipedia / tsunami’s
tumblr / tsunami’s       exes

j	 
(empty)	 

k	 
(empty)	 

l	 
leading depression wave:	dead calm of dull leaden sadness / chest pounding
open the hysterical night / glimmer of nova or
surfer or morg or stardust or some other shiny
fleeting nymph underneath 4:00 a.m.’s bedside light
heralding the arrival of galactus come to shove a 
straw deep inside her and suck her puny crumpling
juicebox dry
leading positive wave:	she turns and faces the threatening villagers with
their flaming sticks / gives them the finger and
drowns them / that’ll show them / the end
local/regional tsunami:	sick day due to personal earthquake / mental 
health day due to psychic landslide

m	 
marigram: 	allowable weight of emotional baggage
marigraph:	because size matters
mllw: 
(mean lower water)	when tsunami’s a bad drunk
ms: 
(surface wave magnitude)	second-wave tsunami
mw:
(moment magnitude)

her grandiosity / the rising image of her false
self / earthquake survival strategies vis-a-vis
anachronistic coping mechanisms such as adopting
the tsunami posture etc.

n	 
noaa:
(national oceanic and atmospheric administration)	tsunami’s psychic hotline shilled by her very own 
dionne warwick lookalike / her oracle / her 
japanese singing twins
nws:
(national weather service)	tsunami’s publicist

o	 
(empty)	 

p	 
pwtc:
(pacific tsunami warning center)	tsunami does the diaspora / tsunami strikes back at
empire
period:	universal punctuation between peak and trough /
midol and hell / uncontrollable weeping held back
tight behind the eyes
p-wave:	tsunami’s geek name

q	 
(empty)	 

r	 
runup:	tsunami’s thug name

s	 
seiche: 	tsunami’s stripper name
sswws: 
(seismic sea wave 
warning system)	vodka and ativan and crying jags, o my !
strike-slip earthquake:	tsunami makes a freudian slip and falls into a vast
vast canyon
s-wave:	tsunami’s gangsta name

t	 
teletsunami:	her weekly hard-core nature reality show taking
the globe by storm / only ! / on the discovery ! /
channel !
thrust:
(the project for tsunami 
hazard reduction using 
system technology)	she dons a strap-on redux
thrust earthquake:	tsunami bottoms / confuses thrust earthquake for a
trust earthquake
tidal wave:	tsunami’s derby name
time: 
(the center for the 
tsunami inundation mapping effort)	age-defying tsunami / prevents wrinkles and fault
lines / improves elasticity / instant hydration
tsunami earthquake: 	the one that breaks her heart
tsunamigenic earthquake:	the ones that craze it with hairline fractures
tsunami evacuation maps:	in the mountains she escapes from herself / shape-
shifts into a cloud / french-exhaling sighs of mist in
relief / impresses the mountain goats / catastrophe
averted
tsunami magnitude:	her fierceness / her speedballed locomotion / her
hubris / the sashay of her hips / the fatale of her
femme
tsunami watching: 	toms lingering peepingly outside her window / her 
fb feed creepers and clickers / adrenaline-junkied
tsunami chasers on the discovery channel / birders
notebooking tsunami sightings  / documenting her
for the rare ornithological specimen that she is
tws:
(tsunami warning system)	the sirens / the loudspeakers / the radioed meme

u	 
urgent tsunami warning:	tsunamigeddon imminent
usnsn:
(united states national seismic network)	tsunami’s shrink / her reiki healer / her guru / her 
yoda / her primal scream institute

v	 
(empty)	 

w	 
wc/atwc:
(west coast/alaska tsunami warning center)	tsunami cruises through alaska / a supposedly
fun thing she’ll never do again
wrap around effect:	the ouroboros of her terrible radiance

x	 
(empty)	 

y	 
(empty)	 

z	 
(empty) 

Kissing Hands

I
Just last week I had no idea what to say
to my beautiful friend Geeza
whose name is so close to the Greek “Ageezo”
which means “to touch” . . .

Who had winked her headlights at me
and stopped her car when I’d stopped my run
in the middle of the same road before I could know it
I’d reached through the window & taken her hand
off the steering wheel
spotting the glints from the diamond on her finger
and like some cockamamie courtier
for the first time in all my years
was clearly kissing a lady’s hand . . .

2
He wanted to make sure I could understand
the differences between the weekly & weekend
bus-schedule . . . He urgently looked me in the eye
and wondered aloud “Pou einai apo?” (Where was I from?) 
Pale with one tooth in his mouth but young
he wore a white t-shirt & bleached-out jeans
a light pack strapped to his shoulders . . .

Long after we said “Yaisas” & I added 
“sto kalo”—“go with good”—I’d gone
for my run & come back to the little open
wayside church hoping my meditation 
would be good as prayer . . .

As the flame-tip of the candle turned gaze to reverie 
I heard a rustling at my back
saw that the almost toothless pale boy
seemed to have found me
as if looking so urgently for someone else
I thought to tell him I was praying for my son
in my worst most broken Greek
the boy looked pale and skinny as the Christ-ikon 
hanging on the chapel wall
afraid to say no more than the silence
we two suddenly kept
like a vigil . . . Our spell
wouldn’t break till he’d blurt
in such stark English
“I need 3 & half Euros for the bus
to Mitilinni” . . . My fingers would sneak 
behind my back to search for the zipper-slit
above the secret pocket in my running shorts
graspable coins in my fingers
would arrive so fast in his own 
he’d look up astonished . . . Pause
as if to say something he couldn’t
before he’d take up my hand
to put to his lips
turn to leave me
hiding a face in the palm
as though keeping it kissed . . .

The Haunts
          for Dorothea Lasky

Dorothea says my spirit animal is Dana Scully.
Is it weird thinking about your spirit animal
when your pants are around your ankles, tissues
bunched in your left hand even though
you’re left handed? I have been waiting to die 
for some time, so Dorothea gives me her inner warrior, 
she gives me her violets. There is sunrise 
in my mind, everything stubbles. I miss the lack 
of tumbleweeds in Tallahassee when I’m sleeping
in Mississippi. Monsters are scary, but not being 
a monster is even scarier. Everything halos. 
All thoughts are monsters, all thoughts end 
in dirty couches. I’ve got a girl at home 
with good hips. She’s got some lips, but let me 
tell you about her hips. They light smoke on fire. 
They built mountaintops & were pleased. They took 
the line that was originally here & gave it a Pushcart. 
Gave it an amusement park. Gave it a silhouette 
with a pirouette. It’s Saturday. 
I imagine every spaceship with a full tank of gas, 
flying around cloning every woman I almost had sex with. 
I vest my bullets to protect life from staying.
Storms are coming through Tampa, let me have you.
& that’s how I end my heart: let me have you the end.

 

It Was the Lungs
          to Owen Ashworth

I’ll never start a poem where we rob a bank & make it 
out alive. You wouldn’t want it that way. Vs. Poem. 
Vs. Guns Shaped as Stanza. If the bleeding didn’t come,
I might’ve been a father now, too. It’s how most of me goes. 
We’re always sticking with loss when we start with loss. 
My sister is dead but you didn’t know that. 
She was so little when she quieted too much. She’s not far, 
just a few miles down the same street. A little south. 
A little more south. Seriously, you can stay on my street 
& twelve minutes later—a body under soil, the same 
last name. Similar fingernails. Your songs aren’t far 
but they never go see her, either. It’s been so long. 
I wonder if she knows time & how long it can last for most. 
She never made it to solid foods, Valentine’s Day mailboxes 
made out of empty shoeboxes laced with streamers, 
but she was too young to know how to be hurt by a heart, 
& that’s something. Her grave is no bigger than a shoebox. 
I could be wearing her grave right now. Isn’t it sick 
I thought that? The meds haven’t been working that well. 
I’ll never finish a poem where we rob a bank & make it out alive. 
My legs are longer so stay in the car. Stay right across 
the street. Make sure the tank is full. Wear driving gloves—
I know how sweaty your hands get when you’re nervous. 
Keep the graves off your feet. I’ll be out with bags heavier 
than groceries. We won’t make it. It’s better that way.

Instead of an Apology

Each morning –
on my way to work –
the old man,
sitting on the  front steps
of the bank –
stretches out his hand and asks:
What time is it, child . . .
What can I tell him –
each morning
at the same time
it’s late,
very late . . .

Small Stories

She likes to write notes –
“I love you” to her husband,
“I’m thinking of you” to her child,
“Thank you” to her mother.
It’s a little ludicrous actually,
but her loved ones don’t speak about these things,
even pretend
they’ve never discovered anything in their pockets. 
Still, she’s been doing this a while –
since the day
she read somewhere
that a woman jumped from the fourteenth floor,
and in her pocket there had been a note
with the words –
“five eggs and a loaf a bread.”

Crow’s Nest

No one is around 
as the body settles 
the body as it loves  
cabinetry  
and black beds of salt 
a township in rural Illinois 
the body as it looks  
at moths 
filling up the pantry 
with their heat 
and soon my hip slides out 
but I can’t stop reading 
about cruelty 
I am afraid  
of getting home  
and I am sorry  
for all the same things  
What I have here  
isn’t a special want  
It is what  
you might call me  
In front of the animals  
as animals are  
and tend to do   
You couldn’t leave now 
even if you wanted to 
You never expect 
the ice shelf collapsing 
All this is 
is a calling out to you 
because with you 
I might be able 
to take this

 

from Observatories

While I am a moving object 
I am a system 
in the world

and did not get the signal

In groupings of ants in the kitchen, 
the darkness of them,
I am going to sound 
very certain about something

I am coming over

I like commentary, narration 
and need to say where things are from

to wake up and call you
by a different name

                             ~

If I have this dream
it means I’m thinking about you   

and if I trust some navigation 
by sunlight                                
by ancient instruments
where’s the magic in that

Do you notice
my hand on my chin
looking back on
harbingers

are you still with me

You don’t begin to say
a word, you say it

When he has lucid days 
please call us

                             ~

This must count as victory:       
a green pulse beneath the snow             
this momentary 
overcoming

I, looking back, wonder at your satisfying
the edge of a sleeve 
on film 
I surmise
we would have been magical
In the wake of early snow

No more summer 
to build
where there is no fall

                             ~

To be in that case
To have lost footing
What signal am I making
to you this cloud
in camp

After some time the soldier cried
but not this one time
you know this

that at the station he kissed 
the coffee cart girl
kissed the black 
on her teeth and mouth
and on her skirt
black handprints 
the tickertape

No whooping or hollering here
only the radio timed out

his right hand aching
against the coffee cup
and will not shoot again

                             ~

One more figure, 
this one of drones
overhead, too much for 
your ladder of light:

all our recent frights
a node in the system
a wanting to heal this
fear of the sky

where the same soldier
in france 
was bivouacked with others 
where on thanksgiving
they gathered by chance

where blown apart
they opened out 
like a field 

Glacier

The day knocked out my teeth.
The day told me there is no such thing as a lake.

Yesterday I lost my reserve 
and ants took to the hill with determination.

The bodies of the colony poured over the road.
I held my hands up, out.

I looked through a faulty kaleidoscope.
Everything appeared

as it was. The sun cut triangles across my face, 
a range of mountains, extending.

Is there a way to sound less disappointed?
Staring at the wall created a conversation I liked.

As if there was wind, or trees, or wind
in the trees.

                                 ~

What is wilderness doing in this scene?
How much forgiveness is left

if we argue in a forest?
If we fight in a station wagon

and fall asleep 
in a station wagon?

Like ferns beside the road our shadows 
have no choice

but to overlap.

                                 ~

Untethered, I waved like a tree across an avalanche. 
My leg, this slab of ice, whistling.

Hello, from this shore to that.

                                 ~

The activity of the season tired me.
These nervous motors of snow, running.

In town, cowboys coughed into their handkerchiefs and
twirled me across the floor.

In another town, my mother drew swans in a factory so that
the factory filled with swans.

Distance is measured in such false beauty,
I said, staring at the mirror of my face.

                                 ~

The monarchs lodged in the exhaust pipe are lodged in my ribs, held to the road. 
I drove by the same crow. He recognized my face, loved my dimple.

I am afraid he will watch me undress 
or I will let him.

                                 ~

On the road, the station wagon slumps lower, 
drags its exhaust pipe

around like a slug. 
I pull over

and drink from the roadside ditch.
My palms full of melting slush

from water and what colors 
the water.

 

from Kings

I slept through the wind
I didn’t dream

a tree fell 
from the roof everything

started falling it was 
necessary all

this clanging 
hundreds of monarchs

thumping against the windshield 
it can not be stopped

I kept driving I kept 
whittling wings

                    ~

The wind kept 
a sheet of white

paper over my face 
you said I looked like a ghost

but it was only a sheet 
of paper through which

nothing could be 
seen

                    ~

Heard out of ear-shot 
I thought I was here-shut

I grabbed my chest door
my brother stormed

the room shaking 
me from the arms,

legs, head
what are you driving at

he yelled where is 
your signal tree where is

your empathy clasp
mistakes I told him

are nothing 
to be afraid

                    ~

I saw the earth split
like an onion it came
 
undone in layers
I rubbed my eyes clean

disbelief is not a crime 
I wore the death

mask proudly
a cluster of ants carried me out

there was no ceremony
nor witness nor wind

                    ~

I wove a cluster 
of succulents into a crown

the desert moved toward 
me, completely magnetic

the sun was jealous
half of nothing is

nothing the sun shouted
and you are half of!

                    ~

Had I sent the sun straight
out of me?

I have no use for kindness 
only grave, grave

mischief

see the whelping of my lion
see the heaped waves of

the Atlantic color-
rinsed

                    ~

The TV in the kitchen 
is on fire again

all the wiring is wrong
I turned on

the light and fell 
down the stairs

I have never broken anything
except your face

nightly I feed appliances 
to the fire

oh I do not know what
will become of me

Epistle, Twenty Years Too Late

Let me explain.  I never meant to cause you 
trouble, you a master of wit and urbanity,
you who called me angel in the dark
corner of the terrace, your smile
anything but angelic.  Keep control,

I thought, the two words in my head
like a prayer, like two marbles turning
over and over in the palm.  Keep control.
The cocktail party sedate by then, its conversations 
and laughter filtering through the screened door,

I knew you were seducing me.  I let you
seduce me, fine distraction that you were.
Outside, the air had only the slightest chill
on it, and try as I did, I could not effect
my usual chilliness.  I rolled the prayer

around in my head.  And when you put 
your hand under my shirt joking that my chest 
was like that of the marble torso of Apollo, only 
a god or goddess could have saved me.  Keep control.
Keep control of me.  Could you do that?  Control

this monster?  Your lips, stained by wine, tasted 
like wine, left wine stains on my neck.  I 
wanted.  I wanted to stay with you instead of 
retreating to Boston, to my cinder-block room.  
But when the wings started to twitch and ache,

I knew control was the last thing of which 
I was capable.  I should have stayed.  I should have 
let you have your way, let the terrible wings unfurl, 
the wings like something in one of your poems, 
those intricate machines of control and abandon.

 

Learning to Walk

The halo, still fixed to my head then, 
pinned to the calvarium’s fine table 
of bone, almost helped me to balance.  
And balance is such a fine quality.  
No matter how many times my mother

recounts for me how I first learned 
to walk, I have no recollection of it.  
But I remember the second time I learned, 
because learning to walk as an adult, 
like learning anything one should learn

as a child, involves shame and embarrassment, 
those snickering sisters who love to watch you fail.
To clutch the two poles alongside you, poles 
parallel to the ground you stand on, you wish 
you were a gymnast or at least studying

to be a gymnast.  Instead, you feel 
the terrible weight of yourself grappling with 
the weight of yourself, one final and awful
proof for gravity. Shouldn’t a man who has wings 
be immune from such things, be immune from gravity?

Shouldn’t he be able to hover in place, the wings 
vibrating the way a bee’s wings do?
The need to stand, the desperate need to walk, 
was embarrassing.  I said so many prayers then.
I prayed to any god I thought would listen.

I know the girl feeling the kiss in the mirror

So I can sleep in peace I build a small house inside the large one. It expands, deflates, expands.  It is breathing. Inside it: a perfect copy of our old living room. I pretend we are talking about bad movies, band posters. I pretend you are saying something about the empty clotheslines between my teeth, my cassette face, a plug that keeps the world from going in. I move the chairs around the way I think you’d ask me to. I fit so well inside my body now that it is not there.

 

Cross your fingers

And fall into the spaces.  Your lowest sounds fill the pipes, make them tremble, turn the water a kind of sea color you can’t get rid of, can’t get used to drinking.  I am about the size of a cocktail umbrella now.  I am feeling a bit woozy.   I look at the sky and name it after you.  I name it after you because it is eating itself alive.  Pieces of it are falling everywhere, jutting out of the ground like glass.  Everywhere you walk is a kind of pre-hurt, a fear of getting cut.  Everywhere you walk you have to shield your eyes from the glare.

 

Before men could speak they enjoyed confounding one another with signs

Smoke is coming through the bottom of the door even through your hands are already burned.  They windmill the air now: a slight composite, analog, white against black.  I feel it.  The black in the white is feeding it.  The paper makes a shape like a mouth.  A body opens one of its circles.  Things turn as half things, opposite of themselves, paper ships inside an oven.  The family is getting ready for dinner.  One frame marks out the next, the smaller of which always the larger, a victor of spoils. The picture is already gone.

 

Night was nothing to him but a song

We were stopped on a road.  Everything was a hot air balloon tied to the grass, bouncing up and down.  We were afraid it would all simply go, begin going into the gone light.  We were afraid of worse things too.  I kept asking everyone if I was clear, if they could see me.  I was surprised I didn’t have to try.   Then I did.  We were playing that game where everything was lava only we never stopped.  Look at all the things we could have touched. 



