We inherit the hurricane
from the sky & destroy
 
our bodies as if it were
the most ancestral
 
ritual. We kneel down
on separate bedroom floors.
 
You mix alcohol
with tobacco, steal a light
 
& house the mixture
inside your mouth.
 
Smoke from your lips
snakes 2,451 miles of skyline
 
before entering
my lungs. I refuse
 
to eat because after
mourning you
 
there are no rooms left
in my stomach
 
for food. We have lost
a homeland.
 
We have lost
each other. Now,
 
our body is the only
home we still have left.
 
         We can’t lose that, too.


​​I am the first to step over the threshold of the apartment
and I am the first to firmly close its front door.
It has two rooms stacked one on top of the other:
one painted the color of a Tiffany gift box,
one painted the dead skin of a band-aid.
 
 
 
 
 
The stranger who shares the wall behind my bed
snores. His head is so close to mine. Sometimes,
after the sun sets, he plays
three bad guitar chords
then sets the instrument down. 
In the morning his phone
vibrates under his pillow, against the wall.
 
 
 
 
 
There is another version of the song.
I have proof. The most important thing
is that it have edges, that it begins and ends
with you. It’s like if you wear the right coat
it provides boundaries to your being
on the sidewalk, on the subway, and
no one will fuck with you.
 
 
 
 
 
There is another version of the song,
and at the end of it no one loses their mind. 
When I sing in the shower, I realize,
someone now must hear me.
 
 
 
 
 
I was born because I exist. I was born
because he gives me strange looks
when we pass in the laundry room.
He knows who I am by the noises I make
that I don’t know I make. Not
by my face or any part of my body.
 
 
 
 
 
New land, land no one has before trod.
In the kitchen, I unpack the dishes and cups
carefully. It takes me a long, long time.

fear feels very down inside the streets
underside of a radially carved logo
with tally deductions and riding crop
chrome lathers the plum
glinting populist flannel
having combed a motel for ear wax
over the manual lever and snifter of
a warehouse portico in frost
skullcap obscenity tips the cherry bowl
xerox a truss crypt blew peddle by
her bagpipe duck answer
red metal squiggle by a thoroughfare
writ on a purple billboard
glued to 1 p.m. sun

She points past the empty field
            past the ringing of a church bell     She asks who rings
 
the church bell     I tell her     no one now   
 
The silverware needs shining
             in the game she’s making up     She tells me
 
she is an empty treehouse
             & I am a moon pool  
 
but she’s the architect of my scarred abdomen
             she’s set for tea     It’s an ordinary weekday     The sound
 
of bells on rocks     or rocks for bells     she says   
 
your mother won the heaven lottery
             & had a beautiful daughter     I remember saying
 
something like this to her but she’s soaked it in as milk to bread 
                                                              
& repeats the beautiful empty of my abdomen     She
             scars the moon pool   
 
I am a church bell   
 
I empty past the field past the ringing of play   
I remember a table    
 
             It’s an ordinary weekday   
             The silverware needs shining


HAVE WE MADE IT ACROSS THE VAST PLAIN OF NIGHT?
No.
FOR THE MIND IN THE ACT OF ENTERTAINING ITSELF,
This is not a gurney. 

            We may as well be in a museum. After the intravenous,

confetti and Clindamycin. Sleep then keep sleeping through
 

the details, all the way through to the part with croquet and cucumber
​
             on the lawn, all the trappings of Empire,

but none of the pornography.  


That spring Tuesday after you packed, left your couch on the sidewalk, fog entered                  
​           the pulpy, pencil-shaved underbelly, the stained slender frame.
 
If I had drunk myself to death that night, I would’ve liked you to carry me to your
           river, lay our non-rescuable bodies
 
spread-eagle on its bank, tell me of the future: two people in an abject town, asleep,
           the daybreak mimicking their spent bodies, white steam rising from lichen-
           covered roofs.
 
Instead I dream stranded ships, how I drown caught in a mousetrap, how we wear
           paper crowns and they burn — your brows, chin and lips raw phosphorous.
           Your eyes little black pits.
 
And I see you like that in the mornings sitting silently in the car beside which I park.
           As I walk the streets, you pass by me. When I eat you study my mouth,
 
when I sleep you tap my shins, wrists, wishbone hips, and I can’t help say, Give me
           your hand, touch, see how warm I’m down below.

like sky lit moon,   if it didn’t feel so good we wouldn’t eat so much of it:   
            the sugar, the sex. we wouldn’t have
 
built that storefront for condoms & cashews & hands  & legs & lassos 
 
waiting on a credible news source  to confirm reports of the recent extinction
            of the unicorn race.   a week ago it was reported  
 
the last cowboy died out too.   you said you were  shocked & entirely  skeptical at the same time.

as long as there exists the places we are waiting on
            & the places we will not go,
 
i am sure unicorns & cowboys are much alive in the fabric of our DNA.   i whisper into your palm,
            the same palm that reaches & reaches & reaches outward.                
 
you  took the news like one takes  
            a  secret. you thought on it a while.  you buried it in the backyard of your head.  

you watered it, sung to it before bed  & like all things it grew.    

just because we can’t see cowboys & unicorns
            doesn’t mean we  shouldn’t pray
 
to them, you said, quiet,  as to not break the still  black morning’s sloth.    
 
just because we can’t  pray to them, doesn’t mean there lacks room for us to imagine hooves
            against the wooden slats of a saloon, a person riding bare back
 
 
with one-handed confidence leading us
            from temptation to temptation
 
& delivering us to a rotunda  of night sky, you said.
 
you wrote a prayer on a notepad:
            unicorn,   tell us how all was placed on earth.  


you burnt it in a candle.  you watched its ashes  be carried off to somewhere else. everywhere we exist
 
is a building waiting for us to
            step out of,  & because we grow weary of listening for hooves at night,  
 
 
 in the morning, ivory glistens with dew
            & because children stop dreaming in their beds  & later outside of them too, we all must
 
 
face our inevitable extinctions. the new  others will make tapestries of us then. 
            we will not be shown making shapes with arms & legs
 
nor eating pistachios in bed 
 
but alive again, walking upright.  the visitors will say   how happy 
            they look, in the tapestry         where we are
 
chained to a pomegranate tree surrounded by a fence,  in a field of eternal celestial bloom  
 
where the flowers know to open for moon, not sun.  
            those coming to visit  our tapestry will think we didn’t know the difference
 
between our serenity & freedom.   I wonder how they tamed them,  
 
            the visitors will say.   I wonder if  they knew 
 
they were  the last of  something?   & right now as I think these things   in bed,
            on some porch in somewhere montana  a house lamp dims  
 
& the sky a broken yolk above it.
 
what are you thinking, you say.   no, don’t tell   me, you say, waiting  for me to
            pull you onto my side of the bed
 
& the moonlight will make its attempt to pierce
            through the curtains   while we both wait.

You fill a copper urn with kush grass, the pile of rice, and garlands of marigolds.
 
In all four directions, ghosts with quicksilver bellies crowd the sky.
 
Mercurial, you salaam me, sickle in hand to slit my strings at the bridge.
 
 
I slip into dream through the cotton shroud — redline into the underworld at 103rd and
            Broadway.
 
I dip a flower in the Vaitarna River and touch it to my two eyes. It turns into thunder.
 
The rains begin.
 
 
I dip a leaf into the river and it scales into a koyal’s black plume.
 
Silver glints in a flurry of moons, the rains begin.
 
 
The bird in monsoon pinions warbles my name with your larynx and the rains begin.
 
I open my throat and swallow billows of cloud.
 
 
With a stick I write in the sand, My Chandal love with the hole in your throat, it’s hard
            not to lick your sores. 

​As if with the eventual expansion of a sun
              I set out to touch it all
                            over by irreversible means
              and await
                            attendant mourners’ forgiveness


The brevity of blue verbs such as “reason”
                           became me


Though I was about the efficient business of a river
              at a hair trigger
                            I would overflow with corpse-hauling ambition
              and lay it like myrrh at the large feet of men
                            before me


                                          I tended to floss with bootstraps


Stricken with visibility and the quiet violence
              of lightning
                           I was excused to be what I was
                                         gone be


My quote brokenness
             was begotten in centuries as gracefully forgotten as
                           foundations of Roman Catholic cathedrals


              I mean the noun “hurt”
                           was a survey of architectural corrections


I was much too busy
              with the feat of standing up inside the future
                            to pretend what with my feet I mowed down
                                         was to me the matter
 
I was a virtuoso in the medium of utmost


               my mouth invasive
                             yet the one void I avoided owning

​The carousel’s distance
determines my longing for it.
Dulled, or muted, or flagged,
producing a posture and
a face. The daughter under
the pine was mine, but
the photo misrepresented
her look as serenity. A whorl,
recessed and spangled.
Everyone related by blood
would, when given a plate
of food, first push the pasta,  
say, and the corn, the salad,
the fruit, all together in the slight
depression at the center, then
slowly, as they ate, separate
each item slightly from the
other items, so that nothing
touched or mixed, and at
family gatherings you could
learn, and I did, by this habit
who was family and who had
married in, the former proud
of how they ate, the latter
proud of how they didn’t. I
had always said, “I dislike
fun,” in the spirit of ludicrous
pronouncements that sound
like truth when spoken.

​Though spoken as an aside,
it was the truth. The actual
witch, near the end of
training, spoke of wild mind,
rite, and talking openly with
trees, “the standing ones.”
Half a heart, better than half
a smile, sipping a large red
Slurpee in the hot back seat.
The kid by whom, a kid
yourself, you define what it
means to be a genuine
asshole, Gavin Bloss. A failed
family outing, or a failed
family. Every item of
experience an imitative
imaginative for the child.
A shoreline, a beach,
continually refreshed. After
twenty years sober he began
to drink, and within a few
days, literally burned down
the house, the house he’d
built with his own hands, and
scattered the family widely,
before again getting sober for
twenty years, at which point
he died. But, do dreams.

I hop off the 5
at Bowling Green
and can’t remember
if I turned off my stove burner
before I left
my apartment in Crown Heights
 
I remember rushing
to pour water
from the whistling kettle
waiting 4 minutes
for it to steep
over coarse grounds
I remember my front door slamming
but don’t remember
turning the deadbolt
walking to President Street
or swiping my Metrocard
 
I remember giving up
my rush hour seat
to an older lady
in a tan trenchcoat
who looked down at me
like she didn’t expect me
to rise for her
I remember watching her
realize her own disbelief
a moment after it hit her face
hearing a mumbled Thank You
as she slinked down to her seat
 
I don’t remember Atlantic or Nevins
I remember remembering
I need to exercise more
passing Borough Hall
because my old gym is there
next to a Shake Shack
I remember the crisp, colorful lunch
I’d rushed to pack
in stainless steel
while the kettle came to a boil
I knew I’d eat
a cheeseburger instead
 
I lose a breath tripping
over a loose stair
and look up
at the park
I’m surrounded
by chipper tourists
in bright Canada Goose parkas
lining up to pose
in front of the Charging Bull
sculpture
gripping its bronze balls
in their hands
while smiling
for smartphones
 
I see tourists
asking cops
to pose
for photos
see the cops
oblige with smiles
decide to wait
for the impromptu
NYPD photoshoot
to end
before passing
in front of the smiler
taking photos
I wish
my patience was a courtesy
to out-of-towners
or the art of photography
but I’ve learned to avoid
the gaze of cops
assigned to the morning shift
 
A power-walking man
in pinstripes
carrying a cup
of coffee gyrating over its edge
cuts through the scene
just before the iPhone flash
I tag behind him
the same way I often trail
white people crossing
busy intersections
against the light

Five years of fireflies in oil; five years of ants gnawing

through red flags; five years of pockmarked suns, your face:

each ray, each sweltering August; five years of unraveling,

hair loosening from your crown like a rotten tooth;

five years of how easy it is to split a frog in two; five

years of pollen in your mouth, that bitter buzzing;

one year of leeches along the spine, fattening; two years:

are rats good to eat? Another year: sun-licked pots;

your birth year: the cold bones of a stranger’s hand;

the quiet year: no one wants to look at a gaping

fish, swallowing water endlessly; the sixth year:

​to place these flowers on or in the graves?

​There’s a hole where the nail used to be and she can see through it, straight to heaven. Oh, she’s sure he’s up there, somewhere, waiting for her. She peers out the hole oh the whole time we’ve been talking you know, peering for the epiphany only we know and have been holding onto. If only we had the guts to tell her there’s no such thing: she can’t make a heaven of life! And if it’s not a gun, it’s a knife, or a lie, or the phone, or a hotel room, or a stone with a key inside it. Or he might have heaven up there with him. Or she might be his wife. Better she keep looking, press her ear eye nose throat spine elbows spleen toes through the hole and ask if she fits and keep waiting for it and we can tell her stories to pass the time.

Do not come back, my brother says.
Do not come back, my brother says.
Sunset makes me cold. I walk a bridge
toward it, the membranous sky, air
on the tongue of my hunger. To be
lonely like the sound of leaves, I walk
over the leaves. The landmass thickens
as I forest myself. I hear a voice crackle
through my phone and I look for a moon,
white roan wake of my life, a dusted rim,
Depression glass on which I learn the word
salvage in an earlier decade. I have left
so much world behind, one star whispers.
I await the inevitable figure. He steps over
the limbs with a gift. Darkness like trapped
rainwater I thus behold a threshold.
It is clear what I must do to receive him.
And the gift in his hand I must open
my mouth to take.

Between you and me there’s a pyramid
Outside this window when we wake
It seems to have gotten closer after every night
Something planned by its builders
To stupefy generations to the last
I’ve joined a band of looters
On a circuit of readings
You’re off rolling a giant rock
In front of your secret chamber
Between you and me there’s only the foundation
Left of a palace of troubled dimensions
Where ceremonies competed with each other
Until this moment of ease arrived
Of buildings crumbled to be dreamed about
In another time it was the opposite
Suffocated in a tomb with a menagerie of mummified guests
Pets bundled just as tightly in their comical masks
The pleasures of the many concentrated in the one
It was radical but failed to catch on
With those of a new past

A body is sixty percent
ocean & the rest, sediment —  

​A ship at sea bears load to
the plimsoll, its safe burden — 
 
If a limescale fresco remains
to mark history, the flood’s rise
 
& fall, without me jumping in
to live it again, the scene
 
where I don’t wear a diving bell,
where I free-dive grasping
 
one breath — 
there’s no line for that,
 
only the primal sense
of treading water in bed.

In a different place a boy is throwing stones
from the shore of a lake. He cannot see us
 
watching him. We are cities & countries
& years away. He does not know you
 
& I have put our books down to learn
we will not always be spared.
 
There are still frontiers. He does not know
the surface of the lake is a frontier
 
that survives how his stones strike it,
how two swans swim across. Like a dowser
 
wandering in search of water unmapped
& underground, I have made my crossings
 
to reach you. He doesn’t know that either.
At one border, I was asked if I had any family
 
or friends living in the country. At another,
the guards asked me if I had ever lied.
 
You & I stood on another shore & looked
out to see the ducks quarreling,
 
to see how the swans write
an invisible script. Our time is spare.
 
We are a stone’s arcing flight, doubled
a moment in the water, disappearing 
 
just as we seem to meet. The boy aims
& finally strikes one of the swans,
 
snapping something in that willowy trunk.
It dies slowly, & the boy is made to watch.

you are thinking about the last white person you had to cut out of your life. the one who took a picture of dylann roof to the hairdresser “coz she wanted a look with ‘creeper vibes.’” you wonder if the hairdresser was a person of color and rage fills you. how clearly you see that murderer while the hairdresser... and you do what you always do when this happens in public, you disassociate switching to the fantasy of having a particular baldwin quote* printed on billions of small cards and dropping them via drone all over this country. you are fantasizing about how you are always fantasizing about this but the quote is always changing and the location is always changing then you are thinking on home and language and how in some ways they have come to mean the same thing. the train arrives, you get a seat. at the next stop a large white man finds the open space beside you and you resist the reflex to make yourself small, to make room for him. he shrinks into the allotted negative space and reveals a pack of index cards with your mother tongue scrawled on them. you remember god is a surrealist poet and has a funny way of revealing herself to those who will believe. but you wonder why this campy looking man has such an interest in your language. a slew of predictable acronyms rush to the forefront of your mind: CIA, FBI, NSA — based on his age, you dismiss the possibility of the foreign service exam. you are tempted to ask, “why such an interest in arabic?” then you notice a golden band on his ring finger. perhaps he is learning it for the love of a woman who loves this language as much as you do. this sole warm thought is fleeting, as he is: he stands directly in front of you as he prepares to exit the train. you scrutinize him. you sense he senses it. you want to make him uncomfortable. you want to know what he is going to do with your language. but you do not ask. you go home and write this instead.

these growing pains though
this good will hunting
we
fallen twigs
look like bones
waiting to be lit
 
i am trying to tell you something about how
rearranging words
rearranges the universe

may b my
only left /
my only way
outward. 2
esc. not 2 stop
/ 2 make it
stop. lolzy
how boi o’
the month club
think
my hair scores
his hand.
brillowsad.
funny how
i’m mad
as a Texas
air condition.
 
yu can take
the boichik
from the desert
but ya can’t
take the desert
from a history of extra-national violence guest starring as fictive virginity narrative.
 
what we’ve got here is a failure 2 substantiate. 2 put our back into
the elbow grease.
 
guess i suck then.
guess i, lyk the pokeball,
am a plot convention  /
                                    often thrown /
                                                            most present in error.

A stranger walks his dog toward the university.
It used to be a chemical plant.
There is a break in the plaza where students lie in the sun.
There is a tree taller than the buildings with a wide base.
The bark is black and the leaves are black as though it were a painting.
The shade is barely discernible.
The shade is barely discernible from the subject until I step into it.
It knows too much, the brightness.
Not every animal can survive it.
When I think of that city, first the tree.
Still abandoned houses.
Then the houses.
Too quiet for children. For dogs.
I look like no one in this city.

He placed his jar on a hill
thinking to make something of it.
The jar stood still, agape.
Rain fell and filled the jar a finger.
Seed floated in and sank.
A sparrow lit on the lip and shit.
Gold to orange turned the water,
then evaporated, left a chalked
shadow, a geologic print.
Leaves blew around it, snow fell.
In time the wilderness took it.

​​​I am run around as if with rope, imagine being all tied up,
unable to go anywhere but it’s fine. The tiny person says
 
she is a ghost haunting me and I believe it when
in the middle of the night I get up for seltzer and cannot
 
quiet my mind of terrible happenings. Put the thought
on a boat and push it toward the horizon line, they say.
 
Wave now as it floats away. Or there’s a box to pack and ship.
I move through the motions, an unforgettable dance, though
 
it never really works. I wake feeling I am no good but
for my gentleness, my tendency to lie right down
 
where I am and make a home of it. My debts blink
around me like lightning bugs, but it’s not that time of year.
 
Time becomes boxed and labeled. You tell me
you want to live forever, chewing on ice.

On the ugly white couch I am crying with the sun 
over me like a father burning all his Cubs memorabilia 

in the driveway after yet another loss. The thing about not drinking is — 
and then a gimlet in my grip. They say to visualize depression as a plate, 

broken. Ripped-up bill. Ash. I mean, I want to. I want to 
mark my next dissolving on the calendar. Break it down. 

Are the parts of me younger or timid or taking control?
She asks me to tell her more about the thoughts and there’s nothing

bloody there, so I don’t have to lie. It’s enough to say the tulips
turned like an ankle. To try to phrase it as a gift. There aren’t maps

for how blocks of light move past me locally. I grow used to feeling 
like silk, a single strand. What is my work when sometimes 

my hand doesn’t feel like my hand? As if
I could believe it was someone else touching me.

My mother’s girlhood ponytail
was chopped at the root and kept in plastic
at the bottom of the drawer
where the good china was stored
but never used.
 
When alone, it was my pet slipped free
into my lap. A soft fray of auburn
to run my hand along.
 
I never tried to imagine her face
as the hair was severed, a slow cascade
grasped in the fist of the blade holder.
 
The offerings I’d bring to it were always
ignored. Handwritten letters, strawberry
jellybeans. Once, a very quiet song.

​​Don’t tell me I don’t know
this place. These remarkable
hills and more remarkable
shopping carts. This afternoon
distending directly into the
upstairs closet where you sleep
on duffel bags with pills
in every pocket of your denim
jacket. I offer you a cucumber.
You sacrifice our friendship
for a stricter politics of
sabotage. Indifference is
a privilege. But it’s difficult
to commit to loving every
living thing when you don’t
know when death begins.
When I say America, you see
airbrushed beaches and
sealed packages of syringes.
I see a vacant lot swarming
with bodies on BMX bikes.
I see every liquor store
in Norwalk shining beneath
dilated stars. An anarchist
dentist from Soviet Georgia
once told me North Americans 
are kittens. Nothing I write
will get me killed. The universe
continues as an endless
series of births. At some point,
when our molecules recycle,
we will become each other.
We will stop rehearsing
ourselves to bathroom mirrors.
My hands will be a sofa
or a beam of future light.
Your eyes will be a monk’s
tennis racket or an automatic
rifle. Until then, I will go
on jogging with my dad.

​​Inside the bedroom
there are spiders.
 
God is always on
the phone with them,
 
you said after I told
you that I want to be
 
left alone for at least
a year. When I walk
 
our daughter to school
I want to tell her things
 
that will help her sleep.
At night the walls tell you,
 
No one is brave,
but they don’t talk to me.
 
I watch the spiders
and listen to the stream
 
where the deer mingle
without social anxiety.

it is night again. the woods are verdant,

marshy, wet; somehow, the crops dry anyway. we thirst

anyway. this story is depressingly old : on the plateau

where mud sinks into river, i sit with a bottle

i’m not allowed to buy. i can’t remember

where it came from. i can’t remember

why i’m sitting in the woods with a drink

anyway. but since i’m here, i’ll make the trees — 

the bushes, even — give green a rest. try red

instead. try the fire the women in my family

called mark of a changed girl. try palash, gift

from yet another goddess, & our lady

of power, at that : she from the mountains,

born again after a man shamed her, & she couldn’t bear

to live any longer. i wish i didn’t know

this story : the baddest woman burning

for some man. forget rebirth. forget

parvati, sati, any mysticism making us smolder.

give me flowers budding grey — whole fields

of softly-shaking grasses, daylight devoid

of hue. let there be no sign of blush, love,

anger — i want absence, less-ness,

static : a landscape colored so dismally, even i

​can’t shock us all awake — 

​She has a kind face
She has long, long eyelashes
 
I know where we are going
 
Chamomile country, flattened into
hospital ward, two dimensions
no relief, no reward: hundreds of tiny birds
 
There is so much more to say, she said
Yes, I said

Your psychic legs may not notice rugs
& pathmarks, uneven loose steps,
selves too high, too low to preach,
dim in rooms. Hallways may have lived
for many lonesome years. These
innocent things can be demonic. For one
whose disability is quickly discovered,
a slip or stumble is already chosen.
For example, if you have strange notions
or balldance problems, you may not levitate
as high as the average magician when
you take a cakewalk. You are more
likely to trip on a wrinkle in a drug.
You may have a dumbness in your lexicon,
able to sense when you have stopped
on a whim. You need more light to see
objects in the firmament. There is nothing
 in these heavens alone to ignite
a wail. Combustion of tinder, risk
factors incarnate and divine, increase
the chance we all will fall.

In which the men are laughing
The world remains attached
A kite string on a yellow balloon
The Bourgeoise don’t choose Hitler
Our martyrs swing; lilt of lambs
Licking the olive groves
I am not an incident labeled
Insurgency, I seep rose
Hips with the good queen’s salt

pareces blanca he tells me  
 
bachata filling every corner  
 
of his cab I sing along  
 
           accentless  
 
remember the first time I heard  
 
those words in my father’s car  
 
ay, cuando te miro y no me miras   
 
he insists pareces blanca  
 
my mother’s güera I say rubia
 
her parents named her  
 
Barbie como la muñeca  
 
I give him names of towns I visit  
 
every summer and Christmas  
 
but he’s hesitant turns up the music

​​Blue grew through you
 
Tchotchke peacocks at the abandoned zoo
 
Around and around the blue cages, riding the children’s train
toward always, eating gorgonzola
 
Choo choo
 
Blue under blue over blue
 
               Even aquamarine is possible at the State Hospital
(closed nineteen eighty-nine)
 
Ten thousand IT’S A BOY balloons
rubbing together make
the blue sound
of a hacksaw
 
Uranus     (death
 
is famous)
 
And oh, threnody, beauty is therapy
 
           …something new, something borrowed, something
thereunto
 
Blue
of the awesome, wet we’ve — ​
 
If you want what I’ve got you have to hold it
until you’ve imagined how to breathe

​​The thing about environments is that they change around you. Walk, and you are sometimes bitten. Sometimes your heel bites. There is a crop of trees and there are ways to cut them. Tongue by tongue. Root by root. Adze, ax, awl. I wonder which leaves are leaves without a spine, which spines can be twined propeller. Can absence hold water. I ask so close that I hear the ting of your shutting mouth, my chin between your legs in the mirror. Take it off. It is a pastoral landscape meant for shifting. If you wait too long it will think you a chainsaw.  

Forgive me & all
my missed calls.
 
We are living
in what old
 
folks call trying
times, I mean
 
it’s Monday,
it’s that season
 
of the year the sun
sinks sooner
 
than I like.
I love most
 
about sunset
how it suggests
 
distance, a further
place where the
 
world curves
beyond what I see.
 
Before I knew
what to call you
 
I knew you. Dear
darkness, are we
 
headed someplace
new, someplace
 
not already in
our bones? I still
 
have those poems
you said to read,
 
the ones I haven’t
bothered with, 
 
too busy with
what my folk swear
 
is a phase, a spell,
some sort of down-
 
hearted song. Dear
darkness, is that
 
you at the piano,
you who troubles
 
the keys? Is
another word
 
for sorrow
consistency?
 
How we water
from our eyes
 
and call it anything
but persistence
 
beats me. I love
most the waiting
 
rooms, their still
dying flowers.

But you gave this to me, this
silvering fragment or relic-like remnant.
Pure unadulterated music.
Succulent, so small, I could not
name it until I found it
living inside the shivering cells of me.
Yellowing and swelling like medicine
or jealousy. Or some liquid element,
dangerous, one hundred proof.
In Warsaw at dusk, in the porcelain tub,
all the windows of the hotel room, thrown open.
Tiny white fires igniting in the distance.
The space between is delicate and dangerous — ​
search lights in the fields of an unknown
country, hiding inside the shut cabin of a train,
moving through the different rooms
of dreams. Your breath always
on my neck; your hands.

​Reason produces whispers
Monstershop at the cycle center
There will be music assisting headbands among us
cooling pads at a relax center apnea store
There will be breathing research, night bras
What is the diet responsible for your disordered center?
Are you the type of person that needs dentistry in your sleep?
Experiment with easy solutions, with these fairy books
genie gallerys, hormone helmets
We will invade Utah
where the lady shuffle method will be explained
On your bed, a pillow made of numbers
Venus and Cupid, of death, oasis
an Endymion sleepover
We’re in Perfect Mattress, California
Locate your trains
under a blanket of suns until the stars go down
Sweatshirt utility, a cookbook of bandits
Your wake cycle is controlled by Christopher Dark
by hollow man banjo bee lagoons
These zones are completely adjustable


​exists as the free audio book of a new machine
Or the spirit travels a maze to Aristotle in seraphim rose
Six brothers were birds
The Cartel Band chooses a new society
What exactly dies when the body dies?
Existence was first explained in Saginaw
In the back of the garage: giants and generals
These bandaged moments, dyed thoughts
Junkies ascend from their bleached bodies
A man has been canceled
A nebula so far away there is no picture
We are continually reborn as lyric
It’s Octopus vs. Man Under Socialism
in apostolate quickquarian revival
There are seekers and stirrers
The soul scotchtapes itself to analysis
Suddenly, the number 11 becomes important
and there will be songs of exotic vaccination
or a 1986 film script telling us of the Solzhenitsyn of Vietnam

​​I think I’m changing,
 
in order to see it you need to be in front of me and behind me and on both sides all at once.
 
Change is continuous, according to Heraclitus, moving in its own current,
 
not spilling or overflowing,
 
as if it is just the right amount.
 
Everything streams is the way the Cratylus describes it.
 
The current leaves while the stream stays, peeling off what it’s attached to,
 
sometimes I think there isn’t much difference, but I’m really thinking it doesn’t make much difference.
 
Heraclitus believed you are never going to be the same person you are now because that person no longer exists.
 
Because that person is streaming.
 
Streams have options, deepening or broadening,
 
channeling one way or the other.
 
The current has a craving but not the stream.
 
Heraclitus’s ideas survive only in a few fragments in the works of others.
 
I think change often starts inside and moves outside, like a form of abandonment,
 
apart from that I don’t have any plans.
 
There is a sense in which Heraclitus’s concept of continuous change is a permanent marker erasing itself.
 
As when something is misplaced,
 
not lost but in the wrong place, where nobody thinks to look.

​It’s love love because neither
has served. They just showed up
on the court, he in his shorts, she
with a new tube of balls. Love all
because they don’t know the rules.
Nobody’s yet explained that this
is a competition. Someone must lose. 
They’re standing there in visors,
beaming at each other over the net
when the kid in the cream polo
with the weed whacker yells
Hey, this your ball? It’s love love
and they’re sitting on their baselines.
They’re not sitting. They’re reclined,
looking up, net between their heads
as if it fell from the sky to divide them.  
It’s love all when she swipes her racket
through the air and it goes wish, wish.

As Titans, we were coached to bleed
purple and white. We were told to
leave it all on the field. We did
 
as told. After we were through
galloping terribly into each other’s bodies
and withdrew to the gang showers,
 
our pickups, cul-de-sacs, beds, after
the halide flood lights were killed
and the idiot moths scribbled
 
back into October chill,
it gathered itself up on the fifty-yard line.
It drifted to the sideline
 
where our fathers had run the chains,
slid over the track’s backstretch
beneath aluminum bleachers
 
and down the unmown hill
into the bottoms we entered only
to fight or paw or be pawed or be,
 
and there spread itself like an exhalation
around the trunks of trees.
Before our tailback, coach’s son,
 
pulled the gun from his glove box,
you could still hear it
if you went there early enough
 
and sat in grass wet with dew.
It made a sound like crows.
Now there’s a scar on the hill
 
where the gas line was buried
and you can’t hear a thing
over the lawnmowers.

 Volatile vesper flamed
                        to fallow
 
                        the space between
 
            one I slash
 
                        you and another. Come hither,
 
                        nether. Sexual dark
 
            matter: neither nor
  
nor or, either idea — ​
 
            or elemental
           
            et al. Object
 
            lesson in
 
abstraction, seen
 
            best when un-
 
                        seen. A question
 
                        answered with
                                    a question — 
 
                        a phantom
 
            ache, instinctual
 
stint. Can never
 
            leave
 
                        because was
 
            no, is     never. The periphery:
 
      capable
 
incapability, a future
           
            perfect verb.
                        Nerve now
 
verve that urges
            the verge. Else or erst-
 
                                    while. A breath
 
                        without lung. Open air. Still.

​Yes, I swallowed them.
Those bitter bolts rust in acidic
afterthought. This tetanus
of tautology turns my gut a copper
gangrene, a belfry
swallowed. Did you know passive
aggression is so soluble?
A soapy mouth learns other ways
to speak: homonymic hymns
of lye & lie. The awful offal
become my loden, stinking.
Anger uncomplicates. But I gulped
the wrong way. I am a glutton
for bile. I make drinking
songs of silence. Chugalug catgut.
& choke it back. Wolf
down this I can’t, I won’t — ​
this yes, yes, I mean, don’t.

​​I am already so cumbersome from the America in me,
            and its execution of the body. I don’t dance unless I’m sloshed
to my eyebrows in fermentation. I don’t dance until
            I’ve dammed the barrier between my pelvis and its estrangement
from pleasure. I do often roll my tongue, but only to flute
            my lips and spit cherry seeds a respectable distance away from
me. For so long I wanted to be at least one of the following: a willow spine
            and limbs allowed to drift without syncopation, or a manatee
that sailors escort to an ice skating rink. For those of you in the back
            of your heads, that’s a skinny awkward sympathy or a fat
decorative allowance. I’ve lived in shapes I cannot muster the courage
            to name because they are slanted and curved. An octagon
if you will, there, I said it. These false starts at angular, and these teases
            at curves, these crops I’d rather burn than rotate, these hands,
I’ve laid hands, I’ve laid hands on myself when I could not for the foreign
            life of me pull a line of rhythm from my scalp to my toes
without shuddering at my own reverberations.

When do you get to think about God
when the child’s nose is dripping
onto your breast and you’ve sunken
into the rhythm of your own voice
humming a song you can’t remember
where you first heard it
at the end of a twelve-hour day of this
rocking back and forth
pinch of sciatic nerve
as the child snorts and rubs his face on your skin
and you both surrender
staring at the twilight sky out the window
the hideous glowing blue promise of dark
when you sink into the physical moment
of holding, rocking, and somehow being rocked
and you try to remember why you started writing
in the first place
when you used to sift through the names of God
trying to find the one that maybe even you
could pronounce
as the child moans
one long syllable — ​
There is no time now
to think about God
and anyway you have accidentally
made a prayer of your two bodies
by the darkening window.


So long I was told
be patient, the world
 
will come, and like a frog
inching up a pant leg
 
I leaned into the great eye
of a telescope. Summer.
 
Five wars in six
days. Three bodies
 
in three states.
Now we make terrible
 
lovers because we can’t stop
counting the snakes
 
in the yard, one with orange
stripes like a tiger, one
 
wrapped in the claws of an eagle
on the belt buckle of a man
 
with his skull in his hands.
It’s like this when you don’t live
 
forever: the dead in boats and
the dead in heaven, the dead stuffed
 
into shotgun shells and shot
wildly into air, the dead fall
 
around us, we blink them
from our eyes. At most
 
singing
is what we do.
 
And then the trumpets.
And then the screaming.​There was no pink armadillo. 
No smudge of someone’s fire-cooked sausages in the air. 
No escape from thorns cast on each digital divide.
Tears accumulated behind solid surfaces,
climbed the inchoate walls plastered with caution tape, 
wires, poles, street signs wearing ripped fabric tied like streamers.
There was only the morning’s dampness,
caught between the out-there and in-here.
No one felt today ending even as it kept on starting.
There was one teaspoon left. 
Children ate the others with the rest of the innards.
The one spoon they bent and bent
until the bowl fell away from the shank.
Stem. Handle. Then measured in scoops and pounds.

We laundered our t-shirts in the citadel. An animal bond to a keeper.
How do you record dark’s finery of unstitched hems. Drop by drop the night fell
in love with its own indifference. O, Tender Conductor, do you
remember your name. Botany’s secret
 
is a mural of constellations, remedies soiled roots, and mistakenly
I’d abandoned a leaf’s indigo socket, but there and there each acre
became a horse’s master. We were those who live against fire’s spine. 
I wish I’d never seen that country tangled in smoke,
or any war possessed by doubt.

​​The dark said that things could go on loving. Moss grew up the drain and roman grasses reflected June’s long window; shadow’s sun inside shadow’s shadow. She shared,
            before the ocean rendered cobalt, what she could.      The ghostly
 
walking away with her gloves, up the stairs somewhere into the old night. The night that is kind.
 
What so now I wonder. What sleep’s dreamless trek of snow. What easy first breath made last and whose as whole. Without our lowest guard of pride. We eased the time before the tracery bells beneath the sea seemed perfectly new, and noon’s intermediary horizon rose into discourse.

​The day was its own warning. I was thinking of his head
on a plate in my lap. I was thinking of its soft loops of curls,
 
fine as the hair punched into plastic doll skulls. I felt strange
& electric & so did the sky, & when I looked out
 
of the window, it looked back with green. There were clouds
& clouds’ low stomachs lined silver. & there was a room
 
in which I stood alone. When the squall line quickened, the room
became aching. The room became wool. No god was there.

In my sleep, I invent cities known on no map.
How do I explain where I come from
 
when it is a place long separated from itself
by snow? How do I explain my father,
 
his eighth-grade education, his body
like the frozen river running through ghosts
 
of cities? An immigrant’s child. I map the wind
that pushed him west. I map his fists
 
before they unclenched in death. I map
his murder. The river, a witness. When I sleep,
 
he is more than where he came from. The cities
we’ve touched are real. I touch my father’s skin, still
 
warm. I pretend to know myself. I pretend
the cities aren’t memories of cities. I pretend
 
I am the beginning my father wanted.
I pretend that the day he went away to work
 
in another city so that we could eat,
he didn’t cry. Instead, I speak of details:
 
the earth & sun & snow. The late hours
that last & last. Like winter. I speak
 
of things as ordinary as air & light. As grief.
But every night in my sleep, I ward off funerals.
 
I bless my father’s dark skin. Rough hands. I bless
the river’s silt. The hunger-sores. The languages
 
he couldn’t speak. The yellow sun. This after
-world, where worry is a city we’ve shunned.
 
In the hush of winter, I thank him for this winter.
This snow covering every city. He is always dying some
 
-where when I wake. This grief, I’ve carried too long.
O father, forget me. A daughter is the sea. Borderless.
 
Daring to hold the dark inside. I would stay asleep
if it meant that you’d live. But you ask nothing
 
of me. All & nothing. All at once. 

Without a cigarette habit,
no way to exit a room,
 
now Rorschached
with oil spots
that at some point in the night
were faces.
 
Outside the bar I can answer the question
Are you in love?
 
I AM IN LOVE
floats like skywriting
over the dilapidated smoke
of Camel Blues.
 
A Chihuahua licks my boots
like a servant, grossly abased.
A man walks up and says
Do you two know each other?
 
The dog and I have an ill-defined
intimacy, but I love him
or her, or them.

Tonight the water-bearers
pour wine & the music-
makers bestow on a quiet populace
the sole instrument
known to survive fires
as elsewhere the stars
stoke their revenge &
the earthquake rehearses
a new sound
for daybreak; & breaks; & breaks
loose.

We drank gin
& tonics at the bottom
 
of the sea
on Thursdays
 
in between silence
& conversations
 
about human things
like how to breathe
 
underwater     
the blue glow
 
of smartphones
& half a country
 
between us
you taught me
 
how the gills
are both beautiful
 
& dangerous
& when the manta
 
ray passed nearby
docile & mis-
 
understood we
spoke low & our
 
fingers touched
its living shadow

in this one room shanty without windows
only one good sack of millet for hunger
 
and no matches I have risen from the bed
which is only a stolen sheet cast over straw
 
to cook you breakfast. I want to be good
for you. but what do I know of striking flint
 
or bringing anything to flames.
once my aunt tried to teach me
 
said lean in whisper your sins to smoke
said you could be forgiven by fire.
 
but momma lifted her nose at low labor
and I never learned how to burn my secrets.
 
we are not speaking now. momma and I.
she has her feelings about this dirt floor shanty
 
with no books and that flea hop bed
where you named me woman.
 
I know I won’t be young forever but want forever
and I have seen how breast can fall in my family
 
but if I could cook you this millet
watch you eat and smile… damn it.
 
this flint won’t spark. you startle awake
to me beating the dark rocks together
 
your eyes already keening
for something I don’t yet know to call hunger.
 
I say teach me to light a fire
you say woman come back to bed.

As is the blood
on the screen, the horror movie,
when the last bug is plucked
 
from static. The frizz
still of it, small translucent
wings between fingers
 
buzzing like the film
it arrived on. Hollywood
horror or disaster
 
enlivened in living
rooms. The carpet
was how you learned
 
gravity, sitting so close
to it when news came.
Horror: the small fire
 
stoked between
the rib. Crack of
bone or crunch
 
of the smallest fly
now dead, now
3-dimensional,
 
melding its antennae
back to flight. How
television turned off
 
meant bodies inched
out between
rooftops and rebar
 
toward each other
again. How else
did you ever sleep
 
at night, in this
country, where singing
meant you could not
 
sit. Your hand
tests mine tonight.
Our nails are polished
 
to a fume. I could
love you like this,
like how cats slink
 
toward each other
with cicadas
in their throats.
 
Pain, nothing,
but cold cold snow
or shitty feedback
 
or static. Watching
bigger cats
in the snow. Or,
 
was it people
starving
before they turn to
 
each other. I lick
my hand and reached
into the popcorn,
 
I confess. The diva
screams
in a lightning strike
 
in this country
where you lean forward
to buzz quietly
 
in my ear
to better taste
the salt. You could walk
 
toward me with a head
thick with sea hair
and part of me will want
 
this high tide and joy,
but I am not done
mourning yet.
 
Or ever.
My fingers pressed
to the living floor,
 
translated. What good
is this bridge
when it is unmoving
 
and I never call you
back, when the neighbor
does not listen,
 
the fly hatches
in the last suitcase,
on this other side,
 
when I wake up this morning
and every morning
and there is bread.

​start with decisions — take a break from mirrors…
decide to stay in bed today and tomorrow… count
time only through midnights… isn’t there some voodoo
about being the middle child/ of a middle child?… you
should Google that… start humming… to broken
bones of electrical appliances… that
old CD player? yep you can fix it… take on do-it-
yourself projects — face cream, shelves, the perfect
guacamole, and a Home Alone arsenal just in case
a Joe Pesci-like villain tries to arrive… pretend
the varnish brush is a stag horn… who needs an app
for calm??… be greedy about breathing… be
greedy about breathing… avoid phone conversations
and relate only through yes and no texts or emails… 
hey baby, can I be your Melanin Maid Marion? yes
… does _____ have a job? oh no girl… is your brother/
father/husband accounted for?… (silence)… yes…
if voice is required, realize that he/she/they can’t be
your Sun… trust what you can hold in the hand…
when we talk the body vibrates… aim for a dinosaur
roar when people least expect it… enjoy words like
Kilimanjaro and origami… write odes to the Do-rag,
… sonnets to the Soul Train line where you dance
in military-choreographed precision… so fresh
and so clean Outkast, take a look it’s in a book Reading
Rainbow…  Jolly Ranchers, your mother’s kitchen
table… at any altitude remember that ink can hold
the right kind of memory…

at work they talk of taxonomies
                         how words creates bubbles
            of conversation   matter
until everyone is on the same name page
                   homogeneous white wonder
     bread on top of unlined paper
            about who and what matters
when it comes to funding    female bodies curled
        like a fig      manmade grassy knolls with
little grass    but I sometimes think no   the room
     is too small    there isn’t enough light for
this conversation  it’s always starless here   I say where
           are the gone things   not pretty enough for bows

What falls immediately falls without ceremony.
 
Orange, a navigable lake spilling over
all of its shores. Meantime: gray and white levitate.
 
There was a door that opened to my heart
 
and when it opened, a small ocean stayed put.
Your mouth, too, refused movement,
 
but your eyes make words. Rehearse, deliberately,
 
the story of your past. There’s a curtain and a cur.
Place a finger to the lips of the dead, then listen.
 
Keyholes sing cloud-songs. Your life is one of them.

​Blackberries hang low
in the brambles. The aphids are full up,
death is still hungry.
 
In high spring I glimpse a Japanese maple
burning in its stillness.
An aging parent trips on a gopher mound
 
while in Mesa, an orange tree
drops rotting fruit
onto my grandmother’s grave.
 
When string-theory-dimensions weave
together like the back
of an unfinished tapestry, absence will be a place,
 
but only if the universe doesn’t collapse Switzerland.
The first time they powered up the Hadron
I wanted to tell him that I still loved him.
 
I didn’t, so we all lived.
Came back to the garden
and watched our faces age in water ripples.
 
I don’t remember my second death,
only that moss obscured my name.
Nearby there were lilacs.

​ransacking waste places our couch cushion gaps

for change for milk my mother says was the only way

we as children ever got it that is to say I know the gulf

between the rich and poor and we​ are set have plenty we

have nothing to fear your father he is just a worrier refusing

too much milk on Christmas morning fearing his throat

might fuse shut agglutinate singing tenor in the choir

nor too much sweet-bread as this too could keep him from

caroling the sweeter bread of life one appetite changed out

for another one some hunger is good my sister says

on our walk along the road shoulder if there is lack it means

there’s something to be had still still yet more blessed are they

who hunger and thirst for theirs will be for them there is

a future a hunger is a hunger for what’s next the middle hymn

this one sung by the congregation too but not a song

about his birth instead it praises his apotheosis the earth laid

waste to the church triumphant all in glory all resplendency

even the morning singing god if god a morning god

in Carhartt and steel-toes the cafe’s earliest risers huddle near

and listen weekdays to the local pastor outside dark as pines

are and lower down the valley timber mills purge particulates

put out steam in pink and roiling columns throats in ululation

everywhere that frost is found found gold if in earnest

​it is sought

​Take pictures of her in the dark
when the moon
 
is almost full, on the verge
of an eclipse.
 
Ask her if she sees the rabbit.
Show her
 
there are two ways
 
of looking at almost everything. She will
find her way home
 
by eating pumpkin porridge. She will
realize her roots
 
by remembering she came to America
on tiny boat shoes.
 
Her mother is beautiful, you know,
because she was born
 
from the same heartbeat,
an intelligence reserved
 
for the soft-spoken.
Bring tangerines & light
           
citrus spritz on fire
to get a better look at her eyes.
 
She will smell like forgetfulness and dank
oil, the neck is a cradle.
 
She will love you if you stay,
if you promise
 
you have never left.

We would go for baked eggs and get scrubbed. I would know for real if ajummas (아줌마) clean American tourists while wearing black lace. 
 
My birthmother would smile at my milk-moons like a full gulp from the spring​​​​​ — 
but if she had kept me, it would be more likely
 
she would bring customers red beans with ice, patbingsu (팥빙수). 
She would not be called the “wife of a professor” or the respectful word
 
for a “married aged woman,” but instead another kind of ajumma,
who “shoves her way through a crowd to find a seat in the subway.”
 
She would be the street vendor of my dreams, my mihonmo (미혼모),
and I would be the mi-chin-nom (미친놈) who knows no curse words for what she is.

I wonder what it would take to use my body
to keep you warm like those two mallards
left in a cardboard box on my doorstep.
 
I told you of this, years ago, seeing them
for the first time in their makeshift cave,
freezing, a dark cloister of emerald.
 
Their bodies one in abandonment.
 
When I heard of your suicide
I drank nothing but Red Rose black tea for two weeks.
My skin has fit funny ever since.
 
Last spring I took the mallards to Riverfront Park
& opened the door to their borrowed dog kennel.
The two birds split like a magnet broken in two:
 
One for the river & the other into the grill
of a MAC semi.
                        I’m sorry.
I didn’t know how to warn you.
 
When the traffic cleared I collected the bird
& buried it in the silt
& watched its mate search for days.
 
We’ll both wait. We’re patient, you know.

​​it starts with a tussle / in the grass / in talks of being hard / or soft / like that you & i / are tied together / for a lifetime / i knew you could keep a secret / i think i might beat it / to the grave / still i dream / of hands i don’t know / in my underwear /

i don’t know how to tackle / so i wrap two arms and squeeze / around coach’s legs / we aren’t here to hug other boys / but he makes me do it / over & over / in front of the team / i come to like the taste / of dirt in my mouth-piece / i look to parents in a parked car / wonder if we want to be / here /
​
here you wrap it / with a white bow / i bury it deeper / under the backyard / we aren’t wired the same / our blood vessels thread differently / have you ever looked at the back of your hand? / sometimes i watch the blue / roll off the bones a bit / when you fall asleep / i press my hand to yours / we don’t look the same / even without the light

how in her looking
back to hold 
memory close Lot’s wife

did not worry, rooted
to the ground by
frozen pillared legs
  
strange desert mermaid
 
of coming winds to
sweep salted flesh 
away to nothing.
 
disappeared 
 
long before being
turned to salt she
 
had never
even owned
 
a name.

Two dead sparrows assail the pavement ―
so much disappearing goes on unregistered,
my eyes a tedious and vivacious failure. The girls
in the cafes stroke their leashed peacocks 
but I press on with syndicated diligence. 
At the crossing, I pull a screw through my earlobe 
and collect two drops of blood in the ditch
with all the grenade pins. Grenade, its shape
so much like the fruit they named it after,
pomegranate, from Latin pomum granatum,
(apple with many seeds), something
I can harvest and pick from a tree ―
a comfortable taste in my mouth, and yes,
fruit of the dead, or of fertility, depending
on whose sustenance to listen to. Etymology, 
from the Greek logia (study of) and eutmus (true)
I cannot extract but touch like the feet
of my mother’s shrub in Kabul. I open my mouth
and marshal the fruit. Please hold me still, I beg
to the dirt, please touch
my thigh until I’m okay. I’m privileged
enough to think a border as another line to write
on until my shadow briefly spills ink
against cement. It’s 6:23, the pelt of morning
hanging thick above my curves.

​​​another white supremacist / says: america deserves a better color scheme & I am tired / of nights
& the news / the day wears me / long like a dress / mother gifts me daily / a knife that doubles /
as a birthday / candle / she feeds my belly / into a balcony / prepares me / to be peopled / my
mother says / pregnancy is carrying your own / conqueror / but I am afraid / of birth & meatless
cooking / my mother & her post / election texts: baobei, have you hear? / minority everywhere
more attached / *sorry, I mean attacked / I tell my mother / I am safe / that I will live / until my
death / I will name / each bend / in my body / rivering / out of this continent / tonight on tv / I re-
watch lucy liu / in charlie’s angels / the first woman I loved / for looking more like me / than I do
/ I press pause / I kiss the screen / til it blisters / I text my mother / tonight I am alive / & she
texts back: what doesn’t kill you / can only try / again

I have friends that know things, and that’s why
they’re my friends ― the types to twerk in church,
street-smart clairvoyants who make fools aware
of their foolishness ― and so I turn to them in
the darkest hours because they are dark and have
somehow survived long enough to tell me where
it hurts. And where isn’t as important a question to ask
as when, and when isn’t a question that needs asking
because, with the eyes behind my eyes, I can tease out
the swell beneath any kind of bruise, can always find the
color red running toward trauma.
                                                            A long time ago,
a willow of a woman told me why the caged bird sings,
but nobody ever told me why people insist on putting
themselves in cages, which is distinct from putting
other people in cages, which truly goes without saying
and has gone so for so long and hence here we are:
body wine washing over the stones of our knuckles,
sweeping the glass up off the floor. I, too, have a theory
about broken windows I wish to submit to the Academy,
but I heard it was burned to the ground last night; all the
things I don’t know could fill a book, but all the things
I do know could get me killed, though I worry most about
the people who taught them to me, their pictures thumb-
tacked to the wall of a smoke-filled room, faces freckled by
holes made by dart after dart after dart after dart after dart.

Rows of translucent
ova line his lab
bench: Heliconius,
 
the butterflies
my brother has flown
halfway down the globe
 
to coddle. He
worries the hatch,
microscope trained
 
on one
exterior.
Lens to nest.
 
No way to guess
if a specimen’s sick
or cross-bred sterile
 
yet. As long as
something comes out,
it’ll come to use.
 
In the images he sends,
I fixate on his fingertips.
They’re slim like mine
 
and steady as he drops
liquid beads
from his pipette
 
to the eggs’ rest.
While my hands tremble
at the finest tasks,
 
his hold. He has always
felt a pull toward
fatherhood. I’m too cold
 
to be called maternal.
While this set gestates,
its forebears
 
(the few still flying)
need him to trellis
passion vines
 
under mist nets,
to seed their water
with pollen and sweet.
 
For him, they swaddle
themselves in silk
and emerge, winged
 
for slaughter. For him,
the scalpeled
abdomens. The tweezed
 
ovaries.
The spread
-sheet he’s left with
 
to conjure
their species’
odds of survival.

When I last saw her, months ago, she told me
she’d bought an oxygen tent on Craigslist
from an ex-Olympian. Each night,
she zips herself in and sleeps
at the altitude of a Chilean mountaintop. 

​Without the ocean, she said
she would have been bereft.
This was funny
because she’d lived all her childhood
before she’d seen it.
Is it possible to miss
something essential but ―
as yet ―
unknown to you?
The relentlessness of that changing grey-blue,
once felt,
she said, she could not part from.

I played dead for awhile.
Happily, my theater was small, &
no one came looking. In my play
I ground every last swing set.
 
I ate the sand and sand became.

A danger approaches.
The dye clog in the dye
dispenser spout dyes over-big.
 
A mother raccoon full
with still opposable thumbs
dead — a roadside round on Mother’s Day.
 
Maybe I am full alone now.
House to no serial hands.
The critter takes its largest sleep in full sun.
 
I did buy a jade plant.
It is conspicuously alive. 

some days you miss                           
the dusty, littered streets         
of your home, houses
 
hung from the yellowed
sky, loud boom
of the athan five times
 
a day. despite being
a temporary visitor, with
fingers clutching suitcases,
 
toes steeped in American
soil, someone always reminds
you of that makeshift hospital
 
on Queen Rania Street
where you were born. some
days you want to drown
 
in your grandmother’s black
abaya. love resides in arms
so you learned how to
 
walk that shattered concrete,
smoke smooth mint hookah,
dip pita bread into
 
zaat then zaatar, lay on rooftop
patios, haggle in crowded
bazaars, speak Arabic, hear
 
your name, noor ― as in light ―
spoken with a rolled r, spoken
like it should be.

remember                    hands on the
wheel               keep breathing even if
it’s just the quick and shallow  
think about sound    the music
no   the music is too much       think about
the engine’s uneven mumble
the clicking turn signal            metro-
nome without a song
 
you could pull over
to wait out the beehive bleeding
inside your skin except that
the panic in part is because
you’re running late and  
you hate being so late   unable
to be counted on again
 
*
 
if you crash it’s all over
whether it’s on purpose
or caused by the panic
 
you will get to point b
or you won’t and there
are many things you can’t
accept but this you accept
because you must
 
*
 
what else is there to do but wait
for the ground to open and
swallow you like a sarlacc?
 
there will be no lonely there inside the sharp-toothed pit of a beast
among the digesting bones of others also fallen    and in all this  
the blaring white    all your dark   even a thousand years
is temporary   a plummeting plane maybe able
to make the emergency landing   maybe not  
but either way the sky-torpedo filled
with people can’t keep
falling forever

I have been trying to know about the body.
You swim one lap around the perimeter
of a pool. Your skin becomes
altered, turns green
like sickness, like the tropics
so magical. We stretch over each other
and scream, this is not what we had 
in mind. In the dream, a man places a feather
behind my ear, whispers to me,
get out.
I am stationed at death’s door
like a welcome mat. I understand I am playing
catch-up. Your body crosses, and I straighten
it out. Your body pauses,
and I unleash the dogs. I write snow
on a window pane as the man assists
children near water. Whoever is the most
pure wins the prize, however heavy
on his body.

Hypothesis
of a new galaxy:
mobility
 
as magnetism,
a flux field
of particles
 
deflected, or
an adornment
to live inside:
 
cosmic dust
& clouds of gas
that fill;
 
a real-brown
wig, yellow-sun
strapped heels
 
(her only pair) ―
a singularity,
a universe
 
in my entirety.
Here, I am
half-self, or
 
doubled: both
her & myself
& myself
 
without her.
I am made beneath
the oppressive
 
fluorescent light
of hospital
cafeterias ― I am
 
made of
fluorescence:
glowing but not
 
in the way,
at the start, I
imagined in her
 
bedroom.
Obliteration of noise.
A gravitational
 
lensing. Distribution
of plates & cells.
Something so
 
balled-up & blood
-close it expands
into light.
 
It expands faster
than anyone
can hold.

The single sentence of the day — an alphabet of bone, keepsakes and meanwhiles — ends as it ought: period.
 
The method, adhered to rigorously, is simple: repetition following a rule.
 
The rule changes, though with subtlety.
 
It’s not as if an oath were broken and a city sacked, or that one could see now without assistance the Cat’s Eye Nebula in the constellation Draco.
 
The shop is closed for inventory.
 
The blinds are drawn to keep secret the languorous counting.
 
Midsummer.
 
Still light out.
 
Without apprehension we call it a night.

The Dutch painter
Kiel’s The Lacemaker
may belong to a series
of the five senses and represent sight.
The goose down floats across the assassination
of John the Baptist
and the girl in the lusterless gown
and blue apron. Double strands of cotton
feed into the shuttle of needles
in her hand. Perhaps
taken with the balls of thread,
her cat observes from behind a chair.
Though the lace doesn’t grow,
the down ascends
past the coral beads at her neck
and into the parted clouds
of a Tiepolo ―
who wrote in 1731
of his sketches as auditions for commissions
that they are the finished paintings
and the altarpieces
are copies ― portraying the annunciation.
Winged angels
frame the portal of brilliant sky.
The goose needed to be captured too,
only once,
and then became like the cat that doesn’t move
on this canvas, it became the feather
that does not
touch the ground.

In every blown out river I see Oregon, in every Oregon

another farm up to its neck in cloud water. It’s that time

of year when the girl on the picnic blanket has been waiting

her whole life. When the dog’s one good eye turns black

hole. When I kick the telephone line with my steel toe

I understand how old men’s backs are made of gunmetal

and thunder. Their hair late harvest, their money

no good anymore. So they live in the rocking chairs

their grandfathers built, who are now nothing but fertilizer

for another unvisited cemetery. I’m thinking this time

I’ll pack up forever. Maybe what I’m trying to say is God

left me, not the other way around. My parents nightly kneel

with my name on their lips, dove hands in the hope

that I won’t become my brother. Though who doesn’t

eventually turn into the other version of themselves.

Today represents the birthday of all your greatest

failures. I’ve made you a cake with my initials on it.

Don’t feel bad, old friend. When I nudge you to swim
​
what I mean is there is a galaxy between plank and shore.

​That violence lies in writing is not so far

from the truth. This is the animal I knew before

I started, whose neck I wished to rub my own against.

She brings the word mercy into the field. Her mouth

staggers over the counting, the one and one 

and one of bodies soaked in oil. I keep practicing

the problem, To get back at, to get back at,

the letters written a field of black paper, disorder.

In the blue of gathered facts it feels the same:

splattered mouth, bloody bulb of the sign.

I make lists. I peel olives beneath my skin

and push them out of me. I wake up

in the morning and realize that a sex dream

can also be a sexual assault dream. Mercy ― healing ―

these are words I’ve never used in a poem before.

Can I write into her, she whose own wool

touches mine? A blunter way to say: am I a body

who depends on other bodies? A loved posture

can also be a speech act. It can make the same mistakes,

drop into other, spotted islands. I make lists.

This is how it begins. What will seep will seep.

​But I didn’t die that time.
I promised to call & write
You more often & I did.
In the end, when I saw
The Saint at the Gate,
I didn’t hate myself.
I’d kept my promise.
The Gate was small &
Wooden, faintly familiar.
You remember. It was
A duplicate, I believe.
There was no one else
Under the archway
Of leaves. I cried
When I saw her. Stranger
With a plaintiff’s face
Who couldn’t erase
The letters I wrote,
The phones that rang,
The years I spent waiting
For you to answer.
It began with the Saint 
Seeing me see this.

​Their was. Words
People once used
To describe us:
Their family,
Their drama,
Their yellow house
Was. He tried us. His best 
Was better than ours.
Our best was trying,
Convicted of lowliness.
The loneliness of being
Criminalized on a daily basis.
No docket for that life.
Just his letters in my pocket.
Justice. His rage delimited.
Now, in our time of need,
His patience could feed China.
Miraculous loaves, fishes
Without limit, I eat them
& then I make more.

​It wasn’t all booze and inching toward death.
Love lived there, too.
It came sharp and vanished quick.[1] 
One summer, he re-roofed the house
by himself. After hammering down
the felt underlayment, but
before starting the shingles,
he called for me to come admire his handiwork.
There, scrawled in bright white chalk
across the entire width of the roof:
“I ♡ YOU, JEANANN!”[2] and above it, him,
balancing on the high pitch, a beer in his fist,
broad grin spreading[3] across his sweat-streaked face.
Each piercing white letter now buried
beneath layers of slate for decades to come,[4] 
reminding whomever next pries loose those shingles
exactly to whom I belong.

Outside a woman reverses
a green tractor up into the hillside
 
where a small crowd of people
gather to watch the Italian bees ― more
 
docile than other bees ― fly
into their new hive & I am on
 
my belly in the attic with you
in Argentina translating
 
poems from Spanish. The death
that came to get her
 
was like an enormous gray pillow,
I suggest. No, you say
 
it was more like a soaked mattress,
the kind with springs.
 
It’s the wrong conversation.
There was a woman
 
so afraid of the dark, she slept inside
her cello case. The night was
 
less frightening because she could
touch all of it.
 
Metaphor is not the point
of violence. Violence is.

Of all lies, the worst is The truth will set you free.
I don’t think truth unshackled my father.
Truth paid his moving expenses, set him up
in his grandmother’s house with his new wife ― 
his former secretary ― and two children he didn’t know
how to talk to. Truth banished him
from branch location and operations,
from belonging to the fraternity of money,
and in his exile, he wandered by motorcycle
from flea market to gun show.
In twenty-five years since, I don’t think truth
has, like a magician, swept doves from under
its handkerchiefs, or doubled my father’s joints
to free him from the straitjacket and cuffs.
He collects badges. Detectives, marshals,
the old silver stars. He still believes in law
and order, even as the television he keeps muted
shows him images of protestors, of the officers
who discharged weapons into unarmed teens.
Has it brought him any comfort to know
where the money came from, whose pockets
it now lines? Has it brought him any comfort
to speak that truth to regulators? Sometimes
in my dreams, I see the Keating Five seated
in a circle, cigars and good Scotch, in a dim room.
They laugh about dark money, having taken
so much out in the open, and John Glenn says,
I could still go back into space, and John McCain says,
Who knows? Maybe I’ll just run for President,
and then they both do, but before ―
my father shuffles in, his expression neutral,
a white cloth draped over his arm,
puts their empties on his tray, and asks
if there’s anything else he can do for them.Cigarettes and Jack, tobacco and hop,
every engine runs on an addiction.
I have not acquired my grandfather’s
taste for bitter; don’t smoke because
of how my grandmother stared
at my lungs, red as her oxygen.
There is a greed in survival. When I pass,
I don’t want to know what kills me
as it kills me. My grandmother was found
draped in sheets like the statue she had
become, a piece of marble in the living room,
a cheek of frigid veins. My grandfather
was a phone call before my birth.
I never saw his hair grey or his face
crinkle into a brown bag. I see myself in their
photographs, rewound to my age; we were
not so different. More likely than not,
I have started my own undoing, refusing
drinks, the bonding over a lighter and
a pack of Camels slowly dying in the moonlight.
All over a fear, the same she had those years after
she quit, her hand in mine at grace, voice giving
thanks for the nourishment of her body
burning inside long after the fire.

​I follow your lead: rise when you rise, open
            the hymnal, watch when the priest
 
smudges your forehead with ashes.
            It’s a day you love, your heart setting out
 
into thickets of restraint. When we turn
            to our neighbors and hold their hands ―
 
dry, cool, or frail — I’m shocked by the casual
            intimacy. It’s like coming out of the earth,
 
this thawing earth, where I spent all winter
            weeping, weeping, weeping.
 
Our Uber takes us back to town while I look out
            the window in my distracted way.
 
Before opening the door, I kiss your warm cheek.
            You ask where we’ll have gimlets later.

Scientists predict plastic, nuclear fallout, and chicken bones
will be humanity’s legacy on Earth. Why a girl
 
might live on the moon.
 
A prince and princess fell in love on the moon.
Ice skating near grand boulevards where water poured
from scalloped bowls.
 
A sword. A mirror. A jewel. Things on her bureau. Things
which might lead to an end.
 
Now,
on Earth you wash your child
with rationed bottled water.
Take a swig. Then your partner.
 
The moon in the sky like smoke.
What’s left must be split between you.

only the couplets, and only the shorter ones.
i like to get out of them quickly. i don’t like
the way warm water feels inside my stomach.
you are playing with old versions of yourself
in my mind. the game is marco polo. you don’t
know i am still learning to swim.
i’m five again, and my cousins call me mannish.
my torso is flat and i am not yet shaped like a woman.
sometimes, the neighboring counties flood, so i
am planning tomorrow’s route and wasting time.
earlier tonight, something entered my spirit.
i would call it loneliness, but it’s more stiletto.
i watched a movie about a stripper killing her tricks.
i used to believe only certain women could be stupid.
fall in love with pimps and get diseases.
now i am thankful for wanting nothing but my labia
to stop twitching for hours after i use my hands.
the nurse says the first hepatitis enters through the mouth:
through ill-prepared food, contaminated water.
i am one of the vulnerable populations.
she swabs my arm and tells me to relax.
it’s the first disease i’ve googled in a long time
without fearing i have it, because i already do.
in a way: i take you in small doses, trying to build
immunity. all day long, i’m watching the walls,
trying to see them the way you might see.
i step outside my body like i’m lap-dancing.
i watch you watch me do sit-ups, braid my hair,
brush flakes from my shirt. practice what i’ll say
the next time the doctor asks when the symptoms
began. sometimes, very briefly, i want to be pregnant.
sometimes, i want you there, amazed and embarrassed.
since it lasts for less than five seconds, it doesn’t count.
i use headphones, so your voice doesn’t enter my house.
what i mean to say is that neither of us is holy,
maybe we just don’t belong together that way,
which is what my mother once told me about women
and your parents. she’s older now, and still lonely.
if i asked her again, she might say something different.

Not to be outdone, but there is a tumor
fanned out like a goldfish
 
glowing in my gut. It swims perfect
figure eights and half moons,
 
spreading how the heat of day warms
the bones. It caresses
 
my belly like a monsoon. Let me explain:
all the pennies
 
in the fountain are dim in comparison
when held next to the glow
 
of my backlit scan, a battery-hot bigness
growing. I am filled
 
with radiation and love for the doctors
who feed me
 
to the machine. My veins jammed with
blue traffic, a pulse
 
tugging at the wrists. My tumor is too big.
If it could speak, it would say:
 
That’s what your mother said. I have
never set fire to a house,
 
but I have felt the frame that holds go up
in flames. Not even
 
the moon can eclipse this spangled halo.
This is no ordinary light
 
teething into the skin of the sky. No false
alarm or fool’s gold.

After the storm I mimic my pre-storm self.
I try not to break my ankle and I try not
 
to get murdered, with only a sliver
of moon as my guide. I coax my body
 
away from the edge of fever. I tell it to sleep.
I tell myself to think and form words
 
and to plan for tomorrow. I am subsisting
on the promise of future cheese
 
which is, I suppose, a way of returning
to self. The academic calendar brings
 
all the old feelings. The need for chainsaw
sharing brings the neighbors together
 
and for the coming week people wave
at me when I jog past them
 
and ask me about the status of my home
when they draw my blood or ring up
 
my groceries. A man nearly backs into
the security guard at a parking garage.
 
She is not looking but I yell out to her
and she jumps away. We each move
 
in tandem to squeeze the other’s shoulder,
so happy are we that she has not been crushed,
 
so united are we in this new understanding
of our position as inhabitants of a coming
 
underworld. We need to stick together
or something. We need to crawl out.
 
A woman on the internet imagines a future
where our features can be removed
 
and redrawn to our liking. She imagines
the in-between stage as a completely
 
featureless face. I am horrified by the image
but mostly I am impressed that she
 
is still able to imagine a future. I contemplate
less impactful ways to disappear into a forest.
 
I am giving myself a little wooden anniversary.
I dig deeper into the part of me made sad
 
by certain music and listen exclusively to those songs.
It is an autumnal way to live. A turning, a tuning.

​​​​We learned this lesson from the whales: the larger the gap between bodies, the more satisfying it is when we come close. Or: Having spent years like an insect inside a walnut shell the only way I knew how, it is possible that one day I might push outward, clear the atmosphere around me. A shell can be a slow grave from which one is trying to wake. The house is leaning to the right; catch it, if you will. The wings of a moth are thin as paper, and out there in the dark the whales are all ever pushing outward, in search of something that will hold their attention, keep their heft.

To unbuild in order to build; I kept myself empty for something to fill. But in the meantime, a missing doorknob, the splintered chair, weather seeping in through unseen cracks. We remind ourselves how moths navigate: when light is obscured, their bodies are drawn through constellatory fields of magnetic orbit. I move slowly through the house, dragging dust and light. In the morning when I wake the whales are spread along the beach. In the morning the whales are swimming inshore and southward, slow and disorganized. The reports say, two dozen stranded themselves. Outside the bathroom window, a layer of the exterior had peeled and was flapping violently in the wind, a sound I mistook for a bird seeking flight. 

​​The little men in sateen short shorts
 
running across screens in unison
 
represent pockets of the nation
 
I am flying over and falling
 
against my better judgment
 
in love with, I, a devout homo-
 
sexual stirred easily and deeply
 
by pinking desert mountains,
 
the choreographed generosity
 
happening up and down the aisle,
 
what you could call the river
 
of our pleasant airborne village,
 
the banks all steeped with sleepers
 
in their safety-tested thrones ―
 
safety — what exactly is that,
 
the eye burned backward
 
in my head finding at last its
 
merciful rest, the Wildcat
 
investing in his foe a shred of trust ―
 
trust — a word I shouldn’t use
 
in measures of shred, as though
 
it were the lime I am stabbing
 
to death in my tumbler, no small
 
or citrus thing is this, something
 
I consider when my brother asks me
 
via Messenger — Would you like this
 
— of a blue satin dress too small
 
in the bust for them, my gentle brother
 
several red states away, their gender
 
newly blooming, a truth I am blessed
 
in privy witness to — Would you like
 
this — and the Wildcat leaps balletically
 
in replicate toward the glory cheered
 
upon in living rooms beneath me and
 
in the hearts of Arizonans however
 
far from home, however far from
 
home I am, my brother is my brother,
 
unless of course they find a truer word
 
for kinship, what a transcontinental flight
 
language is, what a game of costumed teams,
 
noun after noun falling from my mouth,
 
like eggs into foam coffins, like strangers
 
falling deeply into safe and unafraid
 
and utterly undifferentiated sleep.

You live in Fool’s Valley. You are the valley and no one is fooled. You are the valley and
I am your fool. You are the valley. I am a fool. You are the valley and I am the valley and
together we curve: apostrophe S. The fool is long gone and it wasn’t his valley. It isn’t
ours, either. We’re just white folks who live here.
 
I drove to Fool’s Valley to see you, but you were already gone. I thought I knew where
I’d find you and I was right. The other library, on the east side of town, hanging out with
that librarian, Megan.
 
I said what are you doing with that librarian, Megan.
 
Nothing, you said. I read lots of books.

​​Potato-thick Slovak names drop off your tongue:
Dankocic. Paholic. You tap your cigarette
 
to a cadence of nine, girls from days of jacks
and school books now an old woman’s memory game
 
against herself. Sabucha with the long braids,
Irene the year’s favored name, its meaning peace.
 
You chant on: Talepka whose father spat black dust
and struck her red behind her knees.
 
And the steel-choked city descends through smoke
as your eyes fix on a far-off street, The Hollow
 
where Tanczak and Vodjak swing a clothesline
you jump under. Zahorsky claps rosy hands
 
that reach for you at Sunday mass. Peace be with you
nine times over, murmured through incense.
 
Markovic, the twin you never matched, grabs your hand
and pulls you homeward, through the alley’s stink
 
of fish and cabbage, to the mother who loved her better.
We notice that your night is falling,
 
and though you forgot Gabovic, we won’t tell you.
A touch brings you back to present peace.
 
Next month, another will go missing ―
soon, only the sidewalk slap of the empty rope, turning.

​​It’s OK to sing without knowing the words.
 
An outsider becomes an insider
and then disappears with the megafauna.
 
It won’t be long until I become the last of my kind
and shrivel into the bushes.
 
Tread lightly, do not let sentiment go to waste.
 
A new fossil is discovered to be
a distant relative of a horse.
 
A rare, medicinal plant produces an unusual smell, winds
carry the scent from one continent to another.
 
What will it take to convince you that I am a woman of science?
 
Tread lightly.
 
How easy it is to become the worst of both worlds.
 
This is for those whose songs we will not know.

​As I stood above it for the last time,
                        the James carried a shroud
            spun from a boat, a donation
of water to water. When the boat rounded the bend,
                                    its wake widened to fill the entire river ―
           
            the sight of such expansion beyond origin
                                    took up every emotion in me, a bolt
 of gauze gathered to my chest, a lozenge of foam
                                                & motion expressed
 
in this curtain I bring down from the window
                        & fold away into its box.
 
Moving for the fourth time in four years,
this gesture now mindless
as the trail dragged upon water, & the water’s measure
                                                against the dock,
           
or driving down Monument Avenue
the trees passing in quick succession ―
           
mindless as any movement made automatic
                        which allows me, briefly,
                        to be free of myself.
 
This blessing floods:    
as I drive to my last physical therapy appointment,
                                                            I am filled
with no identity at all.
 
At the clinic, the PT tells me                           
You need to be more conscious
                        about how you move your muscles.
 
I balance on my bad leg
five times for sixty seconds. We run through all the exercises.
 
A current is the act of something being changed by itself.
In this city, I have met many people I love.
This shouldn’t be rare. It is.
For this particular feeling, there are no words
& that kind of silence is an easiness
 
I’ll miss, an instinctive glance advancing                     
between two friends who know each other well,
                                   
the gift of the unsaid   
& the wake it trails,
            spreading outward & outward like a pain,
 
            like the mind
            & the muscles it trains to follow. 

​I’ve moved into a neighborhood stocked for the infinite trials of the body:
            the dialysis center, the physical therapy clinic,
the university hospital strung with garlands of revolving sirens.
           
6 am & the drugstore’s sign across the street
spills down its command in red text: Come in get your flu shot FREE
           
                        & it’s one of those mornings I’m tempted
if only for a hand lifting my arm, rolling back my sleeve.
The touch of another human recognizing my body
                        despite the brisk pain it would entail.
 
At my annual, my new doctor collected the history
                                                of my family ailments,
which I validated with my name in ink
as if signing a contract.
 
With her hands testing & feeling the lump,
she read my body back to me ―
                        I’ve grown old enough now I begin
                                                to turn dangerous.
 
It is easy to be angry with no one
for this. Once, out on an early walk where I used to live,
 
I paused to watch the baker carry a dark shape from his truck
& lift it, dead weight, to his chest:
 
for a second, the bag of flour could have been anything
in that morning light not yet congealed.
                        It could have been a person, it could have been me
 
& in truth I would like to be carried. Or perhaps maybe just to be guided,
from one place to the next.
 
Is it living in a new place which eclipses all my intuition?
Or is it just living, & how it goes on? I’m tired
 
of knowing all the ways we can be hurt ―
                                                too unique & too anonymous.
                                                                       
I’ve woken at that hour not quite night & not quite day,
                        the call of unnamed birds stirring up…
 
it’s that moment when sight reconciles:
the sleeping child over the baker’s shoulder
           
rearranged into a sack of flour
as he tossed it to the ground,   
 
making rise from the torn burlap
                        a spray of grain
illuminated into dusty columns by the dappled shade ―
 
                                    I wish all breaking were this beautiful,
                                                the darkness changing to light.

​​I live close enough to a church
whose bells are similar at six
and noon. They sound like the tiniest splinter.
Once, we were a wreck at the lack
of mojito at an ambitious hotel in Charleston
where our days congealed.
I have lost my appetite
since her, since brunches
since the loss of her
since the loss of brunches.
The sea ruined my hair.
She combed through glops of expensive conditioner
for hours under lights housing suffocated flies.
I still know what she is up to
when I prank call her receiver.
I close my eyes and picture her terrified,
her eyebrows rising and falling with NASDAQ.
I have lost her
my appetite, my mojito,
my splinter.
In the church bells I hear
then envision the wedding,
the Times announcement,
a blank body leading me down the aisle
to no one, the empty pews, where only
I am here.
I whisper into the receiver
it is me here, it is only me, 
don’t be willing to let go of your heroes.

​​two hundred sixty million domestic and two
hundred ten overseas made Jaws
 
number seven on the list of all-time
highest-grossing films, adjusted for inflation
 
number two in horror; number one
in the horror sub-genre TERROR IN THE WATER
 
strangers seated next to each other
clasped hands in the dark
 
you can see why
 
the scene in which they won’t shutter
the beach, out of concern for lost revenue
 
the scene in which the paramilitary
hunter ups his fee
 
the incessant math, the motel
owner bristling at the shortened season
 
in the movie they say the lifespan of a Great White
is unknown, but that’s misleading
 
they live to be seventy
 
it’s money that everyone wonders when
will it die


The solution to your internal bleeding
is to fill yourself with gauze like a teddy bear
but this is a terrifying possibility
You need to take pills before it seems reasonable
 
The person in the room next to me is reading aloud
and she coos like a pigeon or hoots like an owl
I can’t tell which bird she resembles through these walls
but she is lilting and rhythmic, more beautiful than I could ever be
 
Lately I am all mops and brooms
all appliances, all cumbersome
I searched my insides but found only glass animals
and you think that’d be enough to explain the bleeding
but they were whole
 
I search my insides and find only mysteries
Pale blue visitors, bright red belts
None of this would matter if I had a better body,
which is not the same as saying if I was a better person
 
They are easy to confuse, bodies and persons
They are less easy to separate
I can’t visit you without my body
but sometimes I wish I could

​​At some point I wonder
if you sleep so well because of all
the wine I drink.
 
A security guard somewhere told me I could
oil and press your head
into shape.
 
I know that hope-cum-fidget,
worrying my square front teeth
back into their arched template.
 
I will be vigilant about the changing of the shoe size
so you can grow those toes aligned!
 
Olympians repeat and determine
a compacted loop.
Muscles and their limits
from now on will keep you tethered
to restroom.
 
You leaf through your books, pre-reader that you are,
like a sentient storm.
 
What virtues are my fault
and which aren’t?

—When I was a baby, the doctor said aspirin could kill me. There are not enough enzymes in my body to absorb it.
 
—When I was a baby, the doctor said aspirin could kill me. I tell this to my first boyfriend. He says, “We better get you some Gatorade.” I tell him, “Gatorade provides electrolytes, not enzymes.” I am smarter than everyone I’ve fucked. (I’m not a cocky bitch. It’s true.)
 
—When I was a baby, the doctor said aspirin could kill me. I am not supposed to have red wine or fava beans (or really any kind of legumes) or blueberries or tonic water. They kill off my red blood cells faster than my body can replace them. As a kid, I hated the texture of beans. I asked for fish taco platters with all rice. My boyfriend buys white wine, so that is what I drink. When I was four, my grandfather threw away the cases of tonic water stacked in the garage. If I smelled liquor on him, I refused to go near him. So he quit drinking. I never actively avoided the things that could kill me. Call it god (with a small “g,” so as not to offend) or angels or coincidence.
 
—When I was a baby, the doctor said aspirin could kill me. My therapist asks if I have plans to buy aspirin. As if I need to spend money. If I wanted to die, I could say, “I have a headache.” Someone in the room will offer me aspirin. People like to be helpful. I tell my therapist that anxiety is fucking up my stomach again. I go to the doctor. He asks if there is any chance I can be pregnant. I say no. I am in a long distance relationship and I am not the cheating kind. He asks if I am on medication. I say no. The doctor asks, “Not even birth control?” I say no. When my boyfriend is in town, we use condoms (but that’s none of this doctor’s business). Not even a doctor realizes that a woman can have a stomachache unrelated to period or pregnancy. He does not ask about the anxiety or the depression. (No surprise. No one does.)
 
—When I was a baby, the doctor said aspirin could kill me. I know I want to leave my girlfriend. I can’t stop thinking about cheating on her. She says “monogamous” over and over. She wants me to herself. She says she will share me if she has to. This will never work. She has a zero tolerance policy for cheating. I do not ask for an open relationship because she will leave me. I don’t want to be with her, but I don’t want to be left. I have never had the urge to cheat before. Is this my version of self-respect? If I cheat, she will leave me and hate me and it will make it easier than leaving a perfectly nice person who bores the shit out of me. The day I decide to leave her, I can’t hold food down. I have therapy in an hour. I picture myself with explosive diarrhea on my therapist’s couch (Am I allowed to leave in the middle of a session to take a shit?). I read the label: “Do not take if allergic to aspirin.” I take it anyway. If I die, I don’t have to break up with her. As soon as I swallow the tablet, I immediately regret it. I feel woozy. I am scared to go to sleep because I may not wake up. I stay awake. This must mean I want to live. I go to urgent care without insurance. This must mean I want to live. The doctor asks why I am here. I say I accidentally-on purpose took medicine that could kill me. I didn’t really want to die. I just wanted to stop shitting long enough for my therapist to tell me leaving my partner was the right decision. The doctor asks why I am crying. “Are you scared?” I say, after this I am leaving my partner. She asks if I need a pregnancy test. I say, no. I am in a relationship with a woman (well, for now, I am because I am going to break up with her after this). She tells me this is not an allergic reaction. And I remember I have taken Pepto-Bismol before. And I drink gin and tonics and bake lemon-blueberry muffins and am still alive.
 
—When I was a baby, the doctor said aspirin could kill me. “Could” is the operative word. I kill my relationship instead of myself. My ex feels judged by my silence. I am not the cheating kind. I am not the lying kind, so I say nothing. When she says, “I love you,” I say, “you do?” then I fall silent. What else could I have said?
 
—When I was a baby, the doctor said aspirin could kill me. I tell my girlfriend I have a headache. She says, “I have some aspirin.” I say, “No, thank you.”

ON OCTOBER 13TH, KURDISTAN’S PESHMERGA FORCES 
WENT UNDER ATTACK BY THE IRANIAN-BACKED SHIA MILITIAS NEAR KIRKUK
​& I don’t call my father. I don’t ask anyone in my family about a nation or serving or betrayal or if my family’s family, the blood of my blood, is getting attacked. I follow Sozan’s tweets. I read more on Barzani. I never say his first name. I think of the live uncles my dad hides from me, & I know they are probably drinking vodka like real Kurds, screaming, without understanding that the smoke won’t leave after sleep, at least in Kurdish, the sons fighting & forgetting, the language not learned in Turkey, the no-religion until. Hiding, too. My father used to hate silently, and now, can’t ignore that maybe, he has something, other than death & a nothing & moving land & killing, somewhere to put his anger, releasing the word Iran from his mouth, no longer prisoning it as a way to get back. I don’t actually talk to any of my friends about the politics. I know too much in simple words, we gave up our division and when we finally got to hold the land, we let [               ] fight what hurt us. We swallowed the drone & gave it right back / let it birth another. I don’t have any Kurdish friends, meaning, if I don’t talk about this, no one will know. My friends hear me say Kurdistan and I get rid of the word resistance. I have no one to tell, we’re feeding a weapon, and [               ] killing for us. The only thing I know of the mountains is that when I get there, the sun disappears. I can barely pronounce Kirkuk. I don’t know anything about oil. Or the difference between Shia and Sunni. I don’t know the geography of Iraq. I want to hold all of the world and tell my father I put the flag in my room. But I can’t bring it to our home. I see how quiet I get, when I can’t say peshmerga and mean jihad, still be scared of death & not God. We close one airport & then, their city’s streets & I try hard to feel the itch of anger Sozan tweets with, the way she possesses a nationhood before declaration, Iraq, we will never forget this & born in war, die in war. I can only think that my last name is not Barzani, and barely Baban, and really, if I don’t think too hard that people are dying still, anyway, even though we did bring what barely breathes as defense, no one has to know. If I don’t pledge allegiance to my identity, I don’t betray my                 name, or the incomplete flesh of my flesh, or the distant family & the nothing / moving land still patient against the rush & burning massacre.

Forcing forget on a Saturday in September is how you arrive at
the sea. To address the time of day would mean to reveal how
time spends itself around. Sand dollars have no heart. Ask the
doctor to get it in writing and faxed to the nearest machine:
Sand Dollars Have No Heart. Are people the skeletons of
the lives they create? Is your location determined by physical
capability or you are where you are from the wash up? Aries,
here is what you need to know: organisms of the sea cannot
be repulsed by chipped toenail polish. Put your feet in. Walk
in shallow oceans with suede sandals. Make skeleton picking
your brave new hobby like gathering what’s left of things fallen
while you bathe. In bed with yourself, terror shall leave no part
unkissed.

She sits in front of a light
that is supposed to help her depression,
a few minutes every day, she sits in front of the light and
writes in the happiness journal
I gave her for Christmas.
 
Once she said the clock wasn’t moving and
the secondhand wasn’t moving and
nothing was moving forward and
I drove to her in the middle of the night.
 
I don’t think the clock stopped I don’t think anything
ever really stops I don’t think anything has stopped ever since
and
 
she’s been sitting alone in front of the light.

No one wanted to clean the blood
in the shower, so no one did.
 
Four days went by. My uncle would
 
not go in; my father was missing;
police don’t do cleanup. At last,
 
my uncle’s fiancé went in with a bucket.
 
She was new to our country. The death
was not hers. She was nineteen
 
and went down on her knees. She wore
 
rubber gloves. A year later she married
my uncle. Her beautiful face glowed
 
by a candle; her dress was a shiny, deep
 
peach, not white. No one was closer
to my age when my mother shot herself.
 
Back then, I used to clutch my shoulder
 
with the opposite hand. One day she
stopped me, and gently lifted my arm.
 
Uncross, she said, Let your chest see.

The talk is of a man in the desert
He killed other men and women and them in the desert
They are using the word historic to speak of him
Superlatives to speak of him
 
We know history
We know this is not what they say it is
They have a way of burying the point
The people who make a clear point
 
Who with passion until without say stop
Killing us and us in the street
In the vast deserts beyond ours
Now they are saying it is a thing of freedom
 
To say at all
But where was that the point
The small deep point is long gone now
They have asked us to change
 
What we think of
They have asked me to be a part
Of their committee on feelings
They want to know how we feel
 
How do you feel
About the benefits you have
And what you don’t have
How we maintain them for you
 
That we might change for you
I don’t know the difference
Between this and death the desert
The sound of stop of our lived reality
​
Will I remind them of desert
And street which are no metaphor
And say this is all that I mean
What will I say to the committee if
 
We cannot say politely
This was a year of great freedom
Because of great constraint
Knowing nothing more than the present
 
Longing of total
Love
With mystery
And without

Everything I did I did for the music,
shouting to birds in flight above me
I think you’ve made enough sense for today.
 
I hope that you’re nothing like me
I write on a postcard to the future,
I hope the unfamiliar, like a blanket
or a lamp, touches everything
mysterious and free. When I had
the floor I talked about witches
and domestic labor until it was
clear everyone was uncomfortable.
Almost a chant but too graceless
I mumble to the mirror Laura
you don’t need to recognize
everything either in or outside,
all right? You don’t need to know
the word for it. My favorite
 
part was when we gave
everything away except the radio,
which hardly worked, traded names,
held hands in a circle waiting
by the gas station
for our ride to arrive.

​​Fired canons being reversed back into their sockets


 
Words that you can never take back being reversed back into the lungs and mouths that

            uttered them

​
 
A broken promise being reversed back into the lighthouse
 


The first time he hit her being reversed back into the honeymoon


 
The pills that were stolen and replaced with prenatal vitamins being reversed back into     
       
             the pillbox
 


The bridge that took half a decade to build and cost eleven worker lives being       
     
             reversed back into cement and ore and swing-set
 


The piano that took half a decade to build being reversed back into beech and spruce   
 
              and ore
 


The machine reversed back into a body reversed back into an animal reversed back into   

              the plains reversed back into graphite without with
 

​
Painted flowers that are unstrung

I played telephone with

the patch/pitch of earth

danced forwards and backwards

I guess I was actually trespassing that whole time...

I saw you making love to my best friend

I lived a normal life and it was

fucking beautiful

Come! let us swim in our pellucid copious trivial our having escaped an unfathomable crime

by way of having the memory of us

​together

One time on a Tinder date the dude pulled over
on the shoulder of the highway between two
fields of sunflowers — zillions — heavy-headed
golden goblets studded with almond-shaped seeds
 
fed tip-first into their honeycomb bowls.
These other folks also pulled-over said hi
smilingly and it occurred to me they thought we were
together then I thought we are, I guess, right now.
 
“That there” the older man said “is the oldest
elm in the county” (he may have said country)
stretching one arm toward a fogged-in field
out of which rose yes a catastrophic elm.
 
My Tinder date, squinting, asked “are you
sure that’s an elm?”, one superlong arm
draped around me. I winced but the other man
was generous and said “Yessiree, I am,
 
that’s my land.”

​​Pull a loose hair out of my bra
What do I have to show for it
A better set of pens might be the perfect thing
A credit to capital and a debit to Owner’s Equity
That doesn’t concern anyone you’d know
Oh how I hate to quit, I’ve hated the act
I was suddenly in a spelling bee and given a long word
Sandy said, “they all did what they needed to do”
Which is almost as backhanded as when I said
I hoped everyone got what they deserved
Knowing which acts drove me to choose wrongly
Does not help my mood

logging in or logging out
slice of pizza for me
you shouldn’t even visit
and I ask which two worlds are those
my nature vocabulary is burgeoning
I feel summed up, I feel compacted
his tactical shift same as the racists use
it’s good I didn’t get what I wanted, I wish
I’m not good at memorizing much
besides they also serve who only stand and wait,
the daffadillies fill their cups with tears &
wife in a Subaru putting on moisturizer

at school they’d say     why do you talk like that
 
is what you think you are        nice      goody two
 
            in contrast to / as opposed       ?
 
but really: have you inherited a dozen ways
 
                                   to say your name differently,
 
as in                 do you really think
                        he’s like us?
 
 
 
 
                                                                                               and my father means the man
 
I love     who was raised up in a country church         who has an accent       do I think he’s [                                               ] enough /
 
a clutch of adjectives /             my hair wrapped around my own       skinny neck
 
walking down an aisle             for my first Communion, promising to believe something
 
I could not yet name. swearing to leave God knows what      on the altar / to be an altar
 
to commune with a dusty sort of holiness       [swearing to something in Latin / to a swath
of pink lilies]                 although flowers make me sneeze            I’m allergic to certain inheritances                               but others I wear                        light as the veil that day

The day you left me feckless to my own devices I thought yes
finally. The world coalesced around
my singular glimmering
chimera, whither
I would never be faulted
for anything, & I bathed for hours,
sublimated, I shampooed my prickly hairs,
ogled at my hypothetical
gorgeous self
-fulfilling self-impression charismatic in your bathroom
mirror: tranquil, wet, insinuating
the noonday dream. 
All things reduced to brave clearness.  
I was fantastically hungry. Expecting
to fry eggs, I frowned
blankly
at the stubborn
translucent eggwhites, which
were not budging, just jiggling &
unactualized at 12 p.m.
while everything felt
fine, & perceiving
dull & sluggish butter & yolk
do
nothing worthwhile, I
dumped the nonstick skillet in the trash &
ate dry cereal instead, my chewing noises forcefully
implying your stovetop, & despite
standing up, &
clearing away, I remained
disbelieving, still
unconvinced nothing
wasn’t wrong.

Me, in my wisdom; you, in yours — Ok, fine.
Humility aside, I realize, with a flicker.
 
Beautiful winter evening sky. I tell you so.
How will it all work out?
 
My resilience exhausts me. 
Listen, trees, I’m talking too.
 
For once, I’d like to be careless and lucky. 
For a minute I hate you; always I want to protect you.
 
Anyone can make anything exist, they say.
Why can’t I? A girl in a book...
 
No —. Fuck that for that once.
No one’s ever done it before, but I’m brave:
 
I invite you in. I do it again. Again.
I take a big walk while you decide.

​​​Waking in the night is hard. All feels measured and poured.
Some low feelings have steep sides; what am I good for, to you?
From above we can see where the river turned back to keep going.
Does it matter at all what we want? Fallen leaves look fine awhile.
I’d like boots that brown; a blue coat. Used to be, a woman might dress
to go away, boarding a train maybe, alone, or, possibly, with a man.

When you first learned other, you a target of slurs & fingers of small fists in shove; other always always lives internal; other bunks in between each disc in your vertebral column, each gland you salivate from, each constriction of pupil in search of understanding; other finds home in tendrils of brain, safe behind skull; think walls, think what walls keep, what walls inhibit; how you no prisoner & thus, out out brave other, into a world that throws stones, a world that beats & batters; how you, other, love bold, love bold.

I would like to become         the field.

One summer we lived          in a barn.      
 
We slept,        and woke

in searing heat,          our skins

sticking to       each other.

Outside:          morning

and the sounds         of sheep

chewing grass,           small tears in the fabric

of things,        inch by inch,

until the entire field             was covered

by their teeth.

​​​I’ve gotten so used
To being alone
But sometimes when you give me
A hug
I remember what it was like
And my glands burn in
That sour river of radness
Either way I
Stand like a tree
Getting hugged
And I think that’s pretty funny.

You were a teenage goth
In wartime
Spent years in the
Emotional labor workshop
To love is to lose everything
First to joy
Then to pain
Until after
The brief exit interview with
The priest
They’re all texting at
Your funeral

Until you pass
Through death
And get to that other place
And I don’t mean
Heaven
The intake room
Decompression chamber
For turning to stars
Where bones are
Milled into fire
And you are finally seen
The way you see

The world from inside
Your current body
And understood
And pitied and loved, carried
Away on complex
Vast cosmic trajectories
Down rings ringing with
Ultraviolet vibes
That only a young energy unicorn
Could hear
Your final loss
Will be amazing

​​​Float away to Zanj, shell opening.
Not treasure. Not to possess.
 
I have had enough of your ducats.
Extractions. My head full of
 
teeth. Jangling pockets plummet sailors
to the deep. Colonized by mollusks,
 
the abyssal trench. To Zanj,
which is temporal, requiring skills.
 
Geomancers. Years carved as ivory
memories. Elephants erect
 
their palaces. Where I’m from
we don’t even elect our kings.
 
Where I’m from I don’t know anymore
which god is possessing me.
 
My spotty history,
bent antenna. Suffering from enthusiasm,
 
my eyes — ports — take in
rolling blue dunes, and hidden
 
among them gold humps
where exists water, exists flesh.

Submerged wreck. Coral suited.
Polyps plop plop for a hand
 
to touch, to cut,
and liquefy. Coworkers
 
offer mysterious hugs
when I say I’m leaving. I’m leaving
 
the surface, scooped into sky.
Amalgamated. Shell shed, shell
 
scooped rough from sand. Unseen
adornment for sky. Skull shed
 
left wide open. Boogieing on
wind, brain circulates. Spirals.
 
Demanding a body. To be iridescent.
A shell. Arcing.

1.   There is a raven at my door. She is carrying my innocence in her mouth, a Bratz doll 
      wrapped in brambles and aloe. She is impatient because I have not collected it. I’m sorry / I 
      had forgotten what it looked like
2.   
3.   I grew tired of wandering glassy plains.
4.   
5.
6.
7.   I have known what it means to take the sun between my teeth and turn it over in my lap. 
      After a while, I welcomed the flame / and the bruises / and the thirst.
8.   I fell in love with a man who built me a home / out of his body and set himself on fire 
      because I was inside it. I know not how love blooms / but how it / leeches.
9.
10.  I am trying to remember everything I’ve ever / owned. I am trying to remember anything 
       that ever felt like mine.
11.  I will not wait seventy years / to thaw
12.
13.  I had to learn to eat the wild fruits of the forest. To meditate on the crickets’ song. To let the 
       earth / and only the earth / sustain me. 
​14.

​​I don’t imagine a blank space.

Maybe location is the sixth sense.

Every body has a border.

Oh no, they don’t.

Every body, a seeping creature.

If I bark out light.

Hint: there never was a cure.

Delicious mechanics, to write

beautiful lists.

Fantastic impulses.

And that’s what I am, a body

questioning the tools.

Morning dew in this sequence.

When I’m finished, I’ll let you know.

Every sequence, crashing into.

White pillows, but then three weeks

later, the pillows change.

I keep track of the pillows.

My life in her dissection, my oh.

Who decides what depth is anyways?

Oh, breaking into.

She favors flowing, gauzy skirts.

Festive toenails with vibrant lacquer.

She’s my way out of this tall catastrophe.

Later, I make tea in my homelight.

I take notes in the yard, not far

from a harbor breeze.

Our neighbors are hunting the doves
that have been safely sitting
on our fences and electric lines for months,
so tame we could nearly touch them.
 
Now they vanish when they see us pass the windows
and fly off in bursts when we open the doors.
 
On our walk, we come across one that has been injured,
a gray and brown ruffle of warmth that lies stunned.
 
From its side, it watches us with one round eye.
Then it flutters until it rights itself.
Well enough to stay ahead of our concern,
it is just hurt enough to starve.
 
The season will begin and end the same way.
The guns sound near us all morning,
then the rush of wings like souls releasing.
 
The hunters will shoot until they get to fifteen.
 
Our dogs will bark their fool heads off at the noise,
though it means nothing to them;
they keep trusting us.

I was allowed to forget
 
how there is no loneliness
like ours.
 
I did not search for signs
I might take back, no
 
directions to move me
into feeling.
 
I was not envious of the trees,
the certainty with which they know
 
to be trees.
It was almost spring.
 
I laid in bed and ran
one hand down my chest,
 
then between my legs.
I did not think of you.
 
In the distance,
a pair of brown cows
 
lowed and chewed
their cud together.
 
I did not think of us.
It was almost spring.
 
I read “a happy bee
will fly a thousand miles,
 
will tap a million flowers,
to make a single pound of honey.”
 
I did not think of me.

​​​I’m the wet actor
on the cold stage
 
of this November play
of daylight waning
 
and they haven’t run
the shot yet and no
 
hot water bottles
under the ladies’ gowns
 
can stop our shivering.
Our lines change
 
with every inch
of water crawling up
 
the steel skin of this tank
but plot is useless down here
 
in gulps of spray
off the fake ship’s prow.
 
Was that tactical
or was that strategic?
 
That was political.
Like any stupid war zone
 
all it is to the people in it
is a mess. The storm is
 
inevitable they say,
the storm is coming
 
this way, so let’s
get the best shot.

It’s true, we rue.
You tore yourself
 
apart for us and we
loved to watch you
 
do it. We loved to
watch you crack
 
your hips like a whip,
toss yourself skyward
 
seeding thunder
to the clouds.
 
It’s the brain
that feels the pain.
 
It’s the body
that delivers it.

There is a machine begging
to be followed. There is a way
needed to be had. A system
never holds its breath, never
stops to listen to its stars,
and our lungs burn like houses
in the middle of a soft
war. We are walking to the train
and the train is coming to get us.
We put our hands in our pockets
because we are cold, but in our pockets
is where we also go to hide.
Words are instigating floods
and fires and no one can see
the machine or hear the world
calling. We do not know where
to find the source. We radar
the streets with such poise.
And when we open our mouths
to sing, we sometimes scare
our ignorance to a whole new level
of amendment. The story
always and never becoming ours.

After the war, the wasp-waist returns:
silk civility a flag for romance, buttoned-up jacket
 
over pleated wool. Dior’s vision of “flower-like women”
is made an armor of glamour. Boning and yardage
dazzle even now, a study in minimalist color
 
styled with luxe hat and heels.
Who doesn’t love the regal, criminal feel
of leather gloves drawn past the wrists,
 
terrifying in their strictured elegance?
The year an editor crowns Dior’s collection
as the New Look, the Doomsday Clock debuts
 
on the cover of Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists.
The hand aims seven minutes to midnight.
 
Inside meringue and black couture, the spleen
builds its own reactor. The future arrives in leonine
steps. The future pivots — all of us witness — 
 
a magician’s wife home from the void
mouthing, it’s nothing, nothing.

this for which I lavishly
ravished
 
meaning to decimate or make love to
 
I will always stop to be a beacon
to pick up a coin
to tell my brothers
            do not walk like snakes
 
the story is not mine to tell
filled with pressed lilacs
sow the field with teeth they
murdered me on the way to the hill they
 
sang my praises
meanwhile the story
 
is not mine to tell
 
but when I don’t occupy my mind
my mind is occupied

New Amsterdam, Haarlem Nyghts, the glow of a mobile
            guides wayward ship passing in the night, jutting into each
other all along the national international unnatural natural metropole:
            Swing time, sweet sweat around your nape suspended in
air against the weight of grace, I giggle my screech, smelling
            your musk and excess Express or Eagle from high school,
that which was to never happen, it didn’t have to afterall. The
            lowtop fade prickly massages out my anxious hands, and I draw
you closer, always closest, the difference here dissipates, until we
            try in vain to bring together one. Brother to Brother, one of the
                        ones to be the one.

The course of exhaustion is evanescent but plotted with such precision that any artist could paint it. The last raindrops swell around the bud-point of every bough. There is nothing certain about the appearance of bodies in physical space. A slow cascade, nearly stilled. It isn’t a matter of if you wish to appear, but of whether you will, and for long. What scheduled pleasure doesn’t admit to some rain, in the forecast at least. Such are the pleasures of thought to the perfectly thoughtless. A flag snaps endlessly flat in the breeze. There’s time to get out in the world and to breathe, to liven the lungs, to raise the eyes, to visit the rambling park where teenagers brawl. As for me, I’m merely eroding by choice. Each decision guides me through the next, like choosing a path through the city by following continuous holiday lights. Sometimes they’re strung with disastrous economy. Whereas I’d gladly follow a bird if I could only get one to lead me as Robert Frost was led in his famous poem, “The Woodpile.” Possibly birds don’t behave in that way any longer. They seldom encounter ghosts, or so I believe. Perception will be salvation, one tells oneself, imagining one has been perceived. I take your disappearance as notice from the other world. Someone lifts an iron and rain begins. The sun grows repetitious like desire. The feeling is that of a marketplace. An ethereal mildew coats every mote in its confines. It’s said that the lowliest garbage is flush and sublime. And becoming family, and arresting the breaking wave. A pattern we hold beyond hope of modulation.

Because the blue and green of it
 are content.
 
Because I’ve opened my mouth
 to the salt and it tastes almost
 
like midnight or a wound. Because
 I will fall faster and lighter and
 
farther where there is no barrier reef
 but that’s not the sticking point.
 
See how sea enjoys a spirit of silence
 in its eels, its starfish. Because.
 
One poet dared to write the sea cold as
 love and knew I would ponder what
 
she meant: how the choices are few
 for all who ignore women in revolution.

   I
 
She didn’t ask for me
when she saw all of it ending
so I don’t know how she went out.
 
Whether she wept or sang
Precious Lord or I Wish I Knew,
she didn’t ask for me.
 
Perhaps she asked for nothing — ​
nothing being what she once chose.
I don’t know how she went out — ​
 
whether dreaming of my father
or of the revulsion she had for her own,
she didn’t ask for me.
 
She could have left one suggestion — 
she didn’t, and maybe she died hard.
I don’t know how she went out.
 
Whether dreaming of me or furious
she was at the end of dreaming and
left with one last choice: not to ask.
I don’t know how she went out &
 
                        II
 
I must tell you this: I did not go to her
before her breathing became shallow
so she never knew what I’ve become — 
​ 
that, as another’s daughter, I did long.
Still, dressed in apologies and alibis,
I did not go to her — ​
 
my feet stuck in the sludge
of my other mother’s don’t do this to me.
She never knew what I’ve become.
 
She never knew and no one’s to blame.
Why can’t every choice be just a choice?
Because I didn’t go to her
 
and why not? — continually — and
even then, I didn’t.  What is that?
Even I don’t know if I’ve become
 
a liar, always fire in the grate, or some-
one else’s reason to be grateful but that’s
not good enough.  I did not go to her.
Anyone can see what I’ve become.


Yallah habibti, move your tongue like the sea
easy. My big sister teaches me to ululate, rolls
her tongue in waves. Dips thin fingers inside
my mouth to pull out mine, stretches it long
and pinches the tip. Watch, we move tongues
like this. I see the walls of our father’s house
collapse and we swim free leleleleleleleleleee
 
On the ferry to Tangier I shriek across the sea.
Practice how to sound like a real woman. Old
aunties grab my buttocks, smush their breasts
against my back and sing leleleleleleleleleleeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee
Don’t cover your mouth habibti! Only women
on the upper deck, only sea. We move tongues
like this to tell the waves stay back, tell men
 
stay back, tell the dead stay gone, tell runaway
wives stay gone. They turn me into wisteria
woman, limbs wrapped around poles and thighs
as they guide me. Throw back your head, epiglottis
to the breeze. Salt air burns my hot membranes,
scratches at the tight knots of my chords.
All my life I was told
 
women must swallow sand 
unless we are sounding
a warning.

First separate the muscle
First find
a space for your hand
There is room
             by the heart valve there is room
in the warm
weeping parts. First listen
to the sounds around you
becoming clean — 
the tincture hum of gravel — 
             the fur
as it starts to freeze — When you touch
it becomes a carpet — ​
             it’s your thighs the hairs there
they wait.
Now there are things screaming
in the wind. You watch
your fingers
             becoming imaginary
as if they were enormous
rakes, as if
soft threads grew from them,
             dragged over the body
 
             weavings on the ground

 i lay in a field
of flowering succulents — 
                        i couldn’t rise. a doctor
 
            passed on horseback
& i lapped a small pool
                        of medicine from their palm.
 
            the hawks picked my box
of strings to pieces. i held
                        a rusted harmonica to my lips.
 
            the heat curved its reeds
into sliding notes & i mimicked
                        a dying wind. a leather pouch
 
            was fastened to my neck.
it held a lover’s ring.
                        i carried it to remember
 
            what i bound myself to.
in a fever-dream, i stood
                        before a lone white horse
 
            in the rain. the birds were loudest
in the morning. i told myself
                        they sang to keep daylight
                       
            from coming, but the blue
dawn crept in anyway.
                        i wanted to end
                       
            before i knew how i would end — 
under a jacaranda, i stared
                        into the sky & whispered
                       
            luna, cuentame tus sueños — ​
            i knew i would die here.

1.   In France or London, the sibilant machine of SCIENCE invents a bird
      based on the relics of Egyptian monuments, which is not an exact copy of Nature.

2.   Fragments of amber rewoven into the composite IMAGE, is also an invitation
      to form SOUND, the whistle of species placed in a jar.

3.   The jar is the ART of categories, the essential basis of our condition — to not look away but
      to look in wreaths, full blown, to sow our reflection as an exact copy of Nature.

4.   According to Herodotus there are two kinds of ibis: black and white, the black is the enemy
      of serpents, the white is a domestic bird. The afterlife is a house not all birds are allowed in. 

5.   The best-preserved birds are found in the mummies of Saqqara, wrapped in dyed linen, then
      sawed open. Tools dressed in membrane correct myth: there were shellfish in the cavities,
      not snakes.

6.   In order to preserve SCIENCE, the language of speculums rusting by the window,
      we must shake the graves of birds.

7.   Shaking graves is not a species complex; which is actually an argument of resemblance,
      a market for more skin.

8.   Precise methods of dissection are also useful when carving the womb out of a woman’s corpse.
      We draw this jar to reproduce ourselves, in order to keep producing the SCIENCE of birds.
      Bodies are families, bred of facts and secrets waiting to become facts.

9.   She who scrivens — ​do you contain a monster nostalgia? keep keep keep keep keep

10.   Years from now, when sliced open to be redrawn from memory, the naturalists discover
        an engraving in the urn of my skull: “play dead” (and a laugh track). 

​The antlers merge into every hidden thing
beneath a purple & growing sky
as Colin broadens his shoulders.
We will not pass the bridge. Tracks
soften. Cells go dead.
My shoes like a stagnant river. I am cold,
Joe says, as he loosens his hair from his hood. Spiders waking
to prey on the clouds. My backpack waits
like a bed. Remember when is the lowest form of conversation,
so we let its warmth breed in the hourglass snow.
On the way back, Colin crosses the river by stones.
Ice in its arteries dance toward a harp. As we reach the town,
blankets thrown over our shoulders. Forgive me,
I say. Beyond this steel wool is another threshold.
Its deathbed purple is alive & well.

Flame in my clothes
 
like a hangover that courses the folds
 
for years. Every trace of horizon
 
now gone. In a foreign car, painted in snow salt,
 
I watch myself drift out.
 
Then low tide where I walk ankle deep,
 
careful not to cut up my feet.
 
A bit of flame in the wind. Blood
 
in the flash. There is no god,
 
so I move my own heaven.

​Her shoulders were much smaller
than mine. I wasn’t sure
 
how to touch them. If a man
ever felt this way about my body,
 
how could he
go on touching me?
 
It was surely a very bad thing.
The wet earth
 
smelled richer then,
in Vermont, when it let the rain
 
all the way in, let itself
be soaked through.

​I don’t
want you
to be
nervous. Maybe
thinking of
a walrus
would help.
Have you
seen the
video of
the penguin
accidentally stepping
on a
sleeping walrus?
It thought
it was
a rock.
The walrus
wakes up
like what
the fuck
and the
penguin scurries
off like
oh shit.
Sometimes it’s
funny watching
a surprise
happen, and
not just
funny but
kind of
amazing — like,
you never
really know
what’s what
when it
comes to
this planet.
Then again,
when it’s
you getting
surprised, that’s
different. Especially
for tender
ones like
us. What
are we
supposed to
do? It’s
bad for
our hearts,
you know.
I hope
you won’t
need pills
like I
do. I
think I
get so
scared because
I’m greedy — 
I want
to hold
onto everything,
the world
wants to
take it
away. What
the fuck.
The number
of hours
we have
together is
actually not
so large.
Please linger
near the
door uncomfortably
instead of
just leaving.
Please forget
your scarf
in my
life and
come back
later for
it. 

He said I think about you all the time,
it’s almost obsessive
 
Do you mind if I look at you 
 
I don’t know what you are 
or where you come from 
but I think you are beautiful
 
When I went
to the City of Tampa Mayor’s office
there was a garden with two statues:
one of a standing female Buddha
and one of her partner
staring at her
 
Everything that has an eye
has a universe inside
and it’s endless
 
Kerry James Marshall
the visual artist
said about his art project
Illusions of Eden:
it’s about the home,
reality television,
and how we are obsessed
with penetrating the walls

​the each day sun came      and ran over the house       thick
 
as silk hanging from the line    my body behind
 
that window in a time      when the white phone could sit all day
 
on my dresser      as silent as milk        there was elsewhere and this
 
was nowhere      suffer the relentless trains

​Came the Pyro-technicians
to round out the pageantry of the age.
With the erecting and suspending
of the bridge across Niagara, came the kite-flyers
to draw the cable over to the far shore,
came the Pyro-technicians to show
how the kite’s string, though weak, nonetheless
draws toward Heaven, holds its possessor
fast anchored within the veil, and the bridge
holds its possessor close to the far shore.
And came the Pyro-technicians to show
illumination, stratagem, blue bergamot,
hegemony. And Roosevelt was present, too,
there at that day’s centenary. Does he have
the power not to create the un-liftable stone
that he bears aloft, the 8-angled triangle
unimagined by Euclid — he can, and does!
Yet in the midst of his restraint came barium
for green; came copper for blue; came aluminum,
finally, for silver and strontium salts for red, like Thespians
mirroring the Sun King, or Oberon, bright phosphorus
aflame on Mercury. Came the Pyro-technicians
in town-planning councils in Lansing or Aurora,
stringing dragon kites across the sky,
circular, incessant, calm with linearity, cyclopean — ​
their dew is on the meadowsweet, green-gold.

Two days after giving birth, my empty belly flopped so tenderly
              in the bathroom mirror in the recovery suite. I was afraid 
 
to shit or take a shower because I wasn’t sure
                        what had happened to me or if the stitches
would rip. I’d heard women say down there would look like meat
 
so for weeks I didn’t look. When Christ came back

            he got to keep his scars. He flashed his stigmata
at the women at the tomb
                         and they knew him as their risen Lord. Three days
 
inside the earth. Two months after giving birth
Heidi Klum walked a catwalk in angel wings. The tabloids tell you
 
                         how she got her body back:
Tori Spelling joined Jenny Craig and lost the weight. J. Lo did her first triathlon
seven months after giving birth to twins. Gisele says, “some women think
 
they can get pregnant and turn their body
             into a garbage disposal.” Gisele walked the runway
in wings and a g-string six weeks after an ecstatic
 
natural birth. Natural is one way not to say
vagina in mixed company. The girl-saint loved the Lord
 
and then she wouldn’t eat
                        is every story.
Christina loved the Lord
            and turned splinter-thin. She loved him
right up out of her body, her stigmata visible
 
only to herself. And through that long cold-bodied death, Christ never
             learned to listen. “This body is the site of a miracle,”
says Kerry Washington. Kerry Washington does 6 a.m. Pilates
 
while her daughter sleeps. In the recovery room
             I’m a stretched and sagging balloon. When I get my body back
all the parts are rearranged and worn. When I get my
             body back it’s not quite mine again. When I get my body back. 

A room in a house just outside of Paris,
no idea I’d be sharing the bath with José, a little Brazilian
who could’ve passed for one of my cousins, that particular mix
of African, Cherokee and empire. I couldn’t understand a word he said,
French poured through a Portuguese accent, plus the landlady
didn’t like him, all I needed to justify my annoyance
of the bathroom situation. But weeks in and the landlady en vacance,
the power went out, so José lit candles, invited me to share
his pasta with crème fraîche. He’d never met his father
either, though his mother’s boyfriend bought him art supplies,
paid for drawing classes. I was surprised he was vegetarian,
too, that French was his third language, that I was the provincial.
Nothing happened between us, not even after the bottle of Beaujolais,
not even though I’d been looking for someone to save me
from being bored and lonely in Paris of all places,
only our shadows touching across the walls of that tiny kitchen,
city lights blinking through the foggy window and the realization
that I was no longer translating each word he said, that I understood
him, but even stranger, us — our faces, our very names
the spoils of conquest — our passports and the languages
we spoke and why, our fathers and fathers’ fathers, the back story
of millions whittled down to a few pages in high school,
the cowboy and Indian movies my mother refused to stop watching,
that I’d rent for her years later when she was dying,
flying across the Atlantic over the bones of God knows how many Africans
and forgetting to even look down, to remember them if only for a few seconds.
Yes, the unimaginable absence and lack and yet the unknown alive
in that kitchen, too, its contradictions, its silences
and hysterics, the blackness in our voices as we laughed
and talked through the night — ​a keening, but also a kind of space,
a clearing we could move through.

​Everyone told us the thing about bees.
Everyone told us we’d move through it
like sand, but no one said what sand moves like.
 
The house, ours for the night, had a hole
at its center, large as a room.
Only when I pulled back the curtain
 
was the extent of the damage revealed to us,
the colorful lengths gone to sustain the fiction
more alarming than the cold. In my shoes
 
there was an indefinite amount of sand
but an absolute number of grains. Everyone
told us there was more than we could count
 
but you can count, in fact you must. Our grammar
requires counting. We went out and stood
on the precipice we call the coast.

The bed of the sea was not thrown
down quickly enough. Inevitably,
 
our productions are bound together,
but accidents prevail. In flourishing,
 
we know the forms will suffer, but a few
may be preserved and fitted to some
 
secondary sea. Whole families may
dissolve. We may doubt their position.
  
All creation is taken at hazard. Look
to the principle of descent. Dominant
 
phenomena are the ones that give
birth. Space ultimately thins out.

​On Earth I had been held, honeysuckled
not just by honeysuckle
but by everything — ​marigolds,
bog after bog of small sundews,
the cold smell of spruce.
 
This planet is nothing like that. 
Here, I comb lank alien grass out of my hair.
I wade through monochrome swarms
of weeds, through ankle-high piles of ash.
 
I used to miss desire, but that was eons ago.
I used to miss the sound of my voice,
but that was before I pulled my name
from my throat like a pit and set fire
to the field of my face. When I say
my skin is lace, I mean I used to find it
lovely. Now there is nothing I miss.
 
If I stumbled upon this place again,
I would not know it.
 
I hold myself in my arms.
I bend against myself like grass, like this.It won’t be calamity:
take shelter drills
kneeling in a hallway
lined with lockers
fingers interlaced
to cover the vulnerable
back of the neck.
 
It won’t be disaster:
a thousand dead bees,
swept into piles
like horse chestnuts
barbed and pointless.
 
If you wake up and don’t
want me — ​
 
It will be moss.
It will be kudzu.
It will be English ivy.
 
It will be one possum:
white-snouted, bristle-furred,
undiscovered and dead
in the crawlspace, circled
tight as if asleep.

​In 1926 Laura and Beatrice die of old age in the exact
same room and hour, 400 miles and 35 years apart. This
is superarchitecture. You knew this. You were 19 when you saw
Italy for the first time. You were 19.9 when you built your first
horizontal city in the gap between two strangers’ teeth. Petrarch
and Dante closed
everything. And what I’m trying to say is this, just this — ​
I got your letters too late. You told me that you were giving up poetry again
because you couldn’t fit enough dead ends into a rispetto. We could
have worked this out. But instead you dreamed yourself into bridges made
out of hospital corridors and the 56
Venetian windows that smashed your father’s eyes into rain. Borromini, you said,
is the guerrilla warfare manual for the 21st century. I don’t know. In Supervenice you ate
steel and ice. You drilled holes in your hands and you still
haven’t recovered from the speed and the direction of nightfall.

​Milton said “man”
makes of our world a heaven or hell.
 
Strip from thought and action the low
vibration and heaven’s here
 
by subtraction. Into the West
the East must grow. Hush, I had
 
a dream and you were in it. It didn’t look
anything like you, but it was you.

He lived on IV fluids for months.  
Even the smallest trace of milk
caused him to vomit blood. They
told me to keep pumping, how good
it would be for his system if he could 
ever tolerate food. And in this distorted
dream-world, I let it be my mother-love
(the grief and the milk both in endless supply),
a way to express something even if 
the pots of ink were white.
 
I didn’t see it until later, like in a dream 
that unfolds after waking, but you were there
doing this: taking the bottles of milk in the night 
when I pumped them, or in the day, pouring them
off into meal-apportioned bottles — so careful not
to spill — and with black ink registering 
the day and the hour of our love,
so that now, when I stand at the freezer, 
I see row after row of our duet of prayer and elegy 
stored against the day when he would live.

​The rug was ugly — thick and coarse. I don’t know
how I ended up down there. I understood that I
should listen to what he was saying. Instead,
the thought: fish have hearts. How odd to think
of millions of hearts beneath the river’s surface,
a swarm of beatings around a barge, rich with algae.
He was saying something and I pressed my legs
together but they refused to fuse into a tail. There were
choices — other rugs, the option to stand — 
I chose to stay. I think he talked a lot or
not very much. I thought a lot about wounds or
I didn’t. I remember watching hornets fight
over the pool of blood. Or they fought over
glistening at a gash in a tree. The sad thing is
I wanted to stay or I didn’t know how to leave.
Like good houseguests, my beliefs had tidied up,
stripped the bed, and gone. Without harm, I was
just knuckles on a gunwale, then thrashing. Fingers
cut off to make me let go of the boat. Shhhh,
the beating school soothed. Swim.

 The light there:
                        a found scene, high seat
                                    at the Monday organ, sunbeams
                        captive in the stained glass.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                A draft passes chimney
                                                            to living room. Ghost air.
                                    We are insulated from everything
                                                and nothing at all.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            My timid steps on a winter pond:
                                                a fissured trajectory.
                                                                        What else fails to hold?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dreamt last night
            of a new dog, same
                        as the first. Smooth bellies.
                                    Unnursed nipples. Two dogs
                        competing for affection.
            I couldn’t choose.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                We dress heavy,
answer the weather.
                                                                        Our bodies, like dumplings,
                                                            float in a pale broth.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                White sky,                             white field,
                                    shoots of remnant wheat stalks,
                                                                                                                        so much silence
                                                                        between the notes.

Tonight, I’m the loneliest I’ve ever been.
It’s been a week since our conversation
 
(if you can call it that) about snow.
How it must be cleared quickly no matter
 
how we feel about going out. Today,
I saw myself in screens, reflected in their
 
dark glass. Spectral, like an idea
when really I wanted to be bloody.
 
They told me to write you without
emotion. They said, tell him explicitly
 
what you need. What came out:
Concentrate all your energy 
 
at the rims of our openings. 
Paragraphs, like marriages, begin
 
in certainty and end in spectacle:
Part metal, part bird. I open and close
 
your mouth like my hand was inside you.
Tuesday I gave you the letter. I hear
 
our daughter waking up. She calls
out for me, and I get her. In the morning,
 
the light went through the house, lit every
surface, like the house was an ear
 
tilted toward the dawn, like it
was trying hard to listen.

At the botanic garden, a map
claims there is a swamp
 
and I am a cynic through yards
of paths until boardwalk
 
over black water. Green lacing
fractions of surface. You spot
 
a pie-sized portion of honeycomb
floating. Amber grids waiting to feed
 
unseen animals. This water thick with mirroring
such that I imagine our time doubled for our duplicates,
 
whom I do not lean to see. This dark fluid an event horizon.
 
We cannot stay to learn what lurks. We try a perimeter
path, completing our orbit back toward parked
 
cars and what looks to be wedding guests
 
we keep our distance from, nearing signs
naming roots within the ground. 

My mother calls & we talk for the sixth time today.
She says she’s driving toward the place
where they’ve set up the memorial
for those who have been killed. Teddy bears,
she says, you know there will be teddy bears,
& her voice rings that giddy pitch
somewhere between mad joy & grief.
It’s been too long since I’ve seen
a therapist & so learned, by talking, a way
to talk to someone else. I’m standing
in an abandoned science classroom, fidgeting
with the knob of a gas spigot. I want to cry,
hearing my mother’s voice, & think of lighting
a fire. There’s a secret to loss, but I don’t
know it. It hums like a distant radiator,
all sound & no heat. My mother says I’m sorry,
I just wanted to say something to someone
who would understand. How funny
that we’re here now, older & done with both
birth & its giving. & so in some ways
the same. I listen. I listen more & imagine her
driving, hands teetering upon the wheel
like something sacred, & know the road
is a story we share, a journey unrelenting. One day,
if time does right by us, I will have to bury her.
How can I possibly explain to you why
I think of this? Years ago, my mother turned up
after years of living as an absence, so much
like a ghost, to help bury the mother-
in-law who had wanted so badly to hate her.
& all day mother complained about the thinness
of grandma’s sweater. Which she would wear
eternally. & the cold. & how it too
would be eternal. Look, you who never
asked for this: it’s the bearing
that hurts. Not the losing. It’s the carrying
on. It’s the way, through the phone, I can hear
my mother flooring the pedal through the rest
of her life so she can catch up with the rest
of her life. I love you, I say, my head bent
& eyes pressed against the lab’s eyewash,
my hand trying & trying again to trigger
the water free, wanting only
to rinse my eyes clean,
though nothing comes out.

It’s mid-April. A blizzard arrives with hail and sounds of chimes.
 
On her 80th birthday, my mother asked when I’d go home one more time.
 
Yesterday I rowed 10k in my single scull. Now the Mississippi groans under the ice.
 
A friend sent me “The Third Snow” by Yevgeny Yevtushenko, a poem from Siberia, a century old.
 
A blizzard is indifferent to space or time.
 
Via WeChat, my brother marvels at my house in St. Paul, how affordable compared to his 6 million Yuan hole on an island. He’s willing to forgo the breeze from East China Sea for a place in Minnesota freeze.
 
“Please don’t go back to China,” pleaded Gary Snyder, tears in his eyes. “You know you’re on their list, right?”
 
A brainstorm in soft simplicity. A debate if I should become a citizen after two and a half decades of wandering.
 
And robins know how to wait. They know how spring rides the cold front, how worms awaken the earth. They follow the 37° isotherm for their flight between Guatemala and Minnesota.
 
My mother tried many years to unlock the secret of Dao De Jing. She was allowed to step into the Way after she lost her sight at 73.
 
They follow the smell of snow and rain, the thawing earth, and worms’ vertical migration. When the blizzard blows them off course, they fly towards the sun, and follow its angled light to get back on track.
 
I reached the last stage for citizenship, twice, but chickened out after I did my fingerprints. I never showed up for the swearing.
 
Robins have an inner compass. It sits in their eyes, two free radicals spinning in blue light, two lovers, radiant with joy... this is their quantum coherence.
 
Their third eye through a blizzard, towards home. 

Someone running through
the snow-covered grass.
 
Someone running a daydream
into the blades
 
of the worst-case scenario:
the body scented,
 
after being the one thing
in the world
 
that had to listen to you.
Because, really,
 
we’ve all just fallen
into another minute of grace,
 
imagine how lucky it is
to be undiagnosed
 
and waiting to be placed.
Subscription card loose
 
in a magazine.
Snow mounts
 
looped bicycle racks,  
some of it drawn
 
toward the red vertical fields
of our institutions. 

Leaving
myself
 
w/ a man
I can’t
respect,
 
my body’s
memories
 
are pure
rage. It
 
becomes so
normal, I
 
don’t hide the
evidence.
 
The heart wants what it wants — 
to love
 
soberly, freely.
I know your
 
music, daddy &
my fear
has
 
a purpose.


I mean to slice every line from my tongue.
Or: last week my brother confessed to me
that even on his best days he wanted
to hurt someone else. Or: my brother has
only ever been kind. The day he was born
the whole west went soft w/ sunset & sand.
& I did pull his hair. & I did knock
the wind out of his lungs like a mirror
opening onto a landscape of stone.
What this poem wants is water. What I
mean to say is that when I was a boy
I wanted to marble everything tender,
the way men look at a dress & only
see the wire on which a whole world rests.

not a lot is new. the horses are running at Belmont this weekend.
the sound of bug spray reminds me of you. which is funny.
I’m seeing a ton of skunks when I walk home at night. they really
do seem warm-hearted. I shared a car with Esther and she told
me I smelled like her high school orchestra. Rishi kissed my
shoulder after we went dancing. it feels like there’s always
some equinox about to happen. “littered with equinoxes.”
difficult to stay excited for them. the best part of the clams
were the garlic cloves cooked soft in the butter. there are scientists,
I don’t know which kind, that say in 50,000 years Niagara Falls
will erode away into Lake Erie and in 500,000 the Badlands will
flatten “like peaches in the bottom of the bag.” could you imagine?
how good it will be to have died so long ago and feel like ourselves again.

I go in search of the body,
her buzzed head,
but the glittering grid of her
topography, blinks so unlike mine,
            daunting. telepathic
that I am, of course you
would think me capable
of discerning myself
at any juncture, but how
warped the mirror. I desire,
am of desirous nature,
but when imaged
                        a rush
especially in winter
when the trees of Second Ave.,
which I have no name for,
are gussied to some ideal
            & the figure of me
strains to be righted
& simultaneous
& independent
            of her landscape

I’d always been told strawberries couldn’t grow
in Puerto Rico. There wasn’t the climate for it.
 
            Up here, in this finca, past the carcass
            of Peñuela’s petroleum past, where even
 
the hummingbirds are dizzy with height,
small strawberry studs slip off like beads
 
            from a necklace on my tongue. The farmer picks
            them gently from their fuzzy casing—warm
 
and tender from swallowing the world’s
beatings—as he shows us his budding coffee crop.
 
            Crecemos el café bajo sombra. 
            I think of all the work we do in the shadows.
 
Rearing coffee under the sun is hurried
and stifles taste. Its flavor should be layered,
 
            like the rock that makes this mountain,
            like this mountain of an island.
 
All plants are carbon-husked patience.
But coffee is a slow birth, a bean of push
 
            and pain that can take as long as four years to ripen.
            Intercropped with bananas, papayas and pyrethrum
 
to lure away pests, allow for just and solidary
growth, an abundant existence—this steep hill
 
            of harvest is everything we’re slowly trying to become.
            The farmer says after the hurricane, they lost
 
the majority of their coffee shrubs, and seeds
were swept away with everything else.
 
            Mass growers are striking deals and offering
            local farmers seeds, to grow and sell back to them.
 
We have to grow our own to be our own,
he smiles, splits open a coffee pod,
 
            drops the pulpy body
            in my hand and tells me to try it.
 
I’d always been told freedom would never come
for Puerto Rico. There wasn’t the climate for it.
 
            I ask the farmer about the strawberries. Son silvestres,
            he responds, and points to their beautiful excess.

In a Super 8 just outside Iowa 
City, two 12-year-old boys are 
 
cuddled on the lobby couch, 
scrolling on their phones. 
 
It is late and they don’t expect 
me, or anyone, 
 
in this holy space 
they’ve drawn for themselves. 
 
Their parents are asleep 
on the third floor, getting ready 
 
for a hockey tournament or some other
rough-and-tumble game. 
 
It’s clear by the way the boys
jump that their parents know nothing. 
 
The continental 
breakfast will start soon. 
 
The floor is lava. 
 
The couch they’re on is an island 
I’ve been to.

their green-blue blood pumped by three separate hearts: two branchial hearts to pump blood to its pair of gills, one heart for each gill, and the third to pump blood around the rest of the body.
i try to draw a comparison, some analogy between the three-hearted cuttlefish and our own mode of being and conclude:
a heart for the egyptian gill a heart for the american gill and a heart to reconcile, simply put.

i only want to talk about love
at a time like this. for example:
 
what a trick god played when she said
let there be light and there was light.
 
what a trick god plays when she breaks
open the firmament and sunlight topples
 
the earth. strikes its yellow hand upon the spotted
coat of a snow leopard. its claws pierced
 
through the furred body of a pika
as i sit safely within the last discerning moment
 
of the world, within the last discerning moment
of this poem about the sun calling forth the night
 
we were alone in a room with nobody else in it
and woke to the sun alone in a room
 
trying to save the only thing worth saving

what’s left is a constellation you can see
expanding across the ceiling
caught in the pull of different forces
 
train—snow—swan—necklace—root—pond 
 
a blast of winter spinning at its heart
 
aphid—sex—island—olive—start—hum 
 
the attraction between bodies slowly giving way
until everything appears in retrograde or retreat
 
blithe—dream—tropic—ox—study—day 
 
& there is nothing to be done
not in the offices of prayer
not in the poses you find in workbooks
 
slate—carnation—father—fall—breach—rag 
 
you can only lie across your narrow bed
& watch the satellites begin to burn
stars forming shapes you already knew
dimming as they near the ends of light
 
please—always—gulf—river—guitar—wait
 
but you can still see you can always see it there
the outline of what’s left as it keeps its word
a faint map to other worlds you built once
when the only law you loved was gravity
 
distant—wish—camera—purple—sun— ​

He
                        on        the edge of the bed
[me]
                        pushing           with a hand
                        to prevent
[him]  
                                     Lifting
                        his face
I                       pulled his hair              tight
              and
                                     with [a] knife
                                     removed a piece of flesh
             It is true
             it is true
             it is true
             it is true
 
I                       have killed him
                                    best I could

I'M READY TO TALK ABOUT RAGE
but do not ask me
about my father. Instead,
here is a shovel & plot
of dirt to dig & fill. Here
is my grandfather’s belt,
bent leather & eagle-head
buckle. Here is the dog
shot for tearing a piece
out of my cousin’s arm.
Here is a gun. Choke chain. 
Chain-link fence. Here
is a flagpole whittled
to a point at both ends.
Here is a careless country
& its careful bombs.
Here is a mirror. Mortar.
Fireworks & singed grass.
Here is a man & a man
with their shovels, each
digging a hole, hoping
to bury the other.

from all these love songs, from a lifetime of mornings
with Fairuz and the news that forces its way
into the house and razes the ground and collapses
the sky and, in cycles, for no discernible reason, passes us by?
That love can replace sleep? That so much of a life
can be squandered for fear of forgetting?
That sleep is a staircase and many a grandmother
sat on its first step, keeping vigil, clicking prayer beads?
That in the evening an old bridge is the best place
to watch the fog swallow the road, that October’s clouds
are sorrowing vessels? that rain is an unreliable lover?
That dry seasons, ever longer and more scorching, are the only certainty?
That in Arabic love and the wind share a name,
each a motion leaning toward what captures us?
That a breeze tender as July in the valley
can become a verb?             That we make promises
in the name of love and its changing winds? That a land
in which our hands have planted an olive tree
or harvested leaves from the grapevine claims us
as mercilessly as a first love?
That a lover can ask for the moon, a metaphor
for sleepless devotion, or for a clear sky
without night raids in which we can marvel
together at the burnished silhouettes of the hills?
That we can long for a love to return & to remain a longing?
That even though Fairuz sings Habibi, what’s the use of crying,
what, now, is the meaning of all these words we return
to the laments, a teaspoonful in each cup? That we portion the day
between ablutions and the stirring
of coffee grounds into a slender-armed pot, troubling
our paltry water supply for alternating sacraments?
That in the eye of an unravelling we’re still singing,
as those before us did, that it buries or sustains us,
we cannot know. 

Here is bramble and thorn, stinging asp
and copperhead, alder tree and swamp.
Here, the shreds of my first love strung
on a low-hanging branch. Here, the ashes of
a love I wasn’t allowed poured into a thousand
yellow jacket nests. Here is buzz and sting,
swell and ache, burn and burn. Not pictured:
his sweet, shocked face as I pulled away
from his kiss. How it is always rising
up from the murky water. He resurrects
and resurrects. And each time,
I know again that this is my fault.

​I am trying to let it die. We are moving in a few weeks
and I know I will forget to water it, to re-home it in the soil
 
of our new yard. I figured I’d let it shrivel now, and have one less thing
to haul up into the musty truck, one less item to cross off my packing list
 
and one less strain on arm, back. But every few days I catch a glimpse
of you from my living room window, bent over the small plant as if scolding
 
a young child, urging it to grow. You pick up the pollen-dusted watering can
left on its side under a bike wheel, take it into your apartment to fill it.
 
At first I felt violated, annoyed even, at your taking of my can,
your spontaneous husbandry of my plant, for I truly felt my neglect
 
was some kind of mercy and sense, and I know nothing about you except
that each morning I step over your minefield of empty beer cans
 
on our shared front porch, and I sometimes hear you scream
at the woman you live with from across the street when she locks
 
you out. But I see now, I see­ the way that you polish your motorcycle
for hours in the sparse yard, the way you wave at my dog when we pass
 
on our way out the door. When did I become a person who prematurely
ends things? God knows there’s beauty and purpose in quiet rot, in succumbing. 

​​Dear ____________,
 
              What repair. What weather system permitting
           mourning, some music, the hollowbody
                                               dress of a loved one. What worry I do nothing 
 
              humbly—dream the branches of your blood
                           lines as sunprint—. Feel creased as—.
                       What touch I’ve nailed to me I’ve nailed to me
                                               instead of all these cliff swallows. Their mud nests 
 
              suffocating the eaves. What refusal
                                                            to see ourselves to sleep until we rinse
                                   our feet—. Until someone has tied red threads
around my ankle to ward off a new year. In the field-dark
 
               the storm hovers, the cows sound
a riled sadness. What heat
                        lightning rising. Reverberant sky.
 
                                                  I am radioing from myself
                                  to myself. Endless desert
                                                             where I thought a drop-dead 
               winter should be. Some nights this
 
is all I can do to keep from—. I drink myself into a threat
                        to sleep off my dress
                                    by morning. What static electricity when we’re still
 
            in the eye of it. Thunder slow-dilating
                                                 overhead like a train whistle. The lake swallowing 
 
                         the thrill of lightning lines.
                                                           My only desire a desire to touch
                                                 —no one—for a year. Let the storm drag me
               bodyless into the hush of long grasses,
 
                                             fields brushed with sage, wait for someone
                          more remorseful—to pass through. —I’m leaving
with the perfume rising off my hair, two children
             asleep in their nests.   

This afternoon I’ve got a meeting with ____ ____ to tell her that the poem in which I call her my _____ ____ has been destroyed & I’ll never publish it or read it at a reading because I’m done writing about anyone I work with, she has my word.
 
In a lecture I wrote, I say I’ve been influenced by photography more than poetry & spent years writing poems in response to photography’s characteristic concerns. I say my career in poetry is one long synesthetic mistake. Now you can skip the lecture that anyway you weren’t planning on attending. Also, the lecture’s not really about photography & this isn’t a poem.
 
My new friend Monica just texted me. I’m allowed to use her name because she’s not a poet & I don’t work with her & I haven’t yet made that promise to ______ ______. Monica’s very beautiful & intimidating & I like her because, even though we haven’t ____ ______ together, we admitted to each other in low voices, in the dry goods aisle of Whole Foods, that we each like to ___ ____. I don’t remember how the topic came up & can’t say what Monica & I like because we’re moms & it’s not legal so I shoot blanks to protect her.
 
In my second lecture, the one about the legacy of confessional poetry, I get into it with Anne Sexton who is a terrible mother but a better poet than most people think. I talk about Lowell, Plath, Snodgrass but not so much Berryman. In the end, the lecture’s mostly me looking at Sexton looking at Sexton & at her daughter & her mother who are also Sexton.
 
Sexton, as I said, is a very good poet & a very bad mother. I say “is” because mothers can be bad even if they’re dead. My mother is. Bad & dead.
 
“As if it were normal / to be a mother and be gone” wrote Sexton.
 
Meanwhile _____’s mother has _____ which is sad & she would not like anyone to know.
 
I’ve got a poetry reading tomorrow with ______ & _____ who are excellent poets & intimidate me. Also, I love them & they are generous & by generous I mean not easily offended, which is a kind of love, don’t you agree?
 
I don’t know what to read. I’m sick of that new poem about my son worrying about death & the photographer Sally Mann & _____ has heard that already. I could read the poem about _____’s death, the one in which I use people’s initials instead of names so as not to offend them but _____’s brother suggested I change the initials to different initials & I haven’t done that yet.
 
An editor, by which I mean ____ _____, suggested I take the names out of my book. Can’t you do the same thing without using names? he asked. So I took out the name of a famous poet I didn’t know but kept dreaming about. The poems were kinder then or maybe crueler. They were definitely not the same. They were more about me & not about what had happened to the poet’s daughter.
 
I wonder, I said to the editor, If naming is a kind of love? But the editor said, Hasn’t he suffered enough? Tell them about the time you took out the names and it made the poem better, says the editor.
 
Lowell’s poems were a “ghoulish operation on his soul” said M. L. Rosenthal & Adrienne Rich called Lowell’s disclosures “bullshit eloquence,” I said in a lecture.
 
If you don’t have anything nice to say don’t say anything, says everyone.
 
I say nothing for five minutes. Then I say, By the way I was paid $_____ to write the lectures but it’s gauche—pardon my French—to discuss money.
 
Just then _____ calls. I say, You really don’t want to talk to me right now. She could hear tears in my voice & said, What’s up? I told her I’d been rejected from _____ & _____ & would not be spending any weeks writing in the woods waiting for a covered basket of lunch. Also I did not get a _______ & I had not been invited back to teach at _____.
 
All that’s not real! she shouted, which is something _____ never does, You get everything! Even the New Yorker! I wanted to hang up I felt so ______ but I knew she was right, this was not real. I felt _____ & ______, which felt all too real. Later ______ would apologize & say she was not herself but she was herself & I knew I should feel ______ of myself.
 
I mean really, what is it I don’t have that I want? I ask myself.
That’s the wrong question says ______.                            
 
If this is not a poem can I read it tomorrow at the reading?
If this is not a poem what is it?
A way to spend time with me?
A way for me to waste your time?
We voyeur each other & I perversify my proclivity to unprevaricate.
 
______ will not like the way I disparage myself in this way. ____ ____ will not like the way I am clearly talking about ____ & _____ & ______ & what will the gay guys think?
 
Does it offend everyone equally? asks ____.
Does that make it all right, I ask?
Without seeing the poem I have no way to know, says _____ but ______ doesn’t have time to read the poem or hear it on the phone.
 
Without the poem I have nothing to show of myself, I say.
Do you mean “for yourself”? ______ asks.
 
I have nothing other than these lectures. (I almost wrote “which cost me my right arm,” but didn’t write that because that’s not true although writing them has felt like _____ & has been hard as shit & fucked up my language, which is why I just wrote “hard as shit,” which is a stupid thing to write. At the very least I should write “hard as old shit” since fresh shit isn’t hard at all. “Hard as old shit” is more precise but is not something a real poet writes in a real poem.)
 
I write: “My son is very boring. To be more precise, I find being with him boring.”
 
He wants to talk about soccer or Star Wars or Ellen DeGeneres, none of which interests me. I did, however, like the new Avengers movie because Mark Ruffalo & Robert Downey Jr. are hot as hell or hot as shit or hot as ____. I’m allowed to name them in poems because they’re celebrities & also this is not a poem.
 
      just write “often” 
      just write “like” 
      just write “the way the light [dot] [dot] [dot]” 
      say “landscape” or say nothing
 
For the record I, too, am a bad mother. Actually, I am an amazing mother, but all I want to do is work.
 
The other two sons are not boring. To be more precise, I find being with them enormously stressful.
 
I sometimes often find the way the light the landscape. Haha.    
 
All I want to do is work.
 
“Perverse” as in: a deliberate, obstinate desire to behave in a way that is unacceptable.
As in: T minus minutes to soccer.
Or: roll two sheets of paper together—black & any other color—tape the seam = makeshift light saber.
 
The most interesting thing about me is ______.
 
That last blank has been left blank not because I am afraid of hurting someone’s feelings or that it will negatively affect my career but because there is nothing interesting about me. If I were not practicing discretion I’d say the only interesting thing about me is my compulsive confessing.
 
      Dear Anne Sexton
      you were a bad mother
      I am a better mother
      than you were
      bully for me
      that’s not saying much
      on the other hand
      you are a better poet
      so many are this is not
      false modesty
      this is the truth
      which no one
      asked me for
 
After hearing my lecture on photography, Colin said I could not use the word “truth” without indexifying the term. I have no idea what Colin means & here I use his real name as a way of calling him out & to protect myself from the shame of believing in truth. If I can’t say “truth,” fuck it, I’ll write “Colin” even if he is the boyfriend of my dear friend & might not like being in this poem. There I go again calling everything a poem!
 
I’m sick of my “I” & “she” pronouns, sick of what an editor called “the role of authenticity in your work” in which “role” means pretending something is something else, in which “you” means I. For example I am not actually sick when I say being a woman is _____ to me all these babies later. When I say being straight & white wah wah [dot] [dot] [dot]
 
It is despicable to be so ______. I mean really it is ______ to be so _______.
 
After my lecture on the legacy of confessional poetry my fifteen-year-old son said, So your lecture’s about how we should feel sad for unhappy white women which you are? Everyone laughed. My son is very funny & smart. Not often hardly boring.
 
It turns out my sons are my best work but all I want to do is work.
 
Put it in the book! says ____, about a book we are & are not writing together, a sequel to our book about birth. This one will be about sex & middle age & we will say all the things we did not say before which will be very difficult to do after I make my vow. Oh me & my upcoming meeting! Will ____ ______ believe I’ve seen the error of my ways? Not if she comes to this reading.
 
What I want is a socially acceptable financially viable reason to be away from my children for weeks & weeks & weeks & weeks.     
 
Last night I dreamed I was trying to get my husband to have sex with me & every time he acquiesced it turned out we were in public. Despite the fact that no one seemed interested in watching us, he kept stopping because he was not into having sex in public & we ended up (in the dream) watching a movie with ____ & _____ & ____ put his hand on my leg & it occurred to me that this might be what I’d long ago experienced as a come-on although even in the dream the phrase “come-on” was so remote I kept thinking it wasn’t the right idiom. Meanwhile, _____ had his hand on my leg & I thought (in the dream) at this point there is no way I would say no to anyone, which is not the same exactly as wanting to say yes to _____, but looks a lot like it because of course ____ is “anyone.”
 
______, who shouted at me because I get everything even the New Yorker & with whom I am & am not writing a book, has ______ sex. She has it a lot & writes about it. I know this because she tells me all about it. Actually she tells me as much as she thinks I can handle, which is not very much. Also, I just read her new book which was supposed to be about her dead baby but has an awful lot of sex in it none of which is awful. In fact, I just read her poem about a student she had a crush on & how she wondered if her instructions in workshop were a kind of come-on which reminded me of my dream & also of my vow never to write a poem like that again at least not after my meeting which is in only a few hours. From now on I will only write about Mark Ruffalo & Robert Downey Jr. & I will not listen to my friend when she says if I want my needs met maybe I need a new partner so there we are:
 
Me & my _____ friend & her ___ poems & mine, although this is not a poem.
 
      Dear Mom
      I wrote two lectures
      one about photography
      & one about confessional
      poetry but they were not
      about those things
      both lectures were
      veiled ways of
      explaining to you
      why I insisted on
      publishing a book
      you didn’t want me
      to publish
      it is difficult to
      explain this to you
      because you are
      dead because you died &
      the last thing you said
      to your therapist was
      “Tell Rachel not to
      publish the book”
      & I did anyway
      I thought Dad had
      lost his mind
      when he said
      “I am upset
      Diane died—this
      makes it much more
      difficult to speak
      with her.”
      I called my
      stepmother to say
      please deal with
      Dad I couldn’t
      deal with anything
      not myself not my
      sons I had become
      a woman who had
      killed her own
      mother but Dad
      was right it is
      more difficult
      to speak to you
      but I keep trying
 
 
      Dear Mom
      I think I have to
      write the story of
      what happened
      this time without
      research without
      indexifying anything
      if I even knew what
      that meant I think
      I will never be able
      to write a poem
      until I can
      explain myself
      to you which I
      never can
 
Perhaps that’s why I’m stupid enough to swear I’ll never write another poem about anyone I know or use names, only my own maybe not even my own even if it means I show up to the reading with nothing new nothing mine nothing “true.”
 
I almost wrote love cancer Wayne Jason Arielle 40K Yaddo MacDowell Guggenheim Daniel enraged ashamed exposed torture elitist crazy obnoxious privilege narcissistic libidinous lusty but stopped myself just in time.In the beginning,
a field
broke grass
from dark
earth & fertilizer,
but crops
would not grow.
City crept
closer. Before you
& I were born,
our hearts
were ripe fruit
dangling
in a lonely
woman’s backyard.


            ▪
 
94 years ago, a stranger slept

with the window open. Fog surged

into his room. Imagine waking

from a dream of sky to sky.


            ▪
 
Tonight, your face vanished
from my mind’s unending
mirror. A blue sadness replaced it.
A sound not of your voice,
not your laughter, but the wild
echo of a gunshot. I strike
my dresser’s mirror, break off
a shard the size of your head.


            ▪
 
There are 86 kinds of sadnesses in this room

alone. I’ve counted each of them: the long serpent

standing upright to the height of the ceiling,

the warm bear skulking the corner, his fur

matted in dust. I’ve grown a blue

mantis the size of my hands. I’ve fed it

copper & hyacinth. & often, the black caracara

locked in the closet ululates at night.
 
            ▪
 
I’ll carry the nightstand, carry
the bed & the desk,
the lamp & the moth circling the lamp

to a new room
in a new country. I’ll wear a different tongue.
 
I’ll lacquer the moon. I’ll build a bookshelf
from the bark of a dead tree. I’ll kiss
a man. I’ll kiss a man. I’ll kiss

& ask the moon: when did my brother become myth?
 
His face a brown blotch in my dreams.
His skin particles floating in the sunlight.
 
            ▪
 
Some dull hour in the future this alcove
will be emptied of sound. In a steel table,

            in a changing city, my humbled body
            will open for the last time at the hands

of a stranger. I’ll love them for this final act
of surrender. For the kind

            stitch & staple, & later, these walls
            will hold in them the hum of two lovers,

which is to say two men, or two women
burrowing into each other’s breath.

The patio is an island which floods in its sleep,
each room elopes with the bird
that smashed into a very clean window,
and the on-call physician is dying
for a hamburger at this unreasonable hour.
What exactly do you mean by brain memory?
Soon almost every ostrich will have
its own passenger. That’s what I mean.
She talks about lobsters and methamphetamine.
A few of them live in my esophagus,
she says. But that’s not always the case.
The problem is I’m obsessive and shaped
like a pear. I once knew a coffin maker,
was hired to clean his office building.
At night, long pink tubules descended
from the ceiling like snakes exchanging recipes.
(I did my job, I did my civic duty.)
In the morning, he staggered in
with a bowl of oranges, whistling.
My head was full of amoeba.
But the actual conversation escapes me.
Maybe that’s a good principle to live by:
if you get stuck, stay where you are,
say, pineapple, pineapple, pineapple.

​​I hate all the people who still have mothers.
 
1.
 
I am here to shoulder the grief, a year later. I am here to
refresh my lexicon, as I tell my students. I am here to change my language.
 
In London, at the blood bank, in the middle of St Thomas’ hospital,
where an ambulance stutters silent, docks at a concrete pier, is her
museum. A museum my mother never visited,
in a city that has nothing to do with her.
2.

​I rip up the notebooks scrawled in the midst of the first deep grief and retype and tell myself that I am now more dispassionate. Yet I want a record of the words. Looking over my notes written in class on a James Joyce essay we read last spring. “How can my mother be dead be dead be dead” I wrote and wrote and wrote.
 3.
 
In Sutaru, on the battlefields, Florence bandaged    salved   saved   wound   and wound
white cloth around a wound
 
In those days hospitals were where people went to die— 
 
4.
 
My mother refused the hospital— 
 
Shoulder, I write during my class, thinking of my mother’s body
at the funeral home when I should have clipped a piece of her hair.
Why did I not have scissors in my pocket?
 
Grief: to make heavy   to wear a necklace burdening the throat
to lift the heft of a baby  her bare legs gripping your mother’s hips
 
breath pressed out of your body
 
5.
 
Repeated dream after my mother dies where I sleep in a box of dragonflies the size of
palms. Perhaps they came from my own body. Or hers.
 
6.
 
My mother refused— 
 
Care: A burdened state of mind, as that arising from heavy responsibilities; worry.
 
Mental suffering; grief. An object or source of worry, attention, or solicitude: 
 
We did not know she was dying. Never saw
 
blue and white pad, laid on the bed then the butterfly needle, its delicate
hooped wire, IV taped to a forearm’s pale skin.
 
7.
 
Dry nurse. Wet nurse. Nurse: a worker that attends to the young in a colony of insects.
 
8.

How much I want to believe: charge, custody, keeping, supervision, trust
in watching, guarding, or overseeing.
and yet my mother died suddenly on the couch
 
I never sat by the bed long enough all night while she slept or not wondering
would I be able— 
 
 
9.
 
At the museum I learn that Florence took care of her collections:
 
A box containing seeds and plant specimens that Florence collected in Greece along with
her notes on exactly where she found them.
 
A fly swatter. She used oil to protect against insect bites. She also wore green sunglasses
and packed a lined umbrella as well as a small dingy for her trip to Europe.
 
Objects that will now forever make me sad:
Salem 100s.
Velvet dollhouse curtains she sewed with extras from my Christmas dress. 
Newark airport.
Her silver mixing bowl. 
Her French books.
My daughters. 
Her handwriting.
 
10.
 
She can’t breathe did we not give her the close attention did we not know she can’t
breathe  
 
A door slammed shut. A lung.
 
How I kept my own collection:
 
Skirt I wore when I came home, thrown in the backyard trash.
 
Back of a fentanyl patch, fly-paper sticky
 
Pills to grind under my heel as I might slam out the door
 
11.
 
a lung—this taking care, this hand on a back, over a shoulder, this surgical glove,
 
                                                                                  shiver of silver and green​— 

The year Debbie got
her period, I would visit
her in her new house
on days she wasn’t
seeing doctors or locked
in her closet or hadn’t
wedged herself tight
between the white wall
and the bunk bed
and we would swim
in her pool, wearing big
t-shirts and soccer shorts,
diving to the bottom to save
her Barbies, who she’d flung
there and who, she said
each time, were drowning.

Time is physical. I have been cutting these ropes a long
time. I have been smearing my palm along
time. “I have finished my screenplay.” “It’s about
 
Well, some contend foliage amounts time
some, and mood entirely. I have seen that tree, I have written
that I’ve seen that tree, I feel fine.
I take truths down easy now. I have a notebook. I list them in it.
 
No distance forms your small and yellowy home but time. In it
an event unfolds, and
if you’d like, visualize hands unfolding it, smooth, creases, sure. I’m going
to
             archive
my voice now
but keep watching, I’ll keep talking
you through
             it.

In our dreams starlings fly roundelays
above a city of ruins and tumble down
down into invisible trees
confused but alive
 
Out of the dust blots at first
what seems a starling
what is a drone— 
ah here in these streets seven hundred years old
the disappointments of modernity patrol
 
Someone                       is shouting
you never knew

With spoiled milk seeping
from its many small brown mouths,                                       
my body twitched loose the dead
skin snaked around it, dripped                       
runes in the doorway,
heaved bullet after bullet
into the tub—but did not die.
There are claw marks
& hot grease stains                             
where things came through.
Signature survival signs
etched around my belly—                                                     
at the hinge, in the crevices.
All of it evidence: I did give birth                   
to something. There was a killing here— 
of a kind. Something is lost now,                   
forced from a room in me. Something
is stifled in this body; I have become             
a deconstructed basket
of rose-colored towels
singing on the hospital’s floor.           
Some nights, I think this body
must still be calling out to the child
that tore through it or trying to
forgive itself for giving itself over
to the strange & inconvenient truth
that not all mothers—are mothers.
Some mothers are war—an enemy                             
of their own desires. Some mothers
are graveyards—a field of want                                                         
buried beneath other fields of want.
Some nights, I think this body
must still be praying to a god
that has long since slithered away.

THEY SAID I WAS AN ALTERNATE,
so I thought like an alternate
Answered black when asked
 
where is the nearest bathroom,
guilty
 
as charged when
the barista called the name
 
I made up, only
half-expecting judgment
 
My new way
I mostly liked
 
until the bailiff said, “silence
your cellphones”
 
or “you have
the right to remain silent,”
 
to which I felt compelled
to raise my right hand

It takes a dozen people
hand to hand
to make a circle around me
Is this the best use
for these twelve people?
 
I recommend instead
of parking at the top
starting with the Giant
Forest Museum
 
My side of the story
is on display in a drawer
of gently accruing
paper files
 
It’s never been
my dream to be hugged
 
I don’t dream
 
Nights are lonely sure
but once the visitors are gone
existence
can be contemplated

SOMEONE SHOULD TELL YOU WHERE YOU ARE GOING
when you sleep,
apples fall out your mouth
and tumble, wet wounds,
to the ground. wake and
the work of forgetting begins.

today, the dishes must be done.
today, the stairwell is still
too narrow for two people.
today, you will pass someone
on your way down.

now, you imagine a dry grief,
a swollen tongue.
you memorize a lake-like sort
of peace, the kind soaked in stillness.
you must keep moving.

you don’t think you’ll find yourself
even if you go somewhere else.
​
wake again and
again and always find a hollow
mouth, a tongue that tastes of night.
someone should tell you
where you are going.

I tried to mouth hope but kept saying hatch-
et. Sing something to stay awake. Here’s
a song about our ancestors:     they wore
masks for fear of angels knowing their faces.
They fastened sails to their boats. Paradise,
mother says, hides       behind old family
photographs—the dark we hold but dare not
open. Empty bird nest in the old barn.
 
When I remember you             I remember
the animal we built out of stray bones
from the riverbed. The relic rich ground:
the half-buried horseshoe I tripped over.
You shake sun from your hair—I’ll wear your pearls.
All the trees of the field will clap their hands.

—Then I climbed back down, and he went on.
 
Later, I saw him: the five petals of a common flower.
Later still, a kind of magnolia I hadn’t known.
 
What could be better?, I guess.
Looking for him didn’t work; I had to wait.
 
There was so much in-between.
Some kindnesses hit hard. The clerk who called me honey.
 
I didn’t know how I’d go on and did go on.
The weather provided continuing interest.
 
Rain happened mostly overnight.
In the morning the grass was wet; I must have slept.

My friend kisses
a silver Jesus hanging
below his throat—.
My sister’s friend
wore a pond like a crown;
he handwrote her a letter
before fading
beneath water.
If god were a spider
I’d toss the Big Book at it.
In the sober house
I puked bricks
for an entire year,
stacked them
until they took shape
of a normal kind of me.
I’m soft as tomentum.
There’s a woman
I’ll always love
in a cave’s-mouth-
sipping-moonlight
kind of way.
Her face is a guillotine.
How I love sharpness.
There are no clouds
swollen with souls
in outer space.
An artist carved
the underworld
onto stone. My niece
draws lemons
in red marker.

A listener discrimination is a nonverbal response to another’s verbal behavior.

With our son on my lap     I ask
 
                                   where’s your nose?
 
             & he taps it lightly
 
                         a question mark
 
                stuck in his eyes
 
                       It’s too early     I think     too early
 
            for him to allow someone else 
 
                         to give his body 
 
                                       a name.

