I hover somewhere back behind
the map inside the skull that guides me
through these small streets
to dinner. Everybody in elegant clothes.
Resting in the air condition. It is inevitable
that we will each die in named storms,
that we will be blown against the walls
behind our faces. Sounds made from
the boxes in my friends’
throats. Be more like the doorway
to the restaurant, to hold and frame
these people. The beer Dan holds,
that weeps in Dan’s left palm.
Jane’s earrings shaped to look like birds.
The soft music, the fixtures.
Cities beneath serious rain. They have
brought out for us complimentary
orange drinks. Jeremy laughs until the joke
is well over, and the music is so low
it is done. We are disappearing into
the map’s folds. Small birds. Smaller ones. 

You button this coat as if one sleeve
was grown from marrow, the other
filled with an immense wave

constantly arriving as winter
—with a simple twist your heart
slows, lies side by side a great bear

curled up as stars—you feed it water
warm from the same climbing turn
flowing through your fingers

making room for the night sky
the dead try on, go out further and further
and though the holes are weak

they pull you in, are swallowing you
hiding your arms from outside corners
and just for tonight nothing ever closes.

How about adopting a fully grown girl? Says a broken-headed doll. The dyed-black lace flaps. Talks with its mouth shut. I wonder, mutters a broken-armed doll, arms crossed. Wire showing through the puff sleeve. A girl can’t be fully grown. A girl hasn’t grown, won’t grow. The broken-headed doll and the broken-armed doll talk. Not the girls I’ve seen, anyway. In the abandoned box, earnest ventriloquism continues. Even though at the time we could move our phenomenal bodies outside the box. Every time we speak, pieces of plastic fall from the head, from the arms. When they adopted us, the girls named us. Remember? A name is a name if we remember. The broken-headed doll’s lashes quiver. Damn. What am I supposed to remember with half a head? Someone steps on the wire sticking out of the box. The left-tilting doll’s arms are a mess. If I could cuddle you with my one arm. If I could inch closer to you by coming undone. Girls gather in the alley and talk, not moving their lips. It’s possible if you clench your stomach, as though to keep from crying. A conversation so quiet that it’s beyond anyone’s understanding unless someone writes it down. The girls come here and talk like dolls, pausing their growth. Touch one another’s heads, dress one another’s arms in gauze. What was your name? The girls look into the box. Try to put together the broken joints. They fall apart. We should have adopted ourselves from the start. Ever since we were born, there hasn’t been a good opportunity. The girls peer into the broken mirror where words have gathered in a cabinet. By exchanging looks, they have a conversation.

it’s bad for the lungs to drink the black air. in the walls of the lungs sits soot. all night long my body aches. there’s so much of it, this night. i carry it out, i bring it in, and then i forget, and then it’s morning. even in the lungs the morning switches on. i look around (my habit is back) to see if anything’s gone missing in the night. nothing but a few pages torn out of an extravagant book. and intricately inscribed above the restless conclusion: the morning sun. as if that night without a nose will never come.

I went to the doctor and found out
there is an empty city inside me.

The streets are broad and mostly clean.
Trees are few and far between.
No cars are parked on the boulevards.

Why has it been abandoned, this city?
Who used to live here, and why
did they rush off to the countryside?

I admit I was distressed by the news.
I had hoped for a mist-cloaked wilderness,
or at least a ragged branch of crows.

Instead I wander silent apartments.
The closets brim with winter clothes.

Now I lie awake and wonder what will they
do when the winds of November come
and bite through their thin summer dresses?

It has always been like this: I slept
in a pack on your belly, wanting 

to knit myself into your lobe and herd.
I needed to get down into you. 

Born I drained our mother’s very teeth.
For months my dewy infant head 

refused to grow, refused the silver rope
of cleaving cells, unending surface area 

of other and other. But you: you are
the surefoot, knotted to your own 

tender oil of trees. I have not
given any teeth, sister, only wander. 

My stomach never calmed;
it marked me with its milk and chew.

Already the arrow blasts against
my forehead: I should be going on, 

fruitless as I could be unwritten,
written out. Each day my mouth opens 

on that disunion, a brilliant cleft of air.
You must know something 

of the same rupture, so where is
your face when I turn to it? 

At this point I’ve lost the story,
am looking for a sister ship

half-buried in someone else’s snow.
Still I take on the edges of your lake 

as my child oath, shake all that I know
into outlines you recognize. 

I lean my open neck against yours.
The miracle always returns with a hunger.

sing and sing till your voice is a bullet
you are waiting inside
your father’s shadow

take your hands beyond
the starlight

perhaps it is the lullabies
of sheet mistaking you
for a pillow

only that there is no water in the river
anymore 

and fire too is a tongue
waiting to be caressed to live

you can’t have the world
to yourself
maybe you should
give yourself to the world

your legs on the floor:
like this and like that
your tongue mistaking blood
for wine

your voice is shawled
with a magnifying glass 

you will open your wounds
and make them a garden
& explain to the wind
the origin of pain

Earlier, a hare sunk her haunches
into the snow

and kept still long enough to vanish.

When she became fog,
you were at the throat of a frozen river

and saw, somehow, yourself unbloom.

You know what it means to slink
into another noun,

you know how to pull down a tree
with only your teeth,

jaws snapping roots until fingernails
can pick away the clay.

You know what it means
to unhome a body,

to collapse a pillar that may have, one day,
become a tower.

This will always be your first line
of defense:

clipping your longings until you billow
and reed,

loosening your reflection from winter ice,

staying hare still
until there are no trees left at all.

Imagine a bird who lays her egg
then picks it up and flies without
landing until it hatches
Imagine a thousand
of these birds chopping away
at the soggy light

Since you died a thousand birds
have daily flown through me

each leaving behind an egg
some of which rotted
some of which hatched
releasing more birds that pecked
at my skull
but not generating the noise
and pain one might expect
It’s more like hearing
someone typing
an endless suicide note
in a room at the end
of a carpeted hall

Always one egg remains in me intact
and each time I yank it out
each time I crack it and crush it and throw
away the shell
it reappears whole

I pull it out and pull it out

I break it a thousand times
but nothing is ever inside

I carry it and carry it           I do not land

Papo stole a car so he wouldn’t be late for school, the first bell
and the last chapter of the book you taught in English class.
He wanted to know how the story would end. His story ended
in handcuffs and jail, his gold star attendance record ruined.

I would steal a car for you, even though the keys no longer
dangle from the ignition as they did the year I was born.
I’ve never stolen a car, though I confess to vandalism,
ripping the hood ornament off a Mercedes to improvise
a belt buckle. My pants fell down anyway, leaving me
with skinned knees, a mouth spraying obscenities
and a story to tell. My pants still fall down today,
and you laugh till your face turns birthday-balloon pink,
so I do it again, a rodeo clown rehearsing the rescue
of the cowboy from the horns of a charging bull.

I may be sixty-two, but I wish I could steal a car for you.
You would spin the wheel and parallel park, graceful
as an ice skater gliding backwards in a figure-eight.
I would have a story to tell, not a story where I play
all the parts with all the voices, only to learn that
you’ve heard the story a dozen times before. I would
steal a car to hear your stories, the tale of the boy
who stole a car so he would not be late for school.

I’ve heard the story many times before, but tell me
again about the first time we sat together and you knew
what all the crooners of all the ballads on all the car
radios in history could never find the words to sing:
I felt my blood flinch, you say. Tell me again how
you offered up a bag of raw almonds in your hand
and my fingers dipped into the bag. Tell me again
and again how we slow-danced in the parking lot
to the crooning of a Cuban ballad singer on the car radio.

1.

The Pacific Ocean at night, seen from inside a bus full of strangers en route to Dominical by way of the Interamerican highway. This is what I’m thinking about now. It’s an ordinary image without a doubt, but (for some reason) it won’t leave me alone. An arbitrary image that comes back every now and again, same as those waves I can almost see unmaking themselves in the sand; branches, seashells, a sandal, corks, and wine cartons brought back like buoys from some other ruin run aground on a new continent. The sea at night, when it’s invisible. When it speaks in tongues, so that we know it’s still there, where sight doesn’t serve us. The night’s sea, lonelier and even less fathomable than the day’s. The sea of simpler songs only the drowned and the fish know to sing.

Earlier the same night, the same sea, the same sand where, without a word, we’d bury our feet up to the ankles, rapt by the fire and the embers dervishing until they disappear with a crackling in the air only half-heard. Not so far away, someone is listening to a radio, listening to news of a world that may as well have been suspended a million light years from what is here now. Others come up close behind us. We overhear a conversation that could have been an extension of our own. And yes, the dogs barking in back yards, all the house lights going out one by one.

2.

Of all nights, why dream of an ex-girlfriend you haven’t heard anything about since graduation on this night in particular? Why, in the dream, is she wearing nothing but a bikini, still looking the way she did during your senior year in high school?

On a Thursday, say, running the same errands you’d run any other day, why are you suddenly willing to give one of your thumbs to go back to the bench you woke up on, in a depressing little park outside of Dominical on New Year’s Day? That morning, destroyed, having to face a standoffish ocean, no money for the bus, bodies all around, lying there still, the deviants you swore you’d love forever, arms around each other’s necks last night, howling. The sea does not explain. The sea does not care to, not to us anyway.

An over-population of fauna on the shore, the vacationing kind. The sea, where it’s deepest, moving to the imperceptible rhythm of fossil fuel. Fishermen, further in, pissing covertly. Seagulls and small aquatic mammals escort boats traveling with only one man aboard.

Those who, facing the ocean, close their eyes and make empty promises. Those who do the same, but don’t close their eyes. Those who stand in ankle-deep water, believing the whole ocean’s knowable from that depth. Those who let themselves be buried in the sand, those who build sandcastles. Those who pitch messageless bottles into the ocean, belching. Those who intuit the ocean is no more than a whole lot of water.

In the family album, an empty space, a rectangle: lost photograph of the boy with a tendency towards obesity, alone on the beach, standing in front of the Pacific, the cleanest morning in 1974. That morning, at a right angle, his figure and the slight shadow he casts over the sand forms a sundial. The sea like hard candy.

I am your abyss, your ash and your hell,
I am your very last glance, may you recognize it.

I am your last spark, to which I bid farewell
and with it I wish to kindle a rainfall.

I am your first love’s heir,
the green jealousy of your lovers.

I am a diary. You dance within its pages,
a demon claps out from the storm: Divine!

Your breath is my bread and I – a knife,
such bread belongs only to me, the one who consumes it.

I am a crimson hospital at twilight
where your eyelashes still quiver inside.

I am a woodpecker in a forest of stars,
I peck out from my own self my tears.

I am your young death. And here I am found:
In me is your skeleton. I carry it within.

As it reaches an arm
toward the clouds, the stone
catches a glimmer
of light from the morning star.

It’s not a spell or enchantment,
but the innocence of beauty,
revealed in form.
Yet how can this beauty survive
in a nightmarish world?

The chisels chip the truth,
but a candle burns inside stone.
You can hold the morning star
in your hands like a child
caught in a lie, but you can
never imagine the mystery
of the creation or that

paradise where the sun
never scorches, and stars never fall
or flame out in the sky, where there is no
birth or death, and the shadows
never touch the fossilized bones
of people and animals,
their screams pressed into stone.

That early star is not for us.

I know my turn will be soon. I’ll feel the blow as I walk carefree. The sweaty hand will cover my mouth, and I’ll vomit my scream into his palm. A bullet will carve a heart in my skull, or perhaps a metal blade will tattoo a necklace on my neck. Between his fingers, my blood will become a river as wide as the Río Bravo. Before they arrive, I tear out my pupils and guard them on the bottom of the sea. They’re comfortable there; the salt tastes like tears to them. I sharpen my nails and scratch my skin. I practice the only thing left for us: collecting evidence for the coroner. Before they find me I’m already a cadaver. I seal myself in a coffin and pretend to be dead. That way death is a game of hide-and-seek and not a witness to the terror.

I know my turn approaches, just like that of the women on the borders, in the wars, in the homes they groom and embellish before the punishment. This fate of bruises on the skin no longer surprises us. Only dusty shoes tossed on the road shall remain. Lonely shoes that dream of a fairy tale in which a prince finds his mistress in the arches of our dead feet.

is the trench depth, is the folding in
and under, under and in, is the further
hidden doubling of memory: was it the bleach
or the brine that stung as I ragged myself clean—
yes, I remember, the salt in the wound,
the scorning sigh of the sea pushing that spineless
creature from her depths, dragging its belly
over my soft dirt, it’s gargled dirge
of progress. A slick spill still spilling:
the curve of meniscus coiling like a seahorse
tail, the curl that named the hippocampus,
a creature more myth than morphology.
Memory is no solid monument but liquid’s
twins of substance and ceaseless swell.
I know what he carries in his belly and smears
on my thigh. Not the saltwater. Not the slippery
eggs bursting in male birth. Nothing other
than the pale fire of mine, mine, mine—
saline whisper dragging blood
into my lungs, bullying out any untainted
breath. The blood I suck when biting
down—the salt of metal and sting
of ooze I am drowning in.

As is the name of the earth, goes this good one.
As is the name of the molten river.
As is the name, that river goes forth.

The moon in the trees was a good moon,
The world in the sound-bite, a good world.
As in tunneling, the years went forth.

Narrow misses. Some bright star for stopping.

Madeleine gave me pomegranate seeds.
Betsey gave me strong tea with sugar.
Already we have suffered over the dropped fruit enough.

Already we have drunk the wine and suffered.

I have not yet come to a place of stopping.
You have not yet come to a place of stopping.
This is the way. Some people have hands.

Being a woman, you flow and keep.
There’s a birthing-tent waiting on the plains.
This is the way. Some people have hands.

As a deer longs for streams of water, so my heart longs for You,
how the red, wet animal in my chest throbs Your name.

I gather a garland of the day’s eyes, sew a crown of branch and nettle,
bleach clean the antlers of a fallow.

Before ceremony, the church pews sing a language of hunger.
Every beast I’ve slain has come to bear witness,

fill each seat with their mangled bodies. I’m so close to madness,
Father, stretch my hands, guide me towards Your light.

You who knows and whose vast knowing undoes me—
the rush of my blood is You.

The faithful pacing of my lungs is You.
Forfeit my eyes in lace and I’ll still feel You.

Come find me, Baba, in the church of wheat and sunlight.
Before You, I am disciple, bride, guardian of Your perfect name.

My body is merely a tool of execution. Take me as yours,
and I will follow You. O, how possible I feel in Your light.

Every bird should have the right
to die by night
over the sea
to be swallowed
by the restless mirror
and float on.

Every bird should have the right
to never touch the ground,
to remain suspended in the silence
of a blue sky reflected
in a portal to the other side.

They should have the right
to never close their wings.

I touch my toes.

When I was a child,
this was difficult.
Now I touch my toes daily.

In 2012, in Sanford, Florida,
someone nearby was touching her toes before bed.

Three weeks ago,
in the Philippines or Myanmar, someone was stretching.

Tomorrow, someone elsewhere will bend
first to one side, then the other.

I also do ten push-ups, morning and evening.

Women’s push-ups,
from the knees.
They resemble certain forms of religious bowing.

In place of one, two, four, seven, 
I count the names of incomprehension: Sanford, Ferguson, Charleston.
Aleppo, Sarajevo, Nagasaki.

I never reach: Troy, Ur.

I have done this for years now.
Bystander, listener. One of the lucky.
I do not seem to grow stronger.

Four billion people on Earth.
And all of them sleep, all of them dream.
Every dream is crowded with faces and bodies—
there are more dreamed people than there are us.
But they don’t take up any space…
You might happen to fall asleep at the theater.
In the middle of the play, your eyelids sink.
A moment’s double exposure: the scene
up there is superseded by a dream.
Then there’s no scene anymore, there’s you.
The theater in its honest depths!
The mystery of the overworked
stage manager!
The interminable new rehearsals…
A bedroom. It’s night.
The dark sky flows through the room.
The book that someone fell asleep to
is still spread open
and lies wounded on the edge of the bed.
The sleeper’s eyes are moving,
they’re following the letterless text
in another book—
illuminated, archaic, quick.
A breathtaking commedia that’s printed
behind the eyelids’ monastery walls.
A single copy. It’s right here and now!
Tomorrow it will all be deleted.
The mystery of the great extravagance!
Obliteration…Like when the tourist is stopped
by suspicious men in uniform—
they open the camera, unroll his film
and let the sun kill the pictures:
so the dreams are blacked out by the light of day.
Obliterated or just invisible?
There’s an out-of-sight dreaming
always going on. Light for other eyes.
A zone where crawling thoughts learn to walk.
Faces and figures are regrouped.
We’re moving along a street, among people
in the blazing sun.
But there are just as many or more
we don’t see
who are inside the dark buildings
that rise up on either side.
Sometimes one of them goes to the window
and glances down at us.

Beloved, last night I doused us in good bourbon,
struck a match between our teeth, slid the lit head
lip to chest, throat zippered open and spilling.
Our union demands a sacrifice. Take my masks—
my wretched, immaculate children. Sharp smiles
bored by cavities. Braids thick with hair slashed off
lovers as they slept. The masks grew limbs and danced,
so last night, to the fire—plank pushed, cackling
as they bubbled and split. Then dreamless dark.
Then mercy, somehow, morning reached for me.
Sun found us swaddled in sweat-through sheets.
Gauze and salve while night wore off. O body,
always healing despite me. O body, twin spy
tasked against my plot to rush the dying,
guardian of the next world’s sweets, yes,
I’ll lick this salt. Yes, I’ll wait our turn
because today, we hold hands, mother
each other, bathe in warm coconut oil.
Our union, our long baptism. O body,
all I forced you to know of thirst. Yes
body, you are owed a whole lake. Yes
body, I’ll kiss our wrists, hold them
to our ears and spend our days
losing to the waves.

We were made to suffer. Mostly,
the man you love doesn’t know you

love him, and the woman you love
can’t say that she loves you often

enough where you might believe it
in your horse-heart. Even the dog

you love, you leave with a stranger,
better than you with a green yard—

small but full of sun and crickets
and a corner where the oak shade

lights the ground like a darker star—
somewhere. You must have visited

once in a dream, you were lucky
to stay and now you can never

go back. You can never return
what you took (then used to ruin)

like the hero, who is content
in killing everything without

consequence, firm in the belief
nothing should be met with silence.

The dragonflies hatched last night,
twin-winged ghosts in porchlight
still world-wet and spinning,
unsure whether to chase the bulb
or wave. So much different from the doe,
cock-eared in riverweed, staring at me
through the glass door. We both stop
and meet each other as statues
of ourselves—her flecked in fear and thirst,
and me dead from another night
of missing you. The ice slips
in the whiskey I am bringing
outside, where earlier woodpeckers
hammered out their rotary numbers
and the sky didn’t know enough
to threaten rain. I stand stupid,
looking at the hushed beast
whose mouth opens to the pond
she wants. And I don’t know then
how to disappear enough
for neither of us to see me,
for one of us to feel safe to take
what we need.

I am the first of the sky’s monotonies,
the star you cannot pick up from the grass

after I’ve fallen, eons of fallings there.
I move too fast toward taking shape

in figurations of the morning clouds
dispersing when you try to give us names.

I am the name behind the names, remembering
my origins at the formation of the world.

Christians would call me Christ, I’ll take that name
an instant or two, beside Big Bang or Chaos.

But I have others with more jagged edges,
more spiders moiling in the fucking box,

more chance transcendence in a saint’s appearance,
more worms ensouled in a crow’s shot guts.

Try me: I am the sea’s greatest monotonies,
the sea behind me, the sea above, around,

the sea which is entirely me and not,
the gift of giving given by the gods,

the gift of breath I give you to take back,
the sea which is a wave of me, breaking,

the sea which is a metaphor, but I am not.

It’s good that you’re not here. You’d be surprised
how things have gone. How we have coped despite
the difficult conditions—after all, the river
freezes in winter, in summer runs dry. We’re trying

each of the variations on ourselves,
tasting each plant that sprouts up in the yard—
we should be dead already. But this jealousy
is a thorn in the side—despite the fact that you’re

not here, we’ve made a lot of progress in the art
of fashioning your phantom, and we’re good at it,
through power failures and the animals
who come to howl at the planet. In a certain way

it’s good that you’re not here. Your singularity
would grow immense—since each of us still carries
a hole for you inside our hearts, so we just multiply
and gaze at the sky, at the void above the high-rise.

Because there are no disposal laws for syringes
in this state, I keep a bleach jug packed with syringes.

Once, in a dry-lipped fugue, I dropped two pens
in a full one; now the laundry is blood-fracked with syringes.

Even so, I believe it’s clean coming out of the dryer.
The white-coated vampire states it as fact: syringes

rinse the surgeries away. She’s got a house to feed,
where tiny mouths drool fluid like primed syringes.

I’m not dying yet, but she wants to be sure.
She asks me to deliver a ransom of syringes.

Labs, she calls them: needle-nosed hounds dispatched
by her keyboard; she doesn’t actually handle syringes.

Instead, she sends me to a different wing. The phlebotomists
thump the anti-coagulant in my syringes:

stop telling people that ain’t your hair when you bought it.
They pull blood but inject beauty—compassionate syringes.

On the drive home, the guardrails look like casket lowers;
lane markings, a mortician’s stitch; the cars blunt syringes

hunting out home, the vena cava, in which I brine
a life, my flesh as seasoned by syringes

as my mother’s holiday turkeys. I’m suspended between
every ancestor who lived or treasoned with syringes.

Their ghosts OD in my dreams; riddled with holes,
they beg me to remember their names. I ask which syringes

could bring them back to life. I awaken
to track marks under my nose. A new plot of syringes

dampens on the front steps. I am destined to infuse
survival with meaning, like honey clotting in syringes.

An ice-blue uterus
filled with clouds and contrails.

A rippling promise that we all will return
into amniotic fluid, even if chlorinated.

I accept everything. I renounce everything.
I sink into everything, clothed only in a wet beard.

I float in you like trash, like dead insects,
like a gasoline spill, like lazy sperm

and dream of all the fat, which now dreams
in one of your repetitions the same dream about me.

Seen from the sky, you are one of the countless teardrops
painted on the mask of a murdered demon.

The gun was away on business and
throughout the apartment I closed the doors.
Kept the quiet in. Imitated a table
and ended the gossip of so many saucers
against little spoons. I was a coat rack

in the long hall leading off the cliff of my world.
I modeled for the day my man would
blow in. Each Sunday, when the boot of news
hit the stoop, I pinched the red belt 
through the jacket’s each whispering loop,

pinched my figure—as I had the napkins 
in their rings every other week—
into ready-for-the-taking poses. Pinky finger
and a clutch, a fist of gloves, shoulder-waist
isosceles like a Dutch chocolate slice:

Take me. Waiting had also promised to end me,
but daily, and starting with the innermost parts.
To keep the clock’s hands folded,
I drank from the bottles with the heaviest necks.
I slept over calls from the assorted gentlemen:

University Debt, Universal Surveillance,
the Usually Cruel Cruelties—
all of whom knew how hot the pockets
of my husband the gun. But I 
was housebound and a centerpiece.

My needful plastic apple heart rattled
alone in the bowl. Blood was a good boyfriend.
He did me the cold-weather kindness.
He cuddled in the scoops of my cuticles.
Slow to evade, he let me say things

mostly to myself, such as “Rougher,”
and stiffened in the bracket of a headboard
as if this were what listening looked like.
And then ennui returned, hotter showers,
tighter sonnets on which to practice

arguments; their quick-muster dashes
dickinsoning the cream blue steam
into bite-sized compartments. 
While plotting digressions, my tongue
malleted some alarm code lost to me now

on the backs of my teeth. On the old metal fillings.
—Tiny notes of copper and toxin. The gun.
That man couldn’t quit my mouth. The gun.
That man came in with his business end.
The big door let his pleasure through.

Death is emptying us out with the flat teaspoon

of minutes, bit by bit, without being excessively

voracious. Sometimes it opens the fridge and contemplates us

in the chilled, bluish light, like someone who gets up

at midnight, half-wanting something, without really knowing what.

In the street, someone is lowering the restaurant blinds

with a useless gesture. Seated between empty tables and chairs,

death reviews the menu for the umpteenth time,

repeats our names between its teeth,

unraveling them, as if scouring for

morsels of meat hidden in the cartilage

of this bird without lessening who we are.

Every morning we pack our bags and take flight

with the first swallows,

but the mouth that devours us

ends up being larger

than the parabola

of our flight.

We tend to our roles like we tend to a fire,
poking the coals with the blazing tip of an iron.

The head of a woman occasionally produces more heads.
The body of a woman is the source of all our breaths.

See Also: The naming of riverbanks.
See Also: Nature’s tendency to cleave.

There is a difference between the qualities
we inherit and the qualities of instinct.

The brain with its many folds looks like it’s squeezing itself.
Its mouths are puckered and waiting to be unlocked with a kiss.

An organ of the body is regarded as the source
of nourishment for the next corresponding organ.

How we feed on each other for ourselves.
How we keep ourselves alive through each other.

You are the living tissue beneath the bark of a cork oak.
You are a ship grained with the grooves of trees.

Grooving a valley with soft-scissoring fingers,
a blind river surveys the land for a kinder ocean.

It carries the wishes of fishermen on ridges
waiting for carp to leap into their arms like a woman.

Lean sunbathers are unbothered by death.
It will come sooner than they expected.

Stories of trilobites and volcanic heat,
birth-engine for endless microscopic species.

It moves like blood cells into impressionable soil,
tumbles over rocks, a religion truer than any.

It flows by churches, by graveyards—
musical-fingered tailors, women who buried children.

Ten-volume histories of cities rise in waves:
Tiber, Seine, Nile, Danube, Yamuna.

What are Buddhist temples without wildflower flags
fluttering over streams that lift in high-water prayer?

It turns by a synagogue where a war-jagged rabbi
bent over his books puzzles out what it all means.

My alphabet is weeping, he sobs.
These words don’t hold their shape.

He climbs into the waves of fresh-cut corpses
the blind river grinds to gravel.

The river, sullen and implacable,
twists to a rhythm it alone hears,

Folk tunes in its ears and choral ghosts singing,
to everything its season.

That years, colder than our hearts,
tear us apart.

Small boats float on the blind river with the dead
who bicker about the price of milk and celestial news.

Old stars masquerade as alive, arrive
in a lightbox 200-year approach.

An old man, a philosopher I knew,
hammers the floor with his feet.

We have long ties to sunlight,
equations that always solve for equality.

There will be some yellow streamers at the end
or just a clearing where people have gathered.

The wise invisible river
whispers: time is beautiful and so are we.

I like the 4 a.m. feedings best, tilting
the rocking chair back and forth
with my toes, observing how the invisible

lines of our dark yard rest against
the lines of other yards—of other lives.
Before the sun rises, this small wedge

of the world momentarily in agreement:
everyone on this block wishing for sleep,
for peace, for the coming day to be better

than the last. I like thinking how the grass
growing a thousandth of an inch every
fifteen minutes is celebrating something

as I celebrate solving small mysteries
like learning that a red fox is the one who
flattens the path through the lawn.

Mainly I like pretending I am the only one
awake, the only one seeing the world
at this instant.  The navy sky, thick as blood,

is my blood, as the fracture of stars, bright
as raw bone, is my bone. I like being
reminded that we all began in dark and stars,

that the carbon, nitrogen and oxygen
in our bodies was created 4.5 billion
years ago in another generation of stars,

that somehow if we could weigh the sun,
all rising 418 nonillion pounds of it,
we’d see that strength is never needed

to begin the day. No, it’s something else.
Behind every square of light flipped on,
someone is standing or slouching, stretching

or sighing, someone is covering her face
or uncovering it, someone is thinking,
Today, I will I will I will….

Those white girls in swimsuits,
over by where the sphere of old stars overturned on the narrow path leading to the Bronx River,
gave me pills for the first time.
Actually, it wasn’t pills,
it was a gorgeous horse eye they’d found in the water.
It’s a beautiful organ, they’d said,
an iris shaped like a lightbulb.
Then one of them kissed a live, flopping catfish and said it was her husband now.
I dove into the river head first. I’ll be a lamp one day, I thought,
or a flame
with a light’s wingspan flickering 7.6 times per second
over trees in full fruit or maybe be swallowed whole
by a gator mouth and all its bones.
How does it all start?
The harsh, low frequency call,
the alarm to the species.
Depending on the season my hair grows out in two long braids,
two vines grabbing hold of breathing things,
even a living home, drag it down,
windows and all, into the river’s mud here to stay,
to make words never spoken in its life cycle. 

The other day, when I saw a dead
mouse in the middle of my way,
I stood still and said: What is this?
Why do you lie here so quietly?
Having barely entered this life,
you are already fleeing from it.
Well, let me at least consider
the jolly path your life has taken:
There were certainly no words
wasted when you arrived here,
a baptism was probably a waste.
You never went to school,
no teachers were ever forced to work
themselves to death over you.
You knew from the first day
how to find your place in this life.
When it came to your upbringing,
higher studies, knowledge, awareness,
you were free to do without all that.
You never had any piano lessons,
dancing lessons, gymnastics
lessons, or other kind of lesson.
You were born with grace
and agility and an entirely
natural sense of decency.
Shoes, socks, hat, and gloves
remained unknown to you.
You always wore the same suit.
Did you have any brothers and sisters,
uncles, aunts, and cousins?
Were you by any chance married?
These are questions we all rather
not ask in the end because
they are all too complicated.
Of course, my dear mouse,
you never had to care about anything.
Our kind is full of doubts;
we convince ourselves of God knows,
we make our time on this earth
as annoying as possible;
we struggle and wear ourselves down,
we seemingly go mad with all
those delicate worries of ours.
It is obvious that you were
very happy just to be alive,
you had hardly any worries at all,
which make you, in almost all cases,
nothing but frustrated anyway.
I doubt I am very much mistaken,
when I think about how you loved
to squeeze through small crevices.
A small quantity of leaves
was the world in which you lived,
you liked to crawl under rocks.
When we humans see a bit of grass,
you must see something quite large.
Trees, oak trees, for example,
must have seemed colossal to you,
if you were ever able to overlook
such girth and such grandness.
Even a hare must have seemed
rather respectable to you.
Yet you were especially afraid
of cats, so much that you avoided
even the slightest chance of trouble.
Your voice was a whistling,
and your walk was like a dart.
You could not speak German,
nor French or English,
you clung to your Mouselish,
it was enough to be able
to talk to your own kind.
You did not create any kind
of important work in your life.
You never had a need to travel.
This makes you no less
important in the eyes of our
Father up there in the clouds,
which floated above you as well
as any other beings on earth.
So goodbye.—And when I had
said all this, I continued walking.

Maybe our reverence is for the lost afterall.
Maybe the wash of light that caused our lives

still drizzles at its complicating junctures
like stalactites or the terrible hands of God.

When I was younger and still living back in Wisconsin,
at night with friends I used to lay on the ice

draped over Pike Lake and watch the clouds,
indefinite and lavender,

stumble above the spark of dock lights
patterning the lake’s dark edge.

We may never be known the way we are known,
never turn an ear deaf to our echo.

The night before Shane left for Denver,
he told me again how it was he came to be

and where it was he had gone wrong
and what it eventually would have looked like

to have stayed and died at home in Alabama,
its pastures of ash, sidereal and unrelenting.

What could I have possibly said then
to keep him here in Texas?

That in time the summer heat would break?
That cars would quit blowing the light on 45th and Duval

during one last riotous night of Lou Reed and shit beer
bringing us back to a nameless heaven?

We might think of the past as an adage undone,
a series of bloodlines needlessly broken,

but in truth no absence is sheltered any more than its elission,
and I have given nothing I would not give again.

Where the river pooled up for the boys
a stone emerged.
You didn’t see it any other way:
just a stone, big and anodyne.

When we rose up from the murky water
we’d scale it like lizards. And then
a weird thing happened:
the dry mud on our skin
drew our bodies closer to the landscape:
the landscape was the mud.
At that moment
the stone wasn’t hard or impermeable:
it was the back of a great mother
lying in wait for shrimp in the river. Ah, poet
yet again the temptation
of a useless metaphor. The stone
was stone
and that was enough. There was no mother. And I know now
it assumes responsibility: to watch over us
in its impenetrable intimacy.

My mother, however, has died
and she is neglected by us.

I
It’s stranger to think of you, Allen, now that Mahmoud is gone, your glary eyes,
your voice like an old record, 1947.
It’s 2008, on a sunny winter afternoon, Manhattan. I didn’t sleep last night,
thinking of what you might have been reading if you were with me,
awake, at 3:39 a.m.
I was listening to Leonard Cohen, he seems to be everywhere I go these days, and
listening for short intervals to Fairuz and packing for San Francisco,
speaking to the phantoms weeping, as you wept when you read “Adonais.”
I weep reading Liam Rector and Jason Shinder—“God Bless,” Jason would say,
whenever I told him something he liked, or it was just part of his mantra?
I weep thinking of Darwish. Have you seen him yet, Allen? Should we be looking
for death, or is it Jerusalem?
Meanwhile, did I tell you, I can’t find my national anthem. Every time I start
singing, the tune disappears. I see a flashback of a thin sheet of light, the
American flag I will soon carry. La Marseillaise forever on my tongue.
Where is the garden that will blossom in the cold, the cities I will dream of
finding again, the fantasy of finding India and China while being in
Bethlehem, and the trees outside still bare so bare, or is that what
forgetting looks like?
Who knows where to find solitude—on a broken bed, in the balcony that refuses
the wind’s visit, in the crimpling shadow of poets who never heard a
rooster early in the morning, as I have in the Caribbean, waiting for the
message behind the hills.
Perhaps death will stop at nothing until it’s trapped in what it worships, it’s like
scratching a dream when it’s not looking, it’s like stealing some gray from
the sky, or like the swelling of silence in our throats, trying to climb out of
black smoke.
Skeletons in our minds, it’s a private grief, a private grief, you hear.
Now all I have is the time I dreamt I kissed a boy as the Arabic music was
playing, the time an Afghan immigrant reminded me of myself when I
first took the 7 train to Queens, not knowing yet that nostalgia steals from
longing—
from the thoughts that keep coming to us; not because we can’t forget but because
we don’t want to—
as for me, all I want is a gesture from Mahmoud, a touch from a world that listens
to what movements say.
I practice listening to everything around me—the bird, its cry, the sun, its cry, the
echo, the stillness, its music. I keep all that they mean to me and break into
what we are unable to be.
Death’s stubborn—it never rests. Maybe that’s how it stops suffering. Where have
you gone, Allen?
To New York or Kolkata—is there joy in those places or fear—what do people
there think about as they drink root beer or lassi, as they watch bodies pile
up in newspapers—
it’s all about money, no one’s looking for soul or secret—the things you think you
don’t have—
women looking for love, men looking for love except they can’t find the place for
it. Did you love, Allen? What is the last thing you remember?
The last man in your bed, who was he to you? What can’t darkness prepare you
for? What did God forbid, then said yes to? Do you know where to find
the cloud trapped in a bark? A red ribbon, and a sigh that asks, “Can you
believe?” You don’t have to answer now.
The wind blows something that can’t exist—so it’s victorious. And then we start
cherishing what can change and changes—
the mercy on the tree, the broken arrow, the leaves, the colors that cut air into
what it desires most—lost snow—
an electrical wire that lights nameless neighborhoods that sing under bridges, and
then people stop wearing shoes to feel the earth. Wait—
are we grieving? Is that what we are doing, Allen? I can’t do this—I need forever
now—tell me eternity exists or that I should call my lover, his kiss is that
other dream, sleeping on his lips that other endlessness—
no more moon, mind bent, heart strolled dream hanged, face under madness. You
understand—
in the world we all struggle with Jesus, with what we name Holy Father. Ya
Salaam. Shalom.
Blessing is what we adore each day. As for Heaven, it’s still undefined—come on,
give me a clue.
Is it the end or do we keep redeeming—the shadows are near but far enough. I get
it—you’re the perfect phantom.

II
Tell me, tell me Allen—about the song you sang—of the place that crosses flesh,
of the hush that breaks light, of Saladin Street where we see those
crippling in the dark or the dark crippling, those who went blind last night,
who lost a sky, who dug deep to find a cemetery that once belonged to
them.
Curse the mind. The craziness of being on a Greyhound bus, then a broken down
bus on its way to Hebron.
I can’t hear the footsteps of mourners anymore, the presence of love and hate in
the heart of prayer.
What is history when what disturbs us most finds a different pleasure each day?
Allen, I’ve been having these nightmares—that I can’t get to New Jersey,
that my room is no longer organized, and that the wallpaper my mother
put up on the wall has turned green, or is it red? What should we have for
breakfast?
Wait—before you answer, I have to reach the Mount of Olives, my cousin’s son,
my neighbor’s flock, the hills the stone walls?
What are you really looking for? I don’t know if we believe in what we are saying
anymore, if our discourse on peace is not beaten down.
It’s come back—my dream of New Jersey. It’s a strange place to be lonely in. I
would rather be by the limestone, the agonized horse, the gray light.
But I’m thankful that two hour bus ride to Bayonne every week helps me erase
the day my uncle lost his land in Mar Elais, the afternoon my father cried
for his murdered friend in Africa, and my mother’s line, on ne sait pas, we
don’t know. Still don’t know about return.
By the time I arrive at Journal Square, pass Kennedy Boulevard, listen to people
speak Spanish, Hindi, Arabic, see the lonely tree by the telephone
company, listen to other people’s music (since they play it too loud), smell
other people’s takeaway and see the old Egyptian immigrant still waiting
for someone to speak to him, I understand that moving is like a
hallucination—real, not real, dizzying, addicting, melancholic.
I wonder if the old man speaks English now. Wonder what he hides. I was twelve
when I hid the old map with shame written on it.
Allen, absence stays permanent. No, absence shifts into small gods—pleasures
and sins. It matters less with time, it matter more with time.
Cut the voice into pieces but it stays whole, my Siti would say. I wish she told me
what it means to refuse glory. To lace my shoes. No eyes should be on us.
Place the picture sideways, my Siti would say. A Surah from the Koran. A
verse from the Bible always close.
Is there another word for dreaming? Do ghosts set light on fire? Look—an
eyelash on your shirt, a small sound, a broken scar. It’s always too
crowded at night. Allen, answer.
I’ll tell you how to replace a question with a haze—just think of the present when
it insists on the past, break a glass, then two, and you find that you have no
choice except to walk out and stay.
Remember the twenty letters I left on your bedside, Allen. Dark ground. Empty
room. They all have the same refrain. I know you understand, even if no
one else does.
Whom have we betrayed? Which wisdom, which age? There was a city on the
train. Did you see its colors? Mystic blue. Then yellow.
This wasn’t supposed to happen this way. Mahmoud wasn’t supposed to leave.
Bring me the water jug, two weavers, a marble about to crack, a glass with
a smell that will intrigue me. I understand—
The dead cheat death. And I am restless.
The bending shoulder. The titling neck, the drunken eyes. The lips releasing fever
like a long stretch of black clothes. You see a place and wonder if you’ve
been there.
So Allen, show me what’s slow like my Jiddo showed me what’s gone—a shield
broken, a heart broken, a branch broken, the trees that lost a life before
him?
I replace heat with more heat. Replace ache with winter, winter with a familiar
voice, voice with a wound I confuse with a patch of bitter plants.
I saw Mahmoud weep—the day he realized his moving was spelled backward, the
shore further than the day before, and he still loved summer.
I still love when my lover pulls Neruda from the shelf and reads me a poem over
the phone. It makes me think when his mother suddenly hugged him but
he didn’t know why—that’s same suddenness. It haunts. Finally midnight
is available.
Meditations. Highways. Roads. Routes. Noticias. Hesitations. Mocking one’s own
hesitation. I line them up—conspiracies, frescos, speeding tickets,
recycled newspapers, hairpins, landmarks, lives bargained—and now I
have to find them.
Last night I heard “Ya Jaffa” and dreamt of the sea, but when I awoke all the
water was gone.
And I can’t get the Brooklyn Bridge out of my mind. What do you think that
means?
Let me go back. Long nights as a child. Nightmares. The place moves its dark.
Keeps darkening. Then the dark changes. Another alphabet.
Like electrical shock, it’s October 21, 2008 and I’m in Gettysburg—only six days
until the test—to be or not to be American.
I see the 1860s—the American civil war, the dead and the dying, shrieks and cries
in wagons—the 13 th amendment, freedom—how it’s defined, 1877 and
Hayes, black civil rights, Jim Crow, “separate but equal” —reconciliation,
but whites only—under Wilson blacks clean latrines, pass blankets. We
don’t seem to understand that after war is where you see war. The gospels,
Hosanna—au plus haut des cieux (that’s the language I remember it in).
Souls linger to hand out truths. Mason Dixon line. Pennsylvania and Maryland.
Abe Lincoln. Dixie—
General Lee, General Meade. Passing the line. Harrisburg. Shell, bullet,
ball—Uncle Tom’s Cabin (read). .31 caliber pepperbox revolver. Pistol.
Rifle. Handmade wood fife. Brass bugle. Drummer’s baton. E-Flat Tenor
saxhorn. B-flat Baritone saxhorn (all preserved and behind glass cabinets).
Suddenly, I hear Sandoval playing in a white man’s saloon, the quiet apples on
Route 34. Route 94. What I see here—the color of fall. The great
American landscape—walnut trees, apple orchards, pear orchards, Adam’s
county, Mexican workers in the apple belt.
And I’m out of breath, Allen—are you? Let’s call Darwish. Mahmoud. Mahmoud.
He’s not listening. Later then.
I pass my citizenship test in Long Island. The year ends. 2009 begins in Gaza.
Where has the sea gone? Is there a sea where the simplest things become
strange, the strangest things a simple answer to grief—an empty street, a
baton, a faint desire moving, as if it was decided by someone else what
should be sealed or shared—a dark, transgressed.
Allen, as I watch Gaza, January 20 approaches. Obama’s inauguration. The day I
become an American. Imagine that.
I start watching nightfall along a field of long branches, bare and reaching for all
that they can. Do you think of what it’s like a thousand miles from
Memphis?
Not a lighted road. No one walks here in this obscurity. The road is but a hollow
hold to where we pretend to exist—a cornfield or a burning field, it’s no
different than a mind gone with another.
This is the time of surrender, I think. Is that what the dead do, surprise us and
when we’re finally alone become all that we need to be—a cook, farmer,
messenger, tailor, lover—a crowded sentence. I needed elsewhere.
I saw Faith today, 17 hands, and I looked at the mountains surrounding the ranch.
Oh yes, I forgot to tell you, I’m in California now. Ojai. But just returned
from the West Bank and Texas—
Did you know that Texas is where Darwish died? Such irony. His irony is like the
color of noon—no identifiable tones.
Allen, where’s Mahmoud now? Have you seen him yet?
Damn it, I missed his call. I missed his damn call and now he’s left—truth is, we
decided, no goodbyes.
Allen, when you died, I was with Darwish in Ramallah. We both said nothing.
What could we say, the sun tangled in our shadows.
Spiders and solitude, around us—who can measure the distance of fire half a mile
into our scar?
He stopped smoking, waited for something other than summer, it’s all about
compromise. I know—that’s why we beat hope out of the tabla—
It’s all about god, always about god, no one sees the fountain.
You weren’t well. I know. You spoke to me because you liked Mahmoud.
I know. I wanted to postpone. I was nervous. Your assistant said,
“Don’t”—You died a month and some later. I kept your keys. The poem
you wrote the night before we spoke, your words to me: “I got up in the
middle of the night and wrote a poem. It was a thought that had occurred
to me over and over again and I had never written it down because I was
ashamed of it. It is a fantasy of my own funeral. The main thing is, beside
my family, everybody I have ever made love to are still alive, hundreds of
young kids or older guys, bold by now and married with children. I was
always ashamed of this fantasy—fame and death are something—afraid to
reveal that sort of vanity. So last time I realized, yes, it was vanity but so
what—you take your neurosis and make your pet out of it. The whole point
is to reveal your mind, not be ashamed of your mind. I wrote it down and
it is probably the title of the next book I will put out, Death and Fame.”
That’s what we leave behind, the way we went. Kiss Mahmoud.

Love,
Nathalie


Oh, uncles,
what zealous men you are!
Sister ran away with her lover so
your hounds scoured the hills
and how young and fresh her bones were.
Eve kissed the desert scrub
before the land washed its hands of you
and I, from a small window, smiled
at the children’s feet ricocheting over the ground
and the women, before their breasts ran dry,
trickled drops of their pitiful milk
into the throats of blond soldiers

and the virgin kissed her lover
before father claps his hands
and we pack our clothes
for somewhere my brothers
can fall in love again,
somewhere our river is a sea—
if father forgives his brothers
and the unforgivable land
let us love,
my sisters,
the highlands
…its lover.

in the beginning there was a beginning & before that it’d already begun & before that
a gun

every story i love begins with violence. every story ends.

a life undone as a button slid through the winged gap in its fabric. little portal opening
into light into a bald chest bared as a fang

the etymology of gun is wonderment from the dutch

from my uncle’s locked cabinet he shot out over the city of los angeles laughing
to impress as i sassed lavish in my black jeans

the etymology of gun is hunger
from the french

from the waistband of a strange man’s madness as he traced my outline down
an unlit louisville street.
from the greek

fired from a passing car through my neighbor’s window entering his brain & refusing
to leave
from the old english
a man enters an orlando nightclub breathes

the etymology of gun is police is greed is country from the german
from the sea

almost gossip outside my barred window almost the falling sound of metal leaves

from the old country my mother’s hometown where the gun store on the corner’s
the only business not out of business

from the new country where a weapon can be shipped to your doorstep next day

the etymology of gun is tied to horses from the old norse

a woman’s proper name made from two words for battle

i held a gun only once. my lover begged me to press it against the back of his head
as we fucked. his pistol fit so easy in my hand when i pulled the trigger, my god,

the sound it made swallowed me

click click click click [click].

His identity was stolen and he needed to reclaim it

He hired a mother to reenact his own birth in the hopes he might find his identity

An old man stole his identity and drove away in a Prius  

He hired a mother to reenact his own birth but she did not talk like his mother

A man in Tennessee bought $324 worth of golf equipment with my credit card

When someone steals your identity it is not unreasonable to think it’s a crisis

He rented a baby and a nurse to reenact his own birth and filled a hospital room with flowers

There were charges on his credit card for kitchenware purchased on Amazon

He called Amazon to complain and they referred him to their fraud-detection department

My colleague dresses up as a confederate soldier in order to reenact the Civil War

He owns a confederate frock coat

He owns a confederate sack coat

He owns confederate trousers    shell jackets     vests and caps  

He plays in a Beatles cover band and often these two identities collide

He sings “Strawberry Fields Forever” in a confederate frock coat

Like the other social scientists in my school      he refuses to sign a union membership card

I felt embarrassed and dejected after spending forty minutes trying to get a social scientist who sings “Strawberry Fields Forever” in a confederate frock coat to join the union

But it was easy to get the security guards to join the union  

Last month a boy climbed onto the roof and fell off it

There were no guards on duty to prevent this from happening because they had cut the security budget by 59%

The police report spoke of brain matter by the entrance to the school

Neighborhood kids get drunk and climb to the roof and sometimes they fall

I added an extra layer of security to my email account because I was afraid my colleague would steal my identity

I don’t know how to say no to people  

I gave my friend the password to my cable account so she could watch Showtime and HBO

I didn’t trust her but I couldn’t say no

I didn’t want her to pretend on the internet that she was me

I was afraid she might share my identity with other people

I was afraid that one of these people might sign me up for pornography and sports packages I do not need

He wanted a new identity and at the same time he wanted another crack at his childhood

In elementary school he drank water with lead in it

At home he drank water with lead in it

He believed that lead exposure was responsible for his anxiety and high blood pressure

He believed his mother had lead in her blood during pregnancy

He believed his reduced attention span and anti-social behavior were caused by pre-natal exposure to lead

I’m writing this email with tears in my eyes

I came to London for a short vacation

Unfortunately I was mugged at my hotel

They took all my cash

They took my credit cards

I really need your assistance  

A famous poet sent me this email and I almost sent him $600 in return

I want a new identity because I have dreams that God will abandon me and I will drown in a lead-filled river

I will rot in the river and no one will find me

My eyes and lips and hair and face will rot in the river

And I will be carried away by vultures

To the corporate headquarters of Bank of America

Where my remains will be exchanged for complex financial products

I will be traded for collateralized debt obligations and mortgage-backed securities

My body will decompose and I will scream     

I want to slowly earn interest forever    

a halved face  anyway        a ruin

like a bloody mouth        unworthy

there’s something a broken mirror cannot see

once i looked at these scars  and found them too violent

to be lonely

i called them cities__ timbuktu    egypt without the crush of bricks

in the trance      a red wingless bug crawled up the stove      i snatched it

into a bowl of foamy water       just to find something

to save               he speaks into a crack

on the wall     hot bullets miss my ears

my father who is halfway gone    whose resurrection was ruined

by a crooked finger        i asked this of shame

be a stranger     stay out of the door

if there be bone or thorn    if there be gospels according to

salt     let it enter even the wound’s  hidden face

let the honeyed cotton   fall            let the wind break

just small enough to fill the mouth

let the ocean take without   confessing    debt to hunger

All my timelines lead to this poem.
Proof: What brought us here is all
the same horse. So I have some questions.
Which of us are the shallow wood.
What if blood is emptiness. I suspect
my own veins are rogue simulations
flitting with a new kind of heightened self-
awareness. Proof: the nurse says they are flighty
& hard to find. Drink more water, she sings,
pushing her own tin. What if what’s within
is simulated to keep every artery compliant.
You know.
That whole thing being
as being undead
dead creeks.
 

It’s also sad to think
the envy still filling us over some horse
we knew for less than a week
is simulated. Don’t you feel better at least? Well,
do I have news {for you}: I suspect the horse is
also false, bogus, feigned. Proof: he comes running
when we do not call for him. Proof: In one timeline,
he and I are doing a lot of simulated things.
Get your mind out of the gutter.
On holidays we openly bathe
in a {manmade}
heated spring
 

—or rather: he fears the water & balances
on edge. Half the time he slips. Falls in & blips. Holds me
responsible. Resets. Drink more water, tweets the anti-horse
threatening to annihilate another anti-
{horse}
come salt
winter, come stone
age. So place your bets
that advanced civilizations don’t always
not annihilate themselves. Woah.
Let’s try this again.
Reset.
*

Maybe our most real timeline resides in another verb tense.

Or is hiding in new irregular superlatives. Should we ask for
who
whom
whoest. Because why be skinned when you can be
skunned. Would you do the honors. My deliberateness says to trust you.
One simulation to another, am I wrong. Didn’t we see we through
fire, windmill, heated floors. Were we not a woman waving
a white handkerchief. One if by land. Skull
& bones. Ticks in the trees & mysterious
{reset}
nil & :: please.
*

If nothing else,
can we not all agree
hummingbirds win Most
Fabulous Simulations.
Even if they are the secret guards,

& their tears
the anti-virus software
injecting all those broken
1s & 0s into our hearts.
& surely in one timeline they are the gods themselves ::

the superlative whoest

of engineers
who’ve made mincemeat
of asteroids & atomic
timewears.
It’s too bad that all our timelines are inherently self-destructive.

Proof: we watch the same video of a hummingbird snoring for hours,
still sitting in the nurse’s chair & not a step closer to what life,
outside of human reach, desires. I’m okay with that.
The horse is calling.
& I’m running
my hands through his mane,
unable to explain.
 

Where & when this comfort,
this crisis,
took root.
How did we meet, was it two if by sea.

I can’t remember when we did not cheat
life with a horse
:: when all timelines were

a real
& :: even field
in which the humming
-bird drank our blood
straight from the creek.

I shudder at this sorry sight
How many are like this
jealous of vision

In whose portion will be no riches of witness
Whose fate is to see no celebration nor celebrant
Who thirst to see the rays stream down
Who say it isn’t the alighting
look to the road

Tell them come take my eyes
Before my body gives out
Before this soul of dust is also gone
Before some great calamity befalls

Save my eyes from becoming a notion
Put my eyes in their faces

Who will be able to bear though
the ruin my eyes have seen
Who will be so brave
keep their eyes always open
Even as chimeras roll down
the branches of their lashes
Even as shrapnel twists
and encamps in the breath
Even as life cries out
for the rest of life

resident never real or simulated
and the crossers see that you’re not real or simulated
and they’re not sure if they are
a mural of rural crossers

you simulate what a person with papers would say
would act like so that you can cross over
your accent is hard to understand
you have trouble saying your name and you say it anyway
customs are suspicious because you can’t say your name

so they take you in and make you paint murals of crossers at the border
the murals warn crossers of what might be waiting for them
the unswerving future
an 8-bit desert

all day you paint in the border simulator
portraits of crossers and their portrait is their face covered by a phone

you paint murals of crossers going into the simulation
their faces also covered by their phones but you can see their eyes and they’re scared of crossing
you ask them to pretend there is water    they can only pretend there is water
so long

after your service to the simulator you practice traversing your words
or the simulation traverses you            this simulation isn’t a question of fake
or reality but a performance of saying your name

if the simulation survives you also survive and you keep it alive by crossing
the simulation exists because you cross into it and you love the threshold

when you speak of the border simulator you’re really speaking about blank

how dollar sign can open up a whole new world of crossing
you go to the front of the line customs ask you less questions
in simulation you can pay off la policia
it’s harder to do that in reality
but it’s not the result you want
and the simulation is a results based game

when you speak of the border simulator you’re really speaking about X
where the two worlds meet

Here there was a lagoon
that we think was beautiful
we think was fresh.
We wish we could remember the lagoon
like a little garden of tiny fish
where the bigger ones
got better
at eating the rest.
Here there was a lagoon
and when the water was still
there was a river
that shaped these rocks round
before they became stray shots
of an abandoned ripple on the desert.

And before
before it was the bottom of the sea
and the whales used to mate right here
and not further south where we hear their melancholic wails
it was near this piece of ocean bed
where their whale ancestors dealt out the sea
as if they were gambling.

Here is the desert
and here was the sea
and between them
a lagoon we’d like to remember as fresh
if we could remember.
If we could remember that this peninsula
that parts in the continent
it was first split by a whimsical metal corpse
then by the ancient wound of the earth.
If we could remember
that this piece of land
emerged from the waters
with us
with our stone heart
our dirt heart
our jungle heart.
If we could remember that when this desert we went through
emerged from the waters
it emerged like the great beasts
fangs dripping
hungry
unaware
tormented, thinking it was
the last beast to emerge from the waters.

My cadastre of flesh
dissects me right to the bone,
Khal luster, eyes lined in khol.
And a virgin’s red nails
will arrange the sky
with a pure and transparent sunset.
Will you find surveyors
to measure the depths of tidal bores,
among your steamer trunks of salt?

It ends and starts with intention, for all beginnings are ends.
Invaluable, it doesn’t count for much, I know, but I try. Hard.

There are ways to repeat this, a chorus of crows, a fluttering of sound.

I might get used to it, after some time, but I’ll often be on edge, pinfooted.

It would look like spying, but see here, what I’ve quietly done.

Love and love and more love: evergreen,

Warm, belly-full; cool, satiated, a wilding of grin, romp and ballad.

If all my fears went driving, all stirrings travelled on,

I’d still be here, finishing things; planted and pruning.

There is no gateway; no golden harp.

I am in need, I am in want, I am in hope.

It isn’t a secret, a sheltered hideaway or a silent hurt.

I am admiring the view now, seeing all that it is full and plenty,

And wanting it for myself, closing the distance of one jealousy to another.

Forever; wild and steaming, rioting and skimming the sky with resilience

I am mostly staring at stars, backlit by moonlight.

Most nights, I wonder, half-handedly curious, yet struck with ebbing

Let me, help me to see the worth, the riches, the flourish under the hibernating.

I am so afraid of being troubled and alone at the end of this world,

At the start of whatever is next.

We should recount something says the patriarch
while the north side’s mausoleums leak
and the dogs without instinct disappear
at midday
among the one hundred and fifty steps
that lead to the sand pits

Later the patriarch explains
that everything is a particle
of dead star
and meadows are reflections
of sky
and the horizon a lengthy and widespread
illusion of readymade phrases

All of us are animals
with good manners at the end of the day

The truth is that I am Percival
lance drawn and mane in the wind

A wet beast with protruding eyes
and a hunting satchel
in the middle of the pavement

Sometimes what happens is the waves
fling themselves on the beach without spectators
or a stage

And I see the Land from behind lace curtains
like a great rock
falling apart and without belongings

So now there’s no one left
from the climb or the descent
that can tell me if I am here
or on the other side in the desert

Volcano bled fire
and covered the moors.

Terrain like a sheet wrinkled.
In the desert an airplane dehisced.

Genes paired and shivered
in vain artifice.

Scree filled the bedrock floor.
Detritus, our ingenue.

I mean the land was innocent.
I mean war sizes ran small.

We kept the kills quiet
amid rows of pale clover,

sugarcane and millet.

Before you were born I binge-watched Hoarders.
The hours ample as the antelope
I imagine trampling me whenever
I forget to dream.           I watched women

wear nothing    but yellow as they bricked
themselves in Barbies                       little forts of soul
less bodies                     loneliness a shade of lip
balm               and a few prize-winning doilies

men who sang suppurating songs to rats
named Adolphus and Ben.              Son I watched and
did not love them.           Saw their weariness wick
and bubble        but did not budge.             I had not yet

layered that champagne glass     with the first chop
of your sunshine striated locks                or cut
a swath from the cushion           where your head sweat
once bloomed     did not understand that barriers

could be built          by braiding all your residue.
Love is forever a holding onto.
So how come they beseech me to    let go?
(no more umbilical       cord crust mummified

by the bed post                no more quilt of spit
up rags     stitched above the bureau) they don’t
want to believe love is              obscene. They want
the pink pattern of moderation.

Lips to ease off lips     breath to exist
as a poised pant    the perfect counter
part to the soft parlay            of a kiss.
But son I am sloppy      with bliss.     And I

refuse to contain any of it.              So
let the Florida morning file      across your cheeks
turn to me    and babble      not words        please
but the moonlight that seeps        through the spokes

of a bridge      your voice    the uncease     of lunar heat.

hey chotto-bhai, heard

they promoted you to first commander
of the old crew. heard
~
you can turn the knots back into ropes
now, that they’re with
you. as for me, i’m still fighting not to be
~

a djinn or hate-burnt spire.
i haven’t razored my wrists, tho,
or pilfered the pills to end
~
the endless clang and clamor of oilchange-
whatshouldweeat-cash-
register (ka-ching! ka-ching! my girl J and i
~

would high-five and say

any time we saw boys we decided to confuse
into men). before you
~
judge, consider: before body there is nobody,
and we all begin
as small shores. ay littlest brother, heard you
~

tie ties by yourself
now, that out there, there’s the right one
to love, that you don’t
~
shake at the table as much anymore. is pink
still your favorite color?
do you eavesdrop with four ears and two
~

knocked knees?

listen, the ache of a sister for a brother
isn’t obvious or
~

absent. i swear, not all of us die at war
or in accidents.
chotto bhai, the books i left are secrets,
~

underlined beside
a summer-heavy pecan tree. write past all
the censors. i’ll
grab cheese-sticks, high-five you after,
~

tomorrow. Remember?

1.

Some of us wake up
to rooms and brewed coffee

and the low clatter of spoons
filling up the kitchen

while the voice
of an elderly

pacing
the street below

our balcony
begs

allah
allah
allah

like a drifting tune
till we no longer hear him.

2.

Here comes the fruit cart
selling tangerines like tiny fists.

Here comes the man who measures
the weight

of chestnuts only to burn them
on a low fire.

Everywhere, children
are breastfeeding other children.

3.

War     within
earshot
and the sea
the size of our lungs

we choke on the bones of those
who drowned and never arrived
or never left/

/this Mediterranean overpass to
nowhere.

Sabah el khair are two words
of a prayer.

We used to think that refugees
were of one kind

and we never knew
that we were too.

4.

My aunt says a woman
is like the soil, like the land,

el maraa mitil el ard

giving back despite
the pounding of army

boots and the blue fists
of men on our skin.

Giving back in orange
groves and children

even though her body
couldn’t
her land lost

eighteen and forced to walk
the length

of exile to get here.

5.

Here the streets are stray
cats. The streets are gossip

in the mouths of men.
/Minarets creaking like

old forgotten beds./

You say these men kill
with their hands, their teeth,

their swords, this is the way
they open countries.

You say you have no
idea who their god is

and why
but you know exactly

how only some of us
wake up to rooms

and brewed coffee
to the low clatter of spoons filling up

the kitchen
like a cruel laugh in our chest—

When I see wax, I think of submission.

I think of afterlife. I think of the sky
what it leaves behind. I used to think

myself a doe, then a hurricane. The muscle
inside the tongue. The prayer-sore. Again

& again, something foreign. Fugitive. So briefly

I was a girl. A young woman. A mule, mother, arm-

rest—the sky resting on a bridge overlooking

the river. That cold, cold water. I waded in,
three seconds to numb. & nothing. I can’t give in

to love. What will become of us

when it’s the child that is imagined?
Our gods: the fields under a haze

of mosquitoes. And lo, the stars’ white
fire. And lo, the splintered spines of spruce

trees. And lo, the disappearing hours.

I stretch my neck into the next life.
I breathe in the cherry blossoms & bomb-

scent of aftermath. I don’t care why
I didn’t want this. I lean into myself.

I take what is offered until I forget

I am what is offered. With the orchard
& the apple I didn’t name. There is

an hour that bears my grave already.
It’s late. I can’t help but wish I wasn’t

lonely. That I wasn’t made to disappear.

That first creeping-in of fall in August
like a decision that’s been made
but not yet been put into effect. An endlessness
to the sky. High winds that rattle the tall
tulip trees. Hold their leaves up closely,
and you’ll see a browning at the edges
as though they are burning slowly. The man
picking blueberries with his family thinks
alternately of the mass-shooting
earlier that morning at a nightclub,
which he saw on the news that he turned off
when his four-year-old daughter came into the room
and also of his friend’s presentation
on consciousness, which he understood
about a third of, if he understood
anything at all, and he left feeling
both dumber and smarter for having attended.
There’s never not an I, the argument went,
in our understanding, and God, whether
we believe in him or her or it or not,
is our invention, making us all atheists
because we believe in ourselves
more than we believe in anything else.
So the border of every model includes us
and what we imagine. Try putting something
outside the box and you’ve just drawn another box.
Like one of those Russian nesting dolls.
More obscure, though, is his understanding
of the gunman. That he knows he’s absurd
for not understanding how someone can kill
in a world that can produce blueberries,
that he can’t imagine that the sweetness
of it all could be overpowered—that that
can be resisted for anything else like hate,
injustice, self-loathing, sadness. That’s on him.
A failure to think beyond himself.
And the children pick the berries, eating
most of them but saving a few—most are ripe,
some have begun to ferment. And this is his
favorite time of year and he is happy,
under the endless blue sky that is not endless.

mijo—i know you have seen the night
as an excuse to hold your body like a bottle

and drink yourself to sleep in the morning
the sun will rise bright as an infant fear

in your throat you will not die as much
as you wish for it you will get lucky

friends will envy you with their stomachs
whether or not you deserve it you will lose

women you loved wrong and i know what
that’s like—to love until you lose hope

in yourself no one wants to talk about it
how at the border they offered us clean

criminal records our first ride on an airplane
if we went back to motherland el salvador

it’s so hard to leave and of course your tio
he went back for a girl said he would try again

the right way but there is never a right way
to leave we would have never left if there

was a choice to make but men leave to survive
leaving is what makes us & you will become

a man all the wrong ways which is to say
there is no right way after your tio left

they let me go—into the blinding street
with nothing not even a bus route always

an orphan this time without a family
to call a motherland only an address

my eighth grade dropout’s command of
language & survival—mijo—i made it

there is no need for a map if fear is your
new face learn to kiss him with your eyes

open without a border between your lips

stands outside the dismantled city

A forest of buildings falls down
inside him. When he sleeps

he dreams of forests, but awake
he can’t remember leaves

or the soft sound
that floated down from above
preceding the beneficial
manifestation of food.

Or who it was
who was always
with him.

The last dog in the world
is afraid to regard his tail.

Can’t smell the earth anymore

since all scents left by other
have evaporated. And all
others have evaporated.

For these reasons it’s difficult

for the last dog
to travel anywhere.

Instead he curls up in the corner
of a former gas station, under a pile

of leaflets declaring the End
of the World. Or under the other

leaflets arguing that
The World Will Go On, the world
will always go on. The first

pile of leaflets, apparently,
has won. But the dog doesn’t
know this. What’s paper to him, anyway?

What are days? Just him and
the left-over spiders.
Him and the rusted hinges
and oil refineries and cars stopped

in their tracks on the empty
highways.

How long can a last dog
live like this? The world goes

on and on.

Down here, we’re a bit base,
            a bit under-
            finished. Beneath all our living,  

we move the dust one footprint at a time, 
            never free 
            of our evidence—boxes upon boxes

of what we’ve broken and what we’ve kept.
            The everything
            we almost don’t want.

This is where our devouring 
             comes home,
             where the open mouth

of the ash pit chokes on the warmth 
             we’ve already spent,
             on the forests we’ve burnt down

loving each other over and over 
             and not enough.
             Once, down here, I begged

for it. And then begged
             some more. 
             I know: How base. How me.

But sometimes a ribbon of lace 
             across a clavicle 
             is a typeface only anguish

can decipher. Sometimes 
             I needed you
             to press the folded halo

of your lips to my ear and tell me again
             about our dying, 
             how the dust we breathe

is three-quarters us. Once upon this time 
             your hand unfolded
             in the dark, white as a moonflower—

and struck me. It meant everything
             could be forgiven
                           but never would.

And I remember now 
             how undead I felt,
                           and how I kept going down

                           until one of us was finished.

 don’t know what to think of first
in the list

of all the things that are disappearing: Fishes, birds, trees, flowers, bees,

and languages too. They say that if historical rates are averaged, a language will die
every four months.

In the time it takes to say I love you, or move in with someone, or admit to the child
you’re carrying, all the intricate words of a language become extinct.

There’s too many things to hold in the palm of the brain.

Your father uses the word thing to describe many different nouns and we guess
the word he means. When we get it right, he nods as if it’s obvious.

When we get it wrong, his face closes like a fist.

Out walking in the neighborhood, there’s a wide metal lamp post
that has scratched into it, Brandy Earlywine loves Jack Pickett and then there
come the hearts. The barrage of hearts scratched over and over as if,

just in case we have forgotten the word love, we will know its symbol. As if,
Miss Earlywine wanted us to know that, even after she and Mr. Pickett

have passed on, their real hearts stopped—the ones that don’t look anything
like those little symbols—they frantically, furiously, late one night under

the streetlight while their parents thought they were asleep, inscribed
onto the body of the something like a permanent tree, a heart—

so that even after their bodies ceased to be bodies,

their mouths no longer capable of words, that universal shape will tell you
how she felt, one blue evening, long ago, when there were still 7,000

languages that named and honored the plants and animals each in their
own way, when your father said thing and we knew what it meant,

and the bees were big and round and buzzing.

I find myself on my feet with fifteen leaves.

Everything carries its own light on the walls.

I woke up being hit. The afternoon,
suffocating as the death of cows. My heart
was opened between cemeteries of moon.

The parasites. The drizzle. The mud crowning
the undergrowth with immense sadness.

I knew death when I dressed
in my uniform.

I found the index of solitude: my country in its legal
jargon, its piety, its fiction—

Yes. It loves me, really.

I give my blood as the blood of all fish.

In the never-silence of a bug-hum summer,
you call to me, try to find me

atop west portico steps,
in a hotel placard in Paris,

but you cannot save me. I’m bound
by history. I am burned letters

and bathroom and parking lot at Hampton Inn.
I am broken soup tureen and snapped shears

and rusted skeleton key. I am black wench,
wench Sally, African Venus, Sarah Hemings,

and I cannot be your coalmine canary,
cannot tell you which man will be true.

Chet’la, I cannot save you. You must
find your own truth as fires ripple through you,

as you decide the nature of your landscape—
which bulbs you’ll nurse to blossom—

as you seek peace in this voice
that’s no more you than it is me.

Winds don’t enter the church
I built and condemned inside myself.

I was taught a woman’s body
was reared to bear secrets—

some that should stay a mystery,
even to her. Like when

an animal looks in the mirror
and doesn’t recognize a self.

As children we learn to beg,
say yes. We file out of the chapels

and the classrooms
and learn to spill into lovers,

bur their lips with our phobias,
our leper dreams.

To close off our hearts,
that deep closet of flame.

We start to crave the lash
of nightmares. Imagine

licking up walls, buckling them—
hot with the crush of ignition.

I fled to oceans, I wandered
and found flesh—

some to eat, some to undress.
I fed all of my disappearances.

I destroyed a holy city
someone said was inside me.

Because the Lord used
my heat to accompany music,

because the Lord adorned
my hair with horns.

Because to be penitent
meant being penitent.

How do I ask Lourdes to sort the difference
between my knives? The serrated are only
for dining, the curved ones for husking
muscle from the bone, their edges hollow

-grounded, meant to phalanx at the wooden
block. She’s unloading the washer, my hands
in soap and sauce, and Juárez glows
at the end of the window, the bridge

shiny as an eel. Last month, cartel thugs
hustled her husband Martín, stuck their thumbs
into his clavicles, bruised his hollows
for a teacher’s bonus, while this woman, crouching

inside, counted the copper jackets sheathing
her walls. How does a woman begin
to count how many bullets are shattering
her panes? (She cupped her nervous

belly, fingered the budded navel, hummed
into the growing ear there, 1, 2 . . . 3, each
beat like systole, diastole, song made
to cleave one moment from another.) No

decapitations today, she tells me, though
her neighbor hung himself this week, and I dry
my hands, sponge grease from the steaming
counters. She separates each blade from the other.

The hexed leg in the arid bed. Time aches,
horizons wound, light stabs—there’s room for it
all, missy. My rickety teeth bite the apple. The
venom has stopped tasting like poison. At times it
distorts the drunken features of my comrades, and
again the paint is fresh, the wax is fresh, the garlic
is ripe. And every spring on the rotting burial
mound new grass grows. Here in my bed the cycle
saddens me, but it’s not abstractions I fear. It’s the
pack of dogs passing every morning as I carry my
bag of dreams and coins to the deserted station,
the night’s silk remnant trailing a whiff of rose and
laurel. I wait with apple crumbs on my teeth and
the feeble perfection of my poetic sabbaths.  

             a dark stairwell up two flights to shag rug. I will lie here for a long while. I will be unspectacular and limp. When the opal stone appears, I’ll lean into it. But terror is a runaway train. Is deer head left on side of road, those gentle deer eyes staring softly at nothing. If the stone works at all, it’s easy to catapult my body up the gymnasium rope knot by knot—a willowy thing, until relief under billowing fragrance of the parachute, all our little forms cross-legged in wonder. When I stand now at the end of the earth, night close and tight around me, no difference between what was undreamed and what happened. For example, my stranger ever-beckoning, black eyed and grinning, or is it me who dislodges packed dirt from the hole the earth made?

Her teeth were blue. Not bright
blue by any stretch. More like
she’d been eating blueberries
and her teeth had gotten stained,
perhaps because her enamel
had been rendered more porous
due to the lemon curd, and then
a team of experts had arrived,
removing their jackets and rolling
up their sleeves to use their tiny
brushes to scrub her teeth
with some kind of gritty paste,
yet that blue tint had nonetheless
hung on. Yes. It was more like
something white remembering
the idea of blue than blue
itself. Other than that, she was
perfectly normal. Her slightly
heathered sweater, her jeans,
the way her hair fell across her
eyes and needed to be tucked
in tendrils behind her ears, but
then she’d smile and a slight
chill would fall across the room.

This is how we knew she had
already died at least once. Maybe
twice. Yet she had no idea. She
would hold her wine and toss
her hair and smile and say, Maybe
I’ll call my next book The Bible
so I know my mother will read it!
And we would laugh jovially
while still feeling a slight whinge
somewhere in our bodies, a place
near the liver, under organs
we could not possibly name.

Yet occasionally, if the night
was cold and wine emptied easily
from the bottle as we tore rough
hunks from the baguette, she’d say
things that made us wonder, like,
“Sometimes I just get so sick
of all this stuff, you know? I walk
into a store to buy deodorant
and eighty dollars later I’m holding
all this stuff made by children
in Malaysia or Guatemala
and I think, What is the point?”

Or, “Yesterday, driving home
from yoga, I passed this woman
standing at a bus stop, completely
resigned, and I thought, How
long has it been since she’s felt
totally alive? You know? Like
when is the last time someone
walked up behind her and traced
his finger along her shoulder
because he happened to think
she was beautiful?” The blue
of her teeth disappeared in these
late-night ruminations, swallowed
up by the dusky candlelight.
It was possible to think she was
just a young woman, her life
still unfurling before her while
the rest of us traded quiet glances,
knowing all her tenderness
had never really had a chance.

to lick the skin of the water with a tongue
I don’t speak

the day lifts me up on his shoulders to watch
the varnished remains of our stolen narrative
the cement pelt poured over our feral skins

how to augur anything
but crooked miracles
anyway

It starts as a fragment of sky
that detaches itself from the stratosphere,
something in my eye as I look up.
I call it the Land of the Dead,
its messenger gliding toward me,
star-ermine cape scalloped with black wings,
to land at the foot of the kapok tree
between buttresses
that remind me of the house we lived in once—
you said a gale had ripped off its roof.

Furniture inside for the afterlife—
and you laid out on the table,
a skeleton curled like a foetus
that the king vultures pierce,
their beaks inside your bowel,
their heads painted with prisms,
their white eyes haloed with red.
Kings of light
who once wore the constellations as headdresses,
death eaters
now bringing up lumps of your flesh,
putrid at first, then sweet.
Maggots shrink back into eggs, flies buzz to their pupas.

If I sniff I can smell the stink that’s followed me ever since you died.
Who knows what the mind can do
but here your corpse
is becoming fragrant,
your face pointed east where the sun rises
as our family arrives,
their tears flowing up, back into their eyes,
their tissues folded into pockets.
They hug each other then carry you
into the hut, remove the herbs
packed in your heart, your intestines.
A brush paints backwards, removing the annatto dye
that’s protected me against your ghost, 
dressing me in red jaguar clothes.

Now the surgeons arrive, scrub their hands, peel on stained 
white gloves and green masks
and unpick the stitches across your abdomen,
a scalpel erases its cut,
iodine is wiped off your skin.
You wake as you are counting backwards. When you get to one,
the anaesthetist’s needle pops out of the cannula on your hand
and as the gurney is wheeled down corridors
the sedative wears off.
Now you’re back in the ward, anti-psychotics
sucked out of your blood into the saline drip.
Poisons rush up syringes; pills appear on your tongue
and fly back into nurses’ hands.
Your teeth plant themselves in your gums
and you menstruate.
Wrinkles smooth themselves out
as your hair grows auburn.

Here comes the hard part, the Land of the Dead
floating just above my head
because all along as you’ve been healing
I’ve been getting smaller until
I’m a newborn, resting against
the buttress of your thigh, a liana
linking me to you from my navel.
The kapok tree drops a shower of red blooms around me
as I cry out and take a sharp breath.
I’m lifted up, lowered into the ledge of your womb
where I settle in a foetal position facing east.
The king vultures have followed me in
and someone is zipping up my roof with a scalpel.
I squeeze my eyelids shut and my eyes sink into their sockets 
then vanish.
My lips close and fuse. 
My ears no longer hear your heart. 
Silence.

I’ve gone back as far as I can. You must do the work now
my pregnant mother, you who once told me
what your psychiatrist said—that
you should never have had children.
You were crying at the time and I consoled you
in the hall of my bedsit, cradling the black phone. 
The vultures stayed with me all my life. I wake some nights
and their starry heads are above me, as they were
when I lay inside you, my organs shining in the dark
like caskets of jewels to be plundered.

Maybe you spiked the dirt
With your snare of shivers.

You watched lemongrass
Retreat into the parasols,

Discarded this jungle into
The cinema of forgetting.

You’ve been lying again.

Maybe you knew the venom
Had been painted, that it

Slipped beneath torn
Umbrellas, smothering all

Touch as a vapor buffet.
Honestly. A curse as this

Is a tribunal for the late
Uncles, the bemoaned first

Sons. How you must have
Felt embassy-like, diminishing

A species of servicemen for
An administration of wasps.

This isn’t helping, I can tell—
out of the shower and onto this pill.

Somebody guessed just what life was like
then made a pill for it.

I’m not mad at you. I’ve run out of that kind of madness.
I’m just confused—it’s only a little flu,

but your body circles my three-pronged cane,
and lands on the toilet like a vulture.

Ugh, I’m dying, you say, but you just mean nothing changes.

I wish I could help you. But only time can help you.
I wish it could help me.

The door is crying drops of water
that knew my face once—

press your face against my face
in the glass.

Wednesday we discover several things.
First that some consider memory
to be a lilting luxury. But it’s science she says

and reading is the most beautiful
posture. I agree, I can’t explain, I throw it up.

We use several because singularity sounds
like woe. How can they not believe in science

out the window white water. Lyric sounds
like pretty nation but we’re going to spit it up.

Why do I leave furrows in all these texts dragging
my bad memory beside. We’ll show these men
our lyric. It’s not modesty it hurts she says

what they forget. Lyric is supposed to
hurt he said while I choked it up.

All these minutes of questionable consent.
When I spoke he said how unfair.

They sang of sweets as the girl starved.
It’s not a simile it’s a scene it’s not an allegory

it’s an event. On the map, great gasps
of land are already gone. When we sleep
we are heaving about power.

For the sun, which will burn out or run down

or dramatically implode in a future

epoch about as awful as this one.  For

the one-antlered deer that expired en-route

to an upstate sanctuary because

why not.  For the sequoia tunnel tree

which was uprooted in a storm

the other day.  For my boyhood fantasy

of driving through it.  For California.

For this sadness.  This joy.  This

bucket on the floor.  For the industry

which will most harm you

upon its inevitable demise.

For the pet rabbits who died

in grotesque cages

in our backyard.  For the school

that burned down.  For the lake

in my dreams which is always frozen.

For the pained myth

of your birth.  For this new year.

Which isn’t new at all.

Which will be the same

as last year and the one before it.

And so on.  For the air

inside my mouth shaped like nothing.

For the bell ringing

through the early rain.

For each unheeded warning.  For sweet

love, which seems ever more

impossible.  For Norway,

which has shut down all its FM broadcasts.

For silence, which nobody

truly values.  For the song

I couldn’t recognize in the elevator,

though all I could do was ache.

For the night, which becomes more immense

and depressing and utter

and the voices in it which argue and argue.

For this conflict with the stars.

For ashes.  For the wind.

For this emergency we call life.

The fire you wore is the color
of my eyes. I have mistook a quiet

room once for your laughter
and the curtains once for your hair.

My shadow: plural and your absence:
a chorus—a  fistful of light through

the crack—cobwebs as piano keys—
cupboards and drawers for keeping

memories—green blessings growing
in the sink—your shadow stepping

out of the wall. I am waiting for when
you will open the door. An empty

room is another word for music,
the song of the man, the woman,

the boy and the girl that slipped
out and left their shadows behind.

Your voice is my favorite album,
you left but your bones are still here.

We want what God wants: to be pure.

Take the water. We’ll pay for it in glass.

Poseidon, now there’s a god, a real king of water.

We want what a god wants: to own it, all.

Water baron, barren woman, what do you know of the sea?

The sea never ceases ringing.

I swallowed the seahorse because I could not swallow the seashore.

How to track an animal?

It takes one to know one.

You need it so bad it will kill you.

Is water a human right?

How much you got?

How far are you willing to go for a taste?

Look at the horses on the beach at Assateague: swim or die.

That’s nature—so feral they’ll perish if they eat a whole bag of sugar.

Red, green, or golden, horses love an orchard.

Storm rising? Star gazing.

God of the sea: god of the horse.

In the body in the body of the centaur, which part is human and which part animal?

The difference between liminal and subliminal is regional.

Look up.

It was a half­‐man half-­horse that first grouped the stars into shape, the first shape in the sky—a hybrid—a half­‐man half-­horse selfie.

You can’t have a half-­man half‐horse without a half­‐female half‐horse; with Hylonome, they say Ovid explores “possible combinations of a number of conceptual opposites: natura and cultus, human and animal, male and female, love and war, and the contrasting values of lyric—elegiac and epic poetry.”

On the merry-­go-­round, I always go for the gold‐ring. Alchemy.

Of all the psychopomps, I ride the horse.

Nightly I eat black
For breakfast I ask for a fine blue world
because there’s an ecosystem
inside my organs I do not understand
One day I will no longer care to live
on plants, the tundra, gauze & floss
Every child lives for a while
& sometimes I am even patient with snow
Who knows why the people are dying
Every town quiets their religions
Tonight I call my enemies
to say hello to ask them if they want to spar
because loss is a patch of black farm
perpendicular to my ear

In the house, the healer

coats their bald heads with

red mud, cements the demon back

to the upside down world,

friend-zoning the inmates again.

That stain from the bruised shadow is

said to come after

the three days of darkness, the days of

the coming of the Prince of Heaven; to

judge the living and the dead.

We will dig a hole in the ground,

a hole as gluttonous as the great wall,

for our house,

our goatsheds and the duck roosts, the

lamb, the ducklings, the kids,

our gods and our priests, those

that the gods did not fatten their corpses, especially,

all that have no shadows.

Awuru’s house shall stand;

he will farm away the stain, frenzied

from the wood nails he grew on his stepson’s head, and

the worms he has farmed from it for his day old chicks, and

they have fed, on and on, and

the roosters have grown several

conjoined combs and wattles.

Born in an open city,

butts as marshlands, Akwah sought

the same canal of his birth, bruised the

wall with fried fluids.

Okotombo sculpts stones, eating

the gods’ snakes in the feast of the sun.

We will dig in deeper and deeper, for

the Prince has little patience for hidden hearts.

There is a man child conceived to

break the ribbons, spread flower laurels

and multicolor shreds, by

the name conferred on him.

Let a cloud dwell upon the stain.

Those broken plates in Aleppo we

will hide under our beds, and use the

rest to make tattoos on our foreheads, as tribal people do;

make masks and Ikenga to scare away death.

I will build spiders with talons round

my mother’s hips: they will watch over

the night till the time’s end.

I head for hell at once, possessed by

the speech of sand;

the way, just before the house that

life occupies, a little away from death,

are shadows, made of several shades, often

falling and rising in the harmattan winds,

sometimes drunk on hard water.

I walk to the drunken wind to ferry me,

for my ink is filled with blood now and again, smelling of

ancient balms, flowing through the river,

filling itself again and again, eroding

waterwalls: memorialized in lethal bees,

drywalls and headless semen.

And the world will go on.

Man of Unamuno’s Solon,

why weep when it avails nothing?  

and that is precisely the truth of it all

the way we will continue to be grown and fertilized,

and to grow more and more, in the faith.

I have no debt to the worms except

wads of silk;

the cotton trees and the cotton rot are one,

Lear owes the cats many jars of perfumes, not me.

I owe the cats many long nights of wine.

The silkwads need not fill the grave, the sand always can.

And you mix the world at least, for the greatest beauty.

Like a wrapped gift I had put off opening because the shake of it said
I got right answers in me. And I have been holding the map
in a fog so thick I can’t see the length of my arm.
So this cosmo quiz of income I’m counting on to make sense of
how we were never married, but I dream more than I sleep now.
Of how the fire alarm went off for twenty minutes at midnight,
hungry for a nine-volt, and hitting it with a broom handle
felt like shaking a baby.

My neighbor drives his kids four hours one way
to see their mom and she will still be locked up for years.
Someone abandons a wheelchair in the snow in front
of my house and somebody else shovels a bent path around it.
When they test my blood they ask have you ever exchanged sex
for drugs or money or something that you needed?
There must be a write off in all of this.

In the number of boxelder bugs trapped against storm-windows,
in the growing mole on my left breast, in the way a woman
puts her hot tongue to it long enough that I forget
my grandfather’s melanoma, my Aunt Barb’s mastectomy,
in who claims each of us and how they do it, how the tattoo
won’t come off, how we are so many dependents,
how one headlight will do for now.

We expect a tear-away check in the mail some weeks
towards summer, those of us who didn’t stack enough
in the black. I recycle the magazines wearing strangers
names that I don’t call to cancel because I am alone
enough already. And when the check does come the
watermark reads leave this town, leave the state altogether,
like a receipt stamped no returns, no exchanges.
You can’t undo what you have done.

One morning I woke up wet and folded
in the center of a black gyre.

Sometimes, you’d speak from the outside,
or press your hand in the eye

to streak black specks against my cheek.
Other times, you’d release gold leaf

until the air swelled brighter than a singing beehive.
I told you, in SaLone my Aunt Shirley married a witch doctor

who fed her hallucinogenic tinctures by hand,
unsutured his voice

from the barrels of his throat and threw it at her.
Perhaps this is why

I looked you in the eye for too long,
wasn’t watching

the way grains of sand began
to obscure your face

until even it became particulate.
When I said schizophrenic, you laughed, widened

your eye holes when I said ventriloquist.
In the heart of the gyre, I found snakeskins and hands

severed in the ’90s by the Revolutionary
United Front. You told me in every love story

there must be something keeping the couple split.
Bullshit I said and every now and then I’d spin

songs above my head. I’d switch
from “Bloody Mary” to Billie Holiday in an instant

when I thought you weren’t listening. And then,
Why are you so unhappy? you asked me. I could barely see

your silhouette, pitching rum and ganja
through the vortex. I buried them and hid

alligator gall between my breasts. I could leave
whenever I wanted, you said,

but soon I started finding pieces
of your face, revolving

everywhere I looked. A tooth. An iris.
A bottom lip. My name

came reeling towards me from a net
of insects that said it was your mouth.

There were so many, beating
blood through their wings, claiming

love, saying drink this to press
their stingers in my body.

Filthy as 12-bar, filthy as a stuttering key in the hazy
Door lock at 4 a.m. Filthy as I don’t know what it means to love

You. Out in the country there’s no fence to speak of—there’s just
The blonde path, wide enough for a truck, a truck wide enough

For two bodies to ride restlessly beside one another without
Ever touching. There’s no fence to speak of, just various dusks &

I’m in love with the dust that kicks up—I’m in love with what
A dirt road does to a truck. There’s no edge of the woods—there’s just

The blonde path stretching out of the dark green like a
Leg bone, a radio dial catching a hit of station before

Moving on past into the static. Two girls ride ruthlessly
Beside one another—one filthy as a story, the other filthy

As a storyteller. One girl might leave a trail of crumbs
Behind her. One might leave a line of poured-out gasoline.

Old evening air the way warm soda tastes like a hangover,
A long drive in July. I got plenty of time. You got light in your eyes.

It’s all the middle of nowhere. When the music stops, everybody
Scatters, even the light—an embarrassment of a sunset, really, &

Why even talk about the stars as if we still care about them
In the off-hours, when we’re not confessing to the dead?

These girls wore each other, is what I mean. Passed out in
Each other’s shoes, passed the ends of sentences from one to

The other like taking belts of whiskey out the bottle. One
Night one girl waves goodbye to the other & the empty fifth

She leaves in my hand is where the story turns dark, is where
I stick myself against the story flush as a wheat-paste poster,

Contact-printing my body back onto itself, a decade delayed. Love,
This is where the joke begins: one girl’s gotten gone. Her brother

Walks into a bar to deliver the punch line, & the other girl doubles
Over—An inside job. See, you got to be able to fall, for there to be

An edge—see the bar in waves, the doubled stars in waves, all just
Frosting on a cold cake. Both girls breathless in their own bodies now.

Now, it’s a ruthless thing, to know what’s about to happen to
Someone who does not know what’s about to happen. One girl might

See years go by in waves of roadside signs, a trail of vein rise up
On the back of her hand before it begins to wind down the twin

Bones of her forearm. Two girls trailed each other, delivered one
Another from one year to the next, twinned until they wound down

To just one night. One girl might leave a line of salt in the dirt,
One a flush of dust, sifted into a river. What is there left to leave

When there’s no body to speak of? This is where the storyteller
Begins: I am trying to know what it means to love anyone

Else the way I meant to love her, the way a sweet tooth
Loves salt. Sugar, I used to know this place like the back

Of my papery hand. Now there’s just the blonde past,
A river oversaturated with roses & ash, a back way

Home, a way back to what there ever is to leave behind.
I am trying. The smell of fresh pine, the small task of rain

On a windshield, a drift like the bow of a single fiddle
Drawing itself across my collarbone, my lungs sinking & rising

Slow like sloppy keys in a deep octave, my heart resting dark
Like a gun in a glove box whenever I might need to lean for it.

I’ve paid some hush money to the unpaved path, the paved-
Over past, plucked up the door lock & parked two loose cigarettes

In the useless tape deck, then that small piece of quiet—after the click
Of the ignition but before the radio cuts on, the quarter glass

Coaxing in the scalene country air, yellowing its passengerless slant
Over half the truck’s bench seat, the angles catching nobody, missing it all

—What any girl with half a mind wanders out this way for, to take
As much of it in over & over & sure enough breathe it all the way out.

At the rehab center
late at night when my father
presses the call button,
someone hurries in
and shuts it off, thus maintaining
their quick response rate, but leaves
without helping him pee, he tells me
in a whisper on the best
spring day of the year so far,
of the century: I could have picked
two hundred
million snowdrops on the way in
had I patience
and a doll’s fingers.                 He’s afraid

of angering the staff and has learned to pee
on himself with dignity.          It’s all

in the not-crying.                     In imagining

he’s a chunk of wind
the next day while his penis
is being washed
and he can’t feel it, just a sock
with a hole in it.                       I’m afraid

of the future.                That I’ll need a gun

to help me out of the jam
of having a body.        Is what I’m thinking

while holding his hand, while believing
there’s nothing to be done
about the weight of the night
on his chest except to lift him
and carry him home and give him back
to his own bed to live and die in,
as he and my mother
gave me to the sun all those years ago
to run under and end up here,
not knowing what to do
about the rumor that part of us
goes on after the heart’s last sigh,
other than applaud the possibility
as I would a woman
standing up from a piano
after the gazelles of her hands
have stopped running, the music over
but not the chance for more music
if we clap enough that she believes
how desperate we are and that only
she can save us.

Slow time in the palm of Georgia

I use to show my face

Do you mean nothing?

We ate death slippery

The house was a swallowing coffin

Some get named Charleston

& sleep in Pittsburgh

I march through childhood doors

A hole in a giant leaf

I have trouble naming myself

In a language I can find

What is a stranger?

We are messages

Salt in the corners of eyes

A cup of rainbow tea

How do we fill ourselves?

Sell acts for the habit

I use to show nothing

But what troubles my mind

Lit by a million specks of light,
all your dust turns holy.
What’s rotten in you burns

and burns. You, a shadow-
you, gone glowing
Catherine wheel, a spoked

gloaming. You know lead can lodge
into an animal’s skull, turn
the skull into a lit temple

of its wanderings, and this is how
you understand the fabled bowl
a saint carries, its hollow lit

by the eyes it cradles and the saint
eyeless and God-filled. You are not
eyeless and God is nowhere

to witness how you become
the wheel and the body it breaks,
a spectacle of light you cannot fathom

until you fathom it—flooded
as you are with shadow, darkness
taut as an animal’s shank

until it ripples at your touch. Pools
in the bowl your hands make.
Then breaks.

i look to history to explain & this is my first mistake
when i say history i mean the stone
half-buried by the roadside has witnessed
more tragedy than a glass of a water. i look to the water
but all i see is dust. i look to the dust & all there is
is history. here’s a feather & well of blood
to write the labor movement across the fractal
back of infrastructure. here’s a father leaving home
to build railroads with his bare hands. write the laws
that claw the eyes from owls, that build a wall
between the river & the thirsty, that drag families
from one hell into the next. o this house of mine
was built by men & o i, a man sometimes, pass
through its acid chambers & leave out the backdoor
dust. when i say history i mean what lives in us,
i mean the faux gold chain around my neck,
the diseases passed from generation to generation
dating back to a time before christ, i mean any word
traced to its origin is a small boy begging for water.

Migrant is not a metaphor
or the burning of possible sanctuaries.
Though where he emerged, blue-skulled,
gowned by his mother’s aloe, a canyon lifted
its eye to the sun. He shouldn’t have been.
Like wolves in the white-faced room or
everywhere power makes insignia
of the gaping body. But it happened,
to trombones of light and the villainous
dream of the river. He is there now, fierce.
I was wrong to believe he was a message,
a hand wiping away steam from the mirror.
At first, there was only night and day
and the animal cries of the city. One told time
by the number of spoons collected to calm
the various hungers. Rain, sugar, sleep—
at times the movements of a father like wind
through bamboo leaves. The only bamboo
of course, is in his bones. Outside: a pristine
grid of fountains and pine needles, sky-
scraping ambition, broken young bears
in scrubland marked for development.
Inside him weather is building. Roses erupt.
A migrant learns to love as mothers do,
by trying and trying again. On the opposite
bank, there are men bending tenderly
over their infants. From this distance
their teeth are pennies in the bellies of fish.
And he is real enough to bend in similar
fashion, to coax breath out of brass
and the republic of stalactites. His skull is not
the earth anymore. In the morning he greets
its howling with a glass of milk, soap
under his chin, the monsoon of his lungs.

Shame the light for what grief it brings
the eye, even shut: radiant
the slaughterhouse; phosphorous shells

bright, fed on bone and wedding sweets.
Damn the light—damn the glow of their
sirens, their liturgy of flag

to kerosene, torch to altar
and crossbeam. Praise instead the night,
its starless, basilica void.

Praise the black of ventricles, new
blood. Praise his holy ruckus and
jolt—this boy as echo, shadow,
high-relief. Glory be his mouth,
warm on the soft dark of her breast.

Let’s not begin the poem with and,
though it begins that way

in spirit: one in a long list of—
let’s not call them grievances.

I’m trying to love the world,
I am, but is it too much

to ask for two parts bees
vibrating their cups of pollen,

humming a perfect A note,
to one part sting?

Worry and console, worry
and console: it’s how I stay

in shape. See, I’m sweating.
Some nights my daughter cries,

I don’t want to be in the dirt,
and this is what I call a workout.

My heart’s galloping hell
and gone from the paddock—

I don’t want to be in the dirt
because I’ll miss you—

and there’s no stopping me.
But let’s not end

with the heart as horse,
fear-lathered, spooked deaf.

I’m trying, I am, for her.
If I list everything I love

about the world, and if the list
is long and heavy enough,

I can lift it over and over—
repetitions, they’re called, reps—

to keep my heart on, to keep
the dirt off. Let’s begin

with bees, and the hum,
and the honey singing

on my tongue, and the child
sleeping at last, and, and, and—

don’t ask someone if they’re afraid of dyingit’s tasteless
and they’ll always lieinstead ask if they’ve ever been chained up

in a dungeontime yellowstaining their skinor if they’ve ever
had to collect rainwater for weeks on end stretching out rags

to soak up wet to squeeze through their lipsthe rain-
water here is full of phosphorous if you drink

too much your kidneys faileverything has limits
my grandfather fixed watches for half a century until cataracts

thick as figskin took his eyeswe tell this kind of story
to stay humbleconsider the carnival geek choking on chicken blood

consider the dazzling fortress of copper sucked back into
the earththe soldiers tumbling into the split were bad seeds

they never did sproutthe best part of God is the math of God
you can count the pearls leading from here to himsometimes

faith feels too far away to be of any usea distant moon built
from the prophets’ holy bonesother times it’s so near

I can hold it between my teethI am as good as my wordwhich is to say
I’m keyless as the language of twinsthe womb is a clammy pulp

of shredded tongues where we choose our obsessionsI came out
hot as a punched jawmy head a beautiful blushing

pistachioto reach me now you will have to figure out
my birthnamea hintit rhymes with Tassiopeia

do you understand what I’m sayingI confess I have been trying
to seduce youI’m not the fat egg I claimed to beI’m sorry for that

and for all the tearsthe delicate emotions should have felt more
hypotheticalI have mastered this grammar and little more

They said burn the keys
but only our hair caught fire.

We walked to the borders
with photographs and letters:
This is where the dying began
their dying, this is where
they knifed the children.

The judges called us in
by our cities. Jericho. Latakia. Haditha.

We swore on a god we never met, to love
the lakes, the ice caps,
one frost after another,

but at night in our dreams
the library burnt,
the pears were still crisp in the pantry.

We waited for our flooded village
to be siphoned, the stone bridges rebuilt.
We ate the house keys with salt.

An arrow in the heart of the gonorrheal sun
that falls into the sea over Tel Aviv
discharging its greasy trail. A powerful red.
And mother in the cramped kitchen.
A small painting. You write on the postcard, send it
to the land of Goshen before you, from and to yourself. Go,
you say, go, dove, away from here.

Through the frame-like window:
the melting seconds of your longing
in the brown of a military shirt and pants
trickle backwards to the ground, like a cruel
clock, young soldier, in the palm of a hand.
[1988]

It is true you deserve to die

Some stuffed gull suspended
Above the benefit dinner

A miracle knew you
Made you human

Whatever you touched grew more like itself

Unsatisfied with itself
(So you touched it all)

And this they called the Lambada
Explained the boy

When he crawled on top

Your sick front admit it
Vaguely affected by the tide

And emptied
How quickly a house

Falls into disarray

Not knowing a dance
Could be survived

Or a grip so easily
Unfastened

Torn as you were at the root

The universe (this time) leave out.
Star dust has settled, and if it now resembles the sea,
a suburban climate hangs above it.
Leave out too the cocoons of souls in thousand-year wars
and their testaments.
Leave out bygone centuries. Each fossil
is overburdened with life
drowning inside a life-buoy made of marble.
Leave out the gilded spines and the names of those
who never die.
Leave out the marvelous childhood, details of a sparkling morn,
which gently settles into a time out of mind.
And leave out his brothers too, who linger here
in faded photographs
and in some events, like a dagger
suddenly raised into the air,
in which it all still hangs.

How easy to live with choice
once it’s made. Yesterday
three loquats lay on the ground,
golden as empire.

Lately your voice is tinny, gramophone
cotillion and quadrille. I’m afraid
to turn the record. Dirt blows over

terracotta, up my feet and legs,
devils, devils. More loquats above,
glass tesserae crowning—

somebody. No loss of local boys,
bisque-mild, faces that can outempty
anything, how they drop hard,

cadavers. Nor the reason, unnameable
but as droves toward a feeding purpose.
Trough, crow. When the Spanish

arrived the ocean lay like an
odalisque, and the ribbon-neck sunset.
They did what I wish I could.

Left names. Have I heard correctly.
You were without remove. Oh it’s
a gold rush of expectations this place.

My lover sleeps
in our bed. In the garage, I smash
the cans in the recycling;

I float into our room.

He is a lump
under the covers.
I remember

when he destroyed the porch furniture

with his maul. Each crack opened my eyes.

I pick him up,
and he unravels
into a sheet.

I look out the window.
My lover does push-ups

in the driveway.
He digs a hole
in the yard with his hands.

He slips down the storm drain.
Good riddance, I think
as I tuck myself in.

Left for dead by the god of garbled messages:

The worm say he was to hang,
being the first soul to leave the body.
Call his neck plum, when it bruises
say the skin makes it easy to digest.
His stomach—taut and broad, to be carved out.

Call him vessel, passage. The sea allows him,
makes abduction: funeral and birth. He is compromise
of rotting, an acceptable loss. Weighed in knot
and gasp of air.

The lizard say he was to be buried,
being the first soul to leave the body.
Call his bones returning,
when they crumble back to themselves,
call it rest. He is the seed and the harvest.

Call him wet earth when rain gathers
on his skin. Rising with the flood, call him
body crashing, with a forgiveness for hurricanes.

Zumbi say he was to prophesy,
being the first soul to leave the body.
Call his bloodletting: confession or wilderness.
Call his mouth rigor, his tongue hungry.
He say he knows of coming crucifixions,
of revelations. Being the first soul
to leave the body, he say all his body know is hanging,
all his body know is grave, all he know is wilderness.

Call him death, he say his body only know resurrection.

We strung lights in the halls of Byzantium: cue the music, girls, it’s all in our heads, all in our heads. Trumpets skyward, you know about it, side eye, you know how goes silence in the rock-n-roll, that trance you spun wildly, tannest legs in the slant light, hard desert sun, a scooch right up to the brim. This is a plethora for your housewarming needs, welcome June, dead batteries, blue fish, here take her, full bowl you give your best lap in the car, live forever, every cricket drone the wheat field, how rough stock our mouths in the front seat were; never forget the day that breaks it different, no longer hold me up a parcel on the front porch, Metallica t-shirt, too much pomade, love regardless; river, honor, stockpile, arsenal, meat, blood, long-haired now in some big city, everything bluer, faces, yours, square through the jaw, bouncing with stride busy streets okay.

I vote with my feet. I vote with my wallet.
I vote in person with my vote.
I have a call in to my senator’s office, where

I’m almost in tears saying these words to
whomever answers the phone—it’s the words
themselves, not what they call for, or where

they’re from. I have a voice I can sometimes find
when my head’s in a book, distracted and aware,
a voice that runs lines across a teleprompter,

clearing faces, lighting red up into gold as it
booms and twirls and fails to leave a place
for those voices inside me grown fingery

and inarticulate, too faint this time through
the copier to stand next to something so clean
and bright and blue. Blow some air out of

my lips, steal me into the kitchen—it’s all metallic
and you know, I sit there. I don’t put my head
in my hands. I hold it right up. All this

traveling, shifting between positions, negotiating
the anticipated movements of a crowd, or
pausing too long in the spot on

the carpet which causes the automatic doors
to open, while large shadows move across
the big-box parking lot, the cola sloshes

in a glass on deck in a storm, and the signs in
the community garden ask joggers to
keep out, as if limits weren’t absurd now that

the seasons scatter their days like
pieces across some horrible game board.
I try to rest. I’m no good at it. I sit a chair down

in the shower, and put myself in with
all my clothes on. I press stacks of biographies
between my hands, walk them from

room to room. I can participate in a process,
contribute to, delighted to, I’m happy to
hand you my role. I have an aesthetic. I apply

duct-tape to my car, duct-tape to the camera, to
the listening device, to an individual notebook,
to a big stack of them—I am a person

with a thing about doing my work. The caucuses
start, and we can all see this difference
as making things the same. I’m no different.

I mean I find I have no new friends. I walk
around alone, and I can’t quite tell
when I’m asleep anymore. My body carries me

to the windows of the mattress shop, lays me
against the tinted glass. I’m trying to be
a person who asks difficult questions, who one

can’t get things by, but as I prepare my responses,
I find myself offering to get a cup of coffee
for a person I dislike, then a person I like, then

myself again. I leave the lines I stand in all the time.
I have no sense of these words, what
they meant to me. My eyes soften at what feels

a tender moment, but then I find I read it wrong,
it’s formal, professional, an exchange
of gray-blue tones. I’m holding my hands

in the air above the keypad of an ATM machine,
unsure of my next move. I’ve made a political
donation or two, but it feels now like I’ve come out

of a fever, a hole under the blanket, the edge
of which kept coming off my toes. The bus turns
around in the lot, stops, and opens the door. The driver

says we can get off and then back on if we want.
If it were my car, I’d have a pile of glass carafes in
the back seat, aprons, work shoes, golden photos

of dewy gardens in southern New England,
elephant-colored etchings of trash heaps, a corbeil of
diplomas, some fake and some real, matted together

on the seat from the rains, because I have
no windows, no doors, no car, and nowhere
I mean to go. These are the words I walk

around with, because the ones I want
are gone. We already found them, if you remember.
We brought them out in front of everybody,
and we burned them right up.

Some say marriage is a twinning.
A surgery of adding attachments.
When I undress, the dirt throbs
for me. The mushrooms betray
chastity and parade their vile shape.
Why, among this applause,
have I become so small in this life,
why has love taken away my face?
Some women pray for a husband
who will take the sky in his fist
and break it. We do not sign away
our power to men who sog
like paper boats. Whoever we marry:
we vanish like a trick. What sickness,
to call a woman wife just once, then
call her chalkboard until she is a puff
of white dust, a vague outline
against a black sky. I have so little
of my own. I could hold this new
worth in one hand. When my husband
fucks and plunders through seasons
and countries like a migration
of hurt, I am left in a field of women
giving birth to mirrors of their own
vanishing lives. This is the painting
I have become. My life is not to be
worshipped. I would trade it to the god
of bolt guns or knives. They say
there is beauty in the dark eyes
of a cow. I am out among the neglected
bodies looking for beauty in this slaughter.

I mistook construction sounds for an up-
right bass busking hard in the yard next door.
My thoughts have been so wishful lately. Cups
bedside glint traces of the night before:
the brand of bourbon we both drink, the loose
leaf skullcap tea supposed to make me sleep
through nightmares of my mother’s brother’s noose,
that collar knot he learned in scouts. We reap
such risky skills from childhood, lemonade
stands each a mean lesson in free markets.
Uncle, the practical type, surely weighed
all options. Are those strings in the garden?
How much will they hold? Stools are tipping pins,
and throats strike like bows on cheap violins.

a three headed caterpillar guards the beginning
of this poem. and there is something emerald
crushing my body, like your sad eyes are a river
the locals know not to swim. last tuesday, boats
crowded the water. the dead could drink nothing
but still got drunk to forget, like that one time
the rain was coming down hard in the park. you
opened a palm and instead of pigeons erupting
to feed on the drowned pellets, there was a flight
of ghosts. the hopelessness, a dark juice staining
their mouths. where do you find these women
my mom asks, who is an authority on shipbuilding.

1.

Cousin, I am not mad.
I know this is not the country for them,
but I had not seen the elk

until I had, standing
unbothered in the county road,
rack like a live oak,
rack like a car,
its muzzle the color of a crow hopping down
bleached sedge in winter.

Must I remember
such things as they are? A thousand whitetails
flit through my dreams,
but the elk, the elk
just stands.

2.

Soon after, blood in the well.
Rust,
some said,
but the water came up red.
I held my tongue forty days
and nights,
forty raps to my hand with a ruler.

I sent up prayers
for the horses in Uncle’s fields,
and when the water cleared, I drew a big
clean breath, whispered the Apostle’s Creed
to an empty pulpit.
This,

of course, after I crushed
thirty-three eggs
in their nests,
after I knocked the broom handle
on the barn door five times,
five times a day,

for five weeks. And the elk,
it stood there
quietly.

Behind it, the barn in flames,
wreathed by darting sparrows.

3.

Cousin, I have had a premonition.
A field shorn for winter, a hundred

fawn-colored bucks,
throats slit and blackening the grass.

The blank witness of the sky
like a mouth slackened in sleep,
and at the edges, dark pines

whispering what they had seen
in a language I’ll never know.

4.

At Mother’s request
I will say I never saw it, brown and real
as a dog, quiet as any doe

grazing in the backyard.

And yet I had,
coming back from Uncle’s,
beautyberry spilling from the shoulders
as if to pave the road
the deep violet of the sea.

I’d seen its eyes,
their oval pupils, dumb slash
of eyelashes, female in excess.

My heart became wings beating
blood to my ears.

Rustling in the eaves,
sparrows lit
in pairs to their nests

in the barn before it burned.

5.

And their song
which has fallen silent
before October’s combines,
hay, and clay red as the body,

as the underside of the carcass
strung up and cooling

above the bucket
in Uncle’s yard.

Names of girls.
Names of paintings.
Names of horses.

I can’t decide which
I prefer: the struggle
or the boredom.

We have little to say, so Jack asks,
What was the best thing
that happened to you today?

Then on to the worst:
“The Rose & the Thorn.”

I burned my finger on the oven
this morning, burnt
to a blister—

it’s good to remember
how much it hurts.

“A war-torn country.”
This repetition, this reportage.

why did you bring me here? / i ask / the machine / has a machine family / who assumes i’ve rigged their boy / to do what i want / by feeding him / a coin / fashioned with a string / a yo-yo organ / is what the doctors called it / when my grandmother’s heart fell out of place / & did not / return to its country whole / but who ever does / after leaving / the dinner where his parents tick-ticked boring questions at me / b u t w h e r e a r e y o u r e a l l y f r o m ? / yesterday is the wrong answer, tomorrow too / despite memory, i believe / in hunger / as a way to pass the time / i count the hornets that escape their mouths / for years i laid there & pressed / an ear against the humming / the humming i once mistook for just static / until the stingers / rose from metal water i hear my skin sing / in a frequency made only from laughter / when told, you speak so well / an aubade that calls to me like a grandfather / clock / the machine reassures me that i have nothing / to prove / i am who they think i am / i lace the corset, tight / blend a decimated village into the hollows / of my cheeks / a dirt burlesque / a virus that breached a fire / wall of family portraits / darkening before the embers / tear through / my future / a year composed of bleached wires / where the rain clouds travel back & forth / on a clothesline / i hang his skin / to dry / i lay / his organs on a bed of rice

More snow fell than was able

to be plowed. We turned

our faces to the clouds, waited

in waiting rooms to fill out

the forms, kissing each

one like the scalp of a child

with hair as unreal

as a doll built by hand

in the hold of a beautiful ship.

I sit in the room full of porn,

exhale my own name,

the one of that saint who

carried the Christ

child over a swollen river.

I discipline my waist
and lean

against the heated coconut.

The day is gray as a face,
and my sin

clear as the hoofmarks
in the carmine.

What is God to me

but an open-mouthed
stranger?

I stepped across a viper
and still

the forked tongue
flickers in my hollow.

You see, my lust

will never
know death nor harvest:

elixir of hellebore, colocynth
salt, stick,

and mouse shit.

I run in circles
and bathe in the hateful river.

This grain, this
wild greedy thing

he’s left me plumping

so paltry
and mulish.

Mercury, mandrake—

I am only a girl

with this brilliant black
nest of eagerness.

Over and over, my mother
calls to me,

my name

a reckless ribbon
in the gloaming.

When the clouds part
like stupid lovers,

I close my eyes and press
myself against

the eucalyptus tree.

I let the leaches
crawl until nightfall.

I too drag around tin cans
so you can’t kiss me.
I too have been beat up by cabbies
thrown out of moving cars,
gotten into screaming matches with cancerous secretaries.
I too am covered in war paint
like indelible ink, quick to jump
to bait, to horse, to flower—
don’t look both ways
when entering the river. I too seal off
passages to my heart like a besieged country,
cut losses, cut brothers, don’t look back
when I am lost in the forest. I too fear
invisible drunken singers, I too fear
white horses. I too can’t
forgive can’t stained-glass out of here can’t tell you
words of love when you ask for water.

Your love is a wet risk

highway. Across the Midwest, you’re unfolding
your body: a road hungry
under a frontier-ish horizon. You still
prefer the sober lovers
with their foreign motors, but hate
the smell of oil.You know
how I’d let you
dance beneath my metal—
I’d drive all over you,

but this hurts me too

much: the swell and curl of your
nostrils and hate—you hate
the smell of oil. Well, any love is a wet risk,
a gamble ending in the spin out.
Or slip. The heart I hide behind the hood:
always speeding hot, too
easily interstated.
Lying down in front of me, you say,
Use my miles of hard concrete to
run away—I’m bigger than

your Middle East,
than your deeper South—well,
I know when
I hear an engine idling.You say,Now,

won’t you ride my good thousand
country miles—for you—exploding so
orange bright with interstate lights—me under
your moving body: I could make you
a vehicle so full of light—oh, beneath,
feel this longing—exploding so—
Oh,

no, I prefer the pavement rising under me
unlit, so lonely—
as if a province explored first—by my own dark
hands and the milky way—baby, I will always wear

your hate: the smell of oil.

In my dream, the world is a rowboat. In my dream,
the world is a quarter, sun­spit & golden. The rain comes

in swells, a single hurtling fist. Annie doesn’t understand
the glory of a bumblegirl: blushfire, liquid smoke, diamond-

back honey. The basement sucked iodine. I did not get to yell.
Instead, stains on Annie’s hands, red & full, a latent promise

of nervous tongue & sex, except there was no sex & the bruises
were Boy’s way of saying no, then yes, then no again.

Annie calls this the mythology of manhood. Annie calls this
the mythology of entitlement, but I am thinking of necklaces,

bracelets, earrings made of latex. A fingered, toothy grin.
Annie scrubs my thighs: jetstreams, cherry oil, red as the blood

on the bed. Red as the blood in the water.

Yu know how yu can see car careening
before it even start accelerate? Is same
with she. In the crib she bawl, she bawl
till she cyan done. All her life as if
she in a race with ruin. I know I wasting
mi breath fi hope one day she go realise
wanting nuh mek yu special. Even I—
who cotch-up miself on the side a precipice
one time and was schupid enough
fi think it a place fi set up shop—
did wake-up quick-quick once mi foot slip.
When edge draw near fi true
only a fool nuh accept the idea of falling
plenty-plenty different from the drop.

Patron Saint of Girls
(Ann Marie Burr, 8, missing since August 31, 1961, from Tacoma, Washington)

Pray for this lightning-bright night
to never end. For the rain to always scatter
droplets over those streets, blackened like the pelt

of an animal. Pray for the girls inside
the small house to sleep through the darkness,
close their eyes against dreams and the barking

dogs. Only blind men would circle
around lambs like these whose bodies, shorn
and bared beneath ivory counterpanes,

don’t yet know the way women are held
together like a bundle of wood before they are lit
on fire or how to soak up each other’s blood

with white cloths. Pray for them not to cross
over the meridian of the window frame. Keep them
inside their beds with chins tucked over hands

unmarked by passage. Keep them from leaving
everything behind in those rooms,
including a single red thread caught on a sliver.

 Patron Saint Against Wounds
(Rita Jolly, 17, missing since June 29, 1973, from West Linn, Oregon)

Pray that on this evenfall, bees will fly thick
from her mouth. That the honeyed sweetness
of breath moving past her lips is the only wound

the closing of the day needs to muster past.
On this evening as she soldiers
by sidewalks filled with cracks

and dark thistles prickling the edges
of lawns, pray that men will know hearts
are living things, that injuries

can heal if they are cared for. Pray
that the droning vibrations that echo
through the inky shadows are simply

those bees that have gathered too close
to the ivory roses whose stems can be shaped
into crowns. Pray this is the only sound as she falters

along the roadway, her body moving toward sunset,
and that the livid bruise of darkness looming
behind her is not what we imagine.

Patron Saint of Seamstresses
(Vicki Lynn Hollar, 24, missing since August 20, 1973, from Eugene, Oregon)

Pray that she is the kind of woman who knows
how to pull a thread through, stitch
a hem closed with straight lines, and cut

an end loose without shifting, so you can offer
your own thimbleful of blood
to place at the feet of our maternal

heroine, the only one who will know
if the dark man watches her as he does her blood
sisters. Know that you offer for her a relic,

a way to carry her through the passageway
to the dusky vein of a car lot. Pray
that her pink-blushed dress stays neat

and clean. That the latch on her car door
always bolts tight against wanderers. That the ivory dawn
awakens her every morning until she is a grandmother.

And know that your prayers will not be enough
for her to overstep this moment, so that she can darn
this evening closed with her sleep.

Patron Saint of Captives
(Donna Gail Manson, 19, missing since March 12, 1974, from Olympia, Washington)

Pray the wolf who sleeps in a bed of woven vine
twigs does not rise from his winter hibernal,
that if he wakes, thrashing toward her in the timber-dark,

hex marks are enough to keep him from her
scent. Pray that she will shiver
in the breeze of his passing, that she will feel

his hunting breath through her heart’s arteries.
But first, let her enjoy the music of that night, playing
through her ivory skin, transmuting her existence

from a tawny-haired girl into electric current,
ions traveling along arcs as sharp as the moon.
Offer for her pieces of your body

that no quicklime can corrupt. Give to her
words that feel like a knife in her mouth,
a tongue that can set those night hemlocks on fire.

Pray that she will see the summer’s first luna
moth light on her window, its legs hooked hard
as a switch in the screen, its scales shining bright as bone.

 Patron Saint of Betrayed Victims
(Georgann Hawkins, 18, missing since June 11, 1974, from Seattle, Washington)

Pray that when she screams in that alley
those who hear her voice will not settle
deeper into their own sleep. When she walks

past rhododendrons dark as wildfire, heads
heavier than their stems can hold, pray
she will not take the bait of a man

holding a briefcase. This neophyte
does not know the Spanish word for betrayer
or the way the acrid sent of his hands

can be conjugated into welts. Instead, let her make chains
of asters to crown her head, wrap around
the long brown hair he always yearns to touch.

Pray that he will not stifle the wilderness
that rests beneath her breastbone, the ivory
halo that should never be hardened.

But you must know to also bless those whose hearts
will become bitter without her nimble hands touching
their own. Bless those bitter, bitter hearts.

Patron Saint of Orchards
(Nancy Wilcox, 17, missing since October 2, 1974, from Holladay, Utah)

Pray that the orchard stripped bare of fruit
does not cloak her body in its hollows,
that her limbs are not rooted in its undergrove.

Stay her from his cunning tongue,
the one that would hiss along her ivory neck,
and sheathe itself in the sockets of her limbs.

Let her rise from the ground, leaves collected
in her long russet hair, the musk
of fermented fruit nestled against her skin.

Have her collect her clothes from the altars
beneath the trees and bless the passing
insects as she orients herself in the gloaming.

Pray that the marrow does not leech
from her bones or that her pelvic
arch does not settle into dirt so many miles

from home. Pray that she does not feel his hands
settling along the curve of her neck
or the radial beats of her body fluttering silent.

 Patron Saint of Never Failing Hope
(Debra Kent, 17, missing since November 8, 1974, from Bountiful, Utah)

Pray there is enough starlight to ignite
the darkness and turn luminous strands
of her hair as she walks to her car. Pray

there is enough light shimmering on the surface
of the parking lot that he is kept at bay,
not pure enough to enter the space where galaxies

take shape. Pray that our stargazer
will always take this worn stage, stretch
her limbs across windblown distances on the way

to somewhere other than here. Bless her
every time she becomes someone else, places a mask
over her face, but pray she does not learn this from him.

Know that on this night there is another girl locked
into his handcuffs, bruises mottling her wrists.
She, the parallel to ours. Pray there is enough

in this world for them both to greet a new morning,
enough for both of them to turn off the porch lights,
leaving nothing to gather insects in ivory cups.

Patron Saint of Travelers in the Mountains
(Julie Cunningham, 26, missing since March 15, 1975, from Vail, Colorado)

Pray that the snow will become blinding
enough to hide her from view as she darts
from the tavern on her way home.

Let the wind savage her small frame and gather damp
ivory flakes into the crook of her neck. Let it pitch
her body into a strand of moss-dark trees.

Anything, pray for anything to keep her
from the man on crutches, his lips cocked
in an apologetic smile. Pray the wind takes her

and spits her out on the other side of the mountains,
far from his cuffs and hands and the shovels
he uses to bury them in the night-swollen ground.

But if he finds her, give her prayers that will offer hope.
Pray that she will turn into something feral,
something that will survive the dropping mercury

and the lame man who would scarab her skin with heated breath.
Let her peel the flesh from his bones. Let her be the one
to bury him in the ground again and again.

Patron Saint Against Sudden Death
(Denise Lynn Oliverson, 24, missing since April 6, 1975, from Grand Junction, Colorado)

Pray that the wheels of her bicycle will always turn
over, and the locust-clicking of the chain
will continue propelling her out over city streets.

Pray that she hears the train as she passes,
its steel core thrumming over the trestle, and the viaduct
below full only of her body and the flashing

yellow of her bike. Let the ivory rims quarter
the dampness of the underpass with scattered
light. Pray that he does not come to hold her hand

or cannon his ragged exclamations
into her long, brown hair. If he tries to take
her, pray that she becomes a pillar of stone,

her bones too heavy to move, her wounds
silver veins of magnetite. But, don’t pray for her
to be locked safe in a tower, her body fed

with nectar and her skin scented with oils. Don’t pray
for her hair to grow long enough to climb, or for a man
to pursue her as she flees. Pray instead for revolution.

Patron Saint of Drowning Victims
(Lynette Culver, 12, missing since May 6, 1975, from Pocatello, Idaho)

Pray that when the water comes for her, she reaches
past the break-point. That she does not falter as she holds
her breath deep in her frigid lungs, lungs love-sick

for the touch of air. Pray that the overhead light
in the hotel bathroom flickers like a snake’s tongue
tasting the eager night while she keeps her eyes open.

It is not for us to know why a god would take her
to this room, dressed still in her red checkered shirt
and blue jeans. It is not for us to know, but pray

we learn. Pray that we see her rise from the ivory depths
of that bathtub, water sluicing from her skin, the folds
of her body forming it into estuaries, forks branching into arms

big enough to embrace a paramour in their depths.
Pray that it is him who plunges down as far
as the murky porcelain will allow.

Let the light fang over his prone form. Let the chambers
of his heart shutter close. Let the luckless be the one to taste
the mournful keening of his submerged body.

 Patron Saint of the Forgotten
(Susan Curtis, 15, missing since June 27, 1975, from Provo, Utah)

Pray that her pulse quickens deep
in her chest, sets her skin trembling
like firefly light. Pray she is able to brace herself

against his foul lips, the kisses he longs
to burn along her cheek. Pray her yellow evening
gown learns to hold the color of the ivory moon

in its angled depths, that it never pools around her ankles,
silent as an afterthought. Bless her for the strength
in her legs, those hardened muscles that carried her

along the fifty miles of highway to this place
of teenagers, to this place of prayers
and offerings. Pray that these legs are strong

enough to make her the one who is faster.
Let her be the one to survive, let her be the one to spin
her body through the divide, past the bone-burning heat

of desert sands, the sharp wrench
of mountains. Send her far enough that his hands cannot reach
the path he would take along her collarbone and neck.

  Patron Saint of Martyrs
(Nancy Baird, 23, missing since July 4, 1975, from East Layton, Utah)

Pray that if he arrives at that lonely gas station he finds her
armed with a sword that will spread his blood
across the ground like rubies. Pray

that she is ready to usher him toward his last
breath. But if she’s not, pray that women
will never go to bed dreaming of the taste

of his skin across their tongues. Let them know he would
poison them, strip them of heartbeats
and the feeling of morning air, ivory-sharp against their faces.

Let them know if he could, he would wrap his fingers in their hair
and yank until the crack of their necks is the only sound
to split those endless nights. Pray that we care enough

about our own survival. Pray she doesn’t back down
or that we rise with her. Pray that together we tear
this world apart, light him on fire in one sharp electrical burst.

Pray that this life is something we need not fear, that desolate
roads and backwater stations are our haven. That the darkness
of night is our cloak. Pray we do not become martyrs.

Lord, the angels you sent are here now, beating their wings above
my head.
I cling to them by a thread of blood, but I’m afraid the thread
will break.
And plunged as they are in darkness I still can’t see them, but I
believe they are many, and some are beautiful and deserve to live.
Look, Lord. I can’t feed them all with this meager blood of
mine, and I don’t want them to die, like a mother who fears losing the
child in her womb—although she may have never wanted him before and he might
be the fruit of her labor after—I don’t want a single one to die.
Lord, give me a star to nurse these children of mother in decline.
And since I’ve forgotten how to sew, give me, just for them, the raiment of the lilies.

My father gave me a small jar of honey
and each night I took a secret lick.
Long after the gold hardened to granule
my tongue returned to my mouth sweet.
Later he placed between my lips a sliver of peach
or a white pastille
dissolving down—homeopathic moon.
I kept my tongue clean beneath those gifts.

My tongue has since turned.
Sliding against the edges of men,
I wonder where that gold’s gotten to
and settle for a boy who tastes of copper,
who flaps like a whiskey-watered hawk
and scatters me.
I know you don’t mean it—I’d repeated,
until he refused me passage in his horror.
Empty anther. I wash him off with mint.
His sorrys fill my bed until I’m crowded out.
I count them like coin and at night they rattle.

We hope sounds will open our mouths
and force us into breath. I place a coin
across my tongue and practice dying.
In some cold places, the obol staves
return. My lips seal in the acerbic promise;
whole rivers run through me.
How can I know which boat to board—
I’m just trying to pay my way.

He removes the coin from my mouth
with his own hand. My sordid god.
But this is nothing new, this reaching into
and withdrawing. The truth is
I’d tongue the honey from most any hand
that granted me a crossing.

We leave the frozen

north for the half-frozen

southwest, leave

the driveway, climb

the hill, a December

sun falling behind

the mountain or what passes

for one in this adobe

state, the ghost

white of frigid chamisa

falling everywhere and my eyes

so open

they begin listening

at the periphery, the particulate

air, where they snag

on a pitiful scrub

pine, pulling

its tough green into orbit

around my iris, a color the Romans

called livid. Atticus is strapped

to my chest, his open palm

grazing the desiccated

blossoms, curling closed

around a tuft of piñon

like a starfish

eating a sea urchin. If only

he was as gentle

with the faces of the ones

he loves, who love

him, bloodying

Granddaddy’s

lip with the violent joy

of reunion. We repeat this

word over and over,

gentle, but he is a brute

and handles the world

as if nothing

in it could break. Maybe

he’s right. Or maybe breaking

open is just what

we do

before whatever

is us is

recapitulated, remedied

a bluebird

whirling low

between pines. It’s too fast

for Atticus to track, but we all hear

its call, said to resemble

the word few, or maybe phew!

I catch the gray

bobbing belly

in my livid eye. Few

few, calling

scarcity out, open, the way

its threat belies

an undeniable abundance. We

suddenly see how red-threaded

this world is, tangled, and rereading

the desert’s throb

under all that snow, Atticus

is batting at his own

worn red nose, dutiful

thermometer. We reach

the museums on the hill

where common

desire grows

uncommon, flays

compliance to swell

and throb

where the unmanaged

blaze. We take off

our hats and gloves, blessing

the weather that leaves us

bothered, gentle

thanks even the baby

understands. The bracing that gives

way to embrace. The needles

of the pine there

to be touched, and so too

the cold pane, which he gives

a raspberry. I think

I’m beginning

to understand how brute

and livid love doffs

grace only to regain it

bringing new worlds

into orbit, affront

to everything steady.

When we get home he races

around the house, hands

clutching my fingers so tight

the knuckles swell. Then he’s calm

and searches the floor for

specks, treasure. We give him

a ribbon, a spoon. Everything is art

to be broken. The cat

and the bowl. Finally he sleeps

in the room with the skylight

blocked by tinfoil, tiny

holes for stars, muted clamor

ripping the night open.

The moment we say alone we are
not. The sun tucks under the mouth
of a mountain yet still light fills
our skin. Every day a heart is pulled
out like a wet plum from one body
and placed inside another. Every day
someone comes home to a lover
packing her bags. It is normal
to fall asleep in pain and wake
with more. We break open
clouds by waiting long enough.
Behind this midnight other midnights
trace a face so familiar we touch
our cheekbones like twin moons.
With closed eyes we wonder what
we are to do with all this living.

She remembers from inside the story,
inside the forest’s heart (a flush of green):
a dowry of twigs. Tree trunks as thick as lies.

When she is allowed, she misses herself,
covets the clean corners where her bones
meet, the dull pulse of her tongue on his.

All those misplaced stars, a misery
she can’t find. She has killed things
(though it is forbidden) with her hands

(the wedding mehndi long-faded),
has eaten on the wrong day, forgotten
to fast. She has pulled the strings

of the jungle behind her like a black net,
a wide-mouthed yawn. She holds it tight
so it can’t grow when she isn’t looking.

This party has no history.
We just happened upon
those people going out of fashion
and standing on the runway in the wide
wool shoulders of death.

The weather was on the verge of collapsing.
The owner of the winery
filled green bottles with sadness.

We celebrated until dawn.
The music got up to leave.
We said our goodbyes
to the very last word. The last breath.

Or in the naming, lose
our power. I called you
house and light and pushed you forth—

with each new month
you show me I was wrong:
here, you’ve made a house with bones
of cloud. Look now, your darkness is
so bright. Of course,

you’re right—
I call this love. It burns to ash,
and—never bird—returns
to flame.

When the border fell and armies
came, they cut not only arms but tongues.
They opened every house
and muted ears, and when the family

landed on these once again rebranded shores
they found the rocks weren’t rocks,
the bread not bread,
the letters broken, hammer-scattered,
the sky a thing that hung
too low upon their heads.

Perhaps that’s how I know it,
in this language their own
children would refuse—
dziecko, kochanek, matka, dzień—

these things I try to name each day
were never mine to lose.

orange, how it festers:
a stomach, digesting itselfinto platoons
of orange trees, orange leaves

you count crevices of your palms
secret ferns, nothingbut a pithy city

i’m dreaming

about landscapes i’ve never seen, a node
of chrysanthemums, blooming into fever,
a city built of bodies, bodies of ferns

the ferns are whispering orange,shifting
for the humidityof the shelled soil like
palms, hundreds ofpalms
building cities like handprints

an orange, plucked, a fester, a fist—
we eat dead things to stay alive

Word is, the villagers have fashioned special sticks to prop it up,
to keep its 1000-year-old hat from falling to the ground.

Everyone wants to picnic beneath its waterfall
and laugh about the petals that fall into their drinks.

There’s a Japanese word for that, for the progressive and manifest
degrees of flowering and drunkenness beneath the boughs.

Another word for, roughly translated, you-must-put-your-nose-
right-into-the-blossom-to-practice-and-perfect-your-bee.

When I visited I rode my bike past narrow canals and thought—
just like Holland, where I’ve never been.

Pedaled right through the middle of a discourse
two young scholars were having about flexibility as they leaned

against the smallest tree in the orchard. Underfoot,
the spring grass was an animal whose fur must never be cut.

This by Emperor’s Decree. It rubbed itself against
the ankles of the revelers, the loud, red ones and the quiet ones

who stood there looking straight into the swirling cascade
and saw up close how the world was made.

I am a lost dog I am terrible
rash all over your house

i could hold a wishbone upside
down and empty it

i wish I could learn a lesson from you
but really only rain

you were too excited
to come and see me

i was too excited
to be loved by you

i will open my eyes and light up the earth
oh I have lost it

i have torn myself down
my breezy bad mind

tonight for show and tell
there is someone who cannot

keep singing and it is me

Open your empty, blameless hands,
your mouth where the knives hide,
the folds where the bullets might live.
Prove you’re mammalian by twisting
your neck a mere 160 degrees,
180 if you’re under 30. It’s the seven
vertebrate that give you away.
Even giraffes have that number.
Even the smallest of the squirrels.
Your hands passed down to you by seals.
Bones from the bat’s impossible wings.
Touching the forehead signals humility
and servitude. It signals that in a flash,
you’d bend to shine his shoes,
marry his ridiculous son.
Chain of command the old
trickle-down economics,
with you standing on the bottom step,
waiting for pennies to rain down.
On his collar there’s a bird of prey
with its whopping 14 vertebrate
and 270 degrees of freedom to the neck.
Don’t you wish your camouflage
let you blend into the barracks?
Don’t you wish his eyes
would go somewhere else?
When saluting, the arm should make
an audible snap, as if the bones were giving.
While your hand’s up there,
scratch your eyebrow.
It bothers you more
and more these days.

We had been asked to piece together the conspiracy using only wool.
Wool blankets. Wool scarves. Wool pajamas. Government-issued wool.
Laid out end to end. And fitted to each other. Sometimes sewn together.
Some places overlapping. Or piling up.
What do you listen for in a conspiracy?
What do you hear when you’re wrapped in wool, laid to rest in wool bedding?

It was suffocating. A wool blanket is suffocating if you’re using it correctly.
Try more than one.
Try sleeping with a wool blanket that was cut out to look like arms and legs.
Try living beneath her. Or it. Or them.
All the wool blankets tied up so they hang from the sky.
A wool blanket sky. A night can be suffocating. Too many arms in bed with you.
When is the day? What makes day start?
There are nights in Florida and Texas that are heavier than the day.
A wool blanket is still heavier.
And it’s hard when you’re breathing in there.

For everyone involved. A wool blanket does not have emotions. It does not register
compassion.
I hated 1991.
I was living in Florida. There’s nothing in Florida.
Many species of heron are native to Florida, but herons don’t move.
There is lightning. What does a wool blanket do with lightning? It makes cynicism.
Sometimes it rains.
We were basically being led straight into the 21st Century.

It’s hard to have friends in the 21st Century.
Everything I own is made from wool. And connected together. Maybe I love wool.
A wool staircase is so practical. It supposedly breathes. Wool suits at Sears department stores.
Wool livery, if I owned horses.
Wool lining the cups I use for my coffee.
What makes day start? What a question. The wool is repeating itself. Perhaps that’s
how answering works.

sounded like houndsteeth / crashing into one another on rain- coats / eclectic as the sound of rain- water / in Costa Rica: pst pst pst pst / or in Texas: yes. The scent of shaving cream, the scent of unwashed teeth, and I felt so / I felt so / so lightly full of openings / so much / stiffness jostling like locks / between train cars. Not like these borders / we / wish to beseech. You turned to me and said, I can’t put my finger / on it but I might as well / stick a thumbtack in that map / and, cloud, / string you along through every vapor. This is how I know the rain / in Panama: says tsk tsk tsk tsk / and in Jamaica, reminded / me of lit transparent / plastic / parkas we pulled from the first / aid kit when the sky / poured like a lift of / tropical birds. The car was rented. Or we didn’t have a car / we rode / the one-eyed mammal. The bus / sauntered lazily as a dew bead, he looked, he looked at us. He percussed / the books of his reflections for two / creatures tall & not quite / lean enough to eat / into like the rock- sands of Greece that pill into our skins the shape / of shadows behind cat hairs, and I do not / write about you for you / are not washed out.

How you grow my hairs from your own body.
How you pull them out until I am nothing.
How my love transpires into wind.

At the deep of me is a graveyard of live
cabbages. The cabbages are so good,
especially in the sea hour. Their scales

slink dangerous as your feral cat garden.
Our wedding gifts have long, worn monkey
arms, they swat from the branches.

The antelopes in my eyes feed & feed
on your beauty. Your beauty is catching,
all my antelopes are on fire & ruined.

The future wears furs,
carries an icicle.
Open her robe,

& you’ll see her body is a dull knife,
her heart a bell jar beating with a clock.
She bites us open, my cabbages moan

& swim back to the sea. I have no dead
yet, my net teems with splendid fish.
It is heavy to have so much, heavy
to eat so many feasts before they spoil.

The body unbuckles the door latch
and stands behind the screen. To hide its bloated legs
it wears the frayed red bathrobe of its grief. The sun, that swollen increment,

gathers to a dark burr in my mouth. The green leaves
tighten down across their stems, a small voice coming toward me
on someone else’s phone.

There was something I wanted to say
about the body. (The sun, that swollen
increment, a dark burr in my mouth—) That the body

is a tent stake. That the figure I am chasing through the late
short grass is mine. But the lip makes no remittance
and the sparrow in the boxwood

cools itself to quartz. Then the sparrow casts the spiral
of its sleep. Our feet in the earth are chisels.
The lights in the houses turn in

on themselves like little snows.

Even your name
I have doubts about
and about the trees
about their branches, if perhaps
they are roots
and we have been living
all these years underground.

Who has dislocated the world?
and why are birds circling in our stomachs?
Why does a pill defer my birth?
For years we’ve been living underground
and perhaps
on a day in my seventies I’ll be born
and feel that death
is a shirt we all come to put on,
whose buttons we can either fasten
or leave undone…
a man may roll up his sleeves
or he might…

I am
a captive man’s conjectures
about the seasons behind the wall.

Lately, I’ve become accustomed to the way
each newly dead face flashes like a crushed fire

-work across the screen. The red mass
of each name. How each name settles,

a fistful of ash at the back of the throat.
I don’t hope for ceasefire much, if you

must know. I don’t pray for rain.
On a good day, I honor the war

by calling it war. I sing
along with the hook. I sing

every nigga is a star
& don’t mean dead

things shine too. For shame,
my six-year-old nephew dreams

of a life indebted to invention,
his first prototype a blade

-thin suit to help the human body move
faster. For a muse, he claims nothing

more than the implicit sweetness of speed,
but I know his best heart, how he longs

for cousins to grow gray as an alloy alongside.
I think him a prophet. I think of the fire.

I think of the drones with pictures of first wives
in their wallets, their bad teeth, middle names,

401ks for when all of the blood dries. I think
of the badge & see children running,

children laughing, children cradled
in smoke all at the exact same time.

On a good day, I think die die die
and don’t know where to aim

the hex, who to hunt down or cut
a deal with, some armistice

without end, a certain commitment
to infinitude built right into the fine

print, in an unexpected turn.
I don’t want any more words

that heal. I want a language for being
born underground, gravestone quarried

the moment you arrive. I want explosions
or else a fresh cosmos. I want the fang

-white king splayed
against a throne of bones

& bars I see in all my new dreams
gone. Spare me any coalition

that does not require blood.
Give me time to think & a hope

-less cause. Give me lethal
equipment. Give me the names

of the slain. Say each name
like benediction. Ask

who will claim this flesh?
Expect the quiet.

Expect the flood.

—peg leg, one armed man or
some sort of penile implant
sprouting from your crotch,
you have strange shelter here—
and i am one to watch

i love a good deformity—an eye
patch, a part time job—something wicked
in flesh gone wrong, grab the
sewn celled nub, sweet cob.
hobble hobble, swing the arm
your eyes turn screws round
round, i love a good man
rebuilt after burnt to the ground

tap me with your one good hand
fingerplay me with hot metal
sex, i do small fleshy acrobatics—
you find that metal can flex—
bend, translate heat of freak
into revolutionary freedom,
a scar, pain, suture dotted across
the line, robot fantasies come to life
your broken body, my broken mind

i love a disabled vet, a war torn
warrior, an alcoholic mishap with
toes left tapping the hot wet pavement,
bloody aftermath calls for soothing bath
nurse hands with nurse breasts, nurse
eyes with nursing mouth’s red stain—
pleasure
just the absence of pain

bring on the flood of animals God I see you everywhere there is blood you said speak only when you’re spoken to & I said come inside I am pregnant as the silence I am about to break the Cathars believed the body of Christ could not be swallowed because the body is the Devil’s work never mind the cult of Mary mother of here & now the baby moving inside me on the floor pink sequins spider the light into precious stone in this room there is no room for smoke too much how much to lay one body against the body with no space between the first milk is not milk the only way to go on is without breath pause don’t stop stop & the Devil will push the Devil will be in me reborn

Hovering above
the wheedle brown—
gaunt mud
sucking, hissing dryly

thinking I saw animals in there—
putting something
haughty in the way I held my

bones—to signal
I am human—stay away

the mud full of me—
slow—deliberate sloth
resuming and then
breaking off

not suddenly but with
the purpose
of a stomach being sucked in
hard

the crepuscular
instant when the eyes
go under
then the face

pointed outward like ears
but the ears choked
with brine

at the blue hour, the waiting room
the depthless hall like somnolence

by my side, many people
take leave out of the blue, like a group of hidden
saints who just received secret orders

someone on the phone, someone ties his shoelaces
someone says goodbye (or no more)

those items and dogs
that are not permitted to take away
now pushed away by a little flatbed quadricycle

life is an illusion
an older poet told me
(he just woke from a nap)

as if on a rainy and cold platform
you carry a heavier and heavier bag
and always feel it belongs to someone else

If afraid, cured leather & wood-smoke. If forgot,
sassafras & hominy. If remembered,
bright blue hook. If bereft, lamb sizzling.

If rupture, obsidian &
chickweed. If suture, sleep curled around

a pine tree. If surge, puddle of milk. If shadow,
puddle of gasoline. If gender, shadow hurtling
overhead. If gender, dream in a language

you don’t know. If gender, swim
parallel to shore. If morning, sunspots

& black pepper. If mourning, black
spot on a lung. If harvest, blood
sport & blood work.

If language, cracked
branches. If ghost, funeral suit worn
thin at the knees. If rainstorm, core

of candle. If closeness, death wish & warm
dram. If addict, human. If addict, suture

& nuzzle. If caught out, folly
and muzzle. If walk, decade of
tiny crosshatches. If ruby glass, pick out

the stitches with your teeth.
If itch, reorganize the sky.
If itch, dropped stitch & chipped

saucer. If blackout, cinnabar
& fallout shelter. If walk, keep walking.

The days swell with our remaining.

Yes, the leaves allow the wind to contain

the branch of a tree and the skyline
to become its own type of lineation,

the idea of beauty lost and then found along

the swirling liquid in the trashcans
left in the alley.

Watching the train cut across the prairie,

geese flying the wrong way
for the season,

it’s as if the knuckle of tomorrow
has arrived today

with the weight of snow and wind,
gardens cut open to sky

and the sky alive with the orange hue

of the sun replaced
by a false sense of itself,

a waste of time left clear
and open in this wash of sightline.

Commitmentpolice, a large family, among us also lots of Cains and Abels, everyone is a policeman, joypolice, even when there’s hunger and fear, we grab hold, loudlypolice, we conduct a raid on love and, at night, the rain, everyone is a policeman, even hunger and fear, poorsinnerpolice, shivering decorates us, I hunt you and you hunt me, overandoveragainpolice, you die first, afterwards we are the dead

Goats mewling
in the Muslim village. Leafy footpath
into the bodiless
acre of graves. Pass.

Animals:
Goats
Chickens (a fury, a pack)
One pig (Salma)

Instructors measure
soldiers’ fervor: Your machine must cover
the kill-zone100%Notate this feverCarry

the lure of the apple
among the simulacra. Where are you Salma? Little ache
of sky. Killing
Field inside, branches latched. Arbor, what is beyond
this wood?

Anthropologists are practiced at the turning
pinwheels of faces; those at war are matchless.

Laith has skulls and flags flesh graven. In the war, L.
worked with the AmericansSo did O. so did R. so did
________. We split and cast away salt
seeds over the needles. Get more at the gas station
a mile outside. Outside, there are bursting cotton
bolls, molecule to sepal sepal to stalk
blowing their little snow over the red clay. Out there, is
a gas station, the breathing
roads. Even

you, dear you; you
have been waiting there now for
me a long time, haven’t you? Take this
road into the body return it
as a love letter. Body a simmering
lake of code, nutrient, and wishing. In Arabic,

there is a word that means the cleaving from dormancy or sorrow into first
joy. Or, in that word’s theological meaning, the arriving mouth
of the messenger. It is right on the other side of this wood.

At Hippocrene, I was freakshow proportions while everyone else
Was ravenous on air. It was some kind of bilious joke

When women grew slender as church spires. I refused.
Who then would give birth astride this grave? Too much

Like Mary, all glow and no gain. I was never one of them.
Not the fixed helical spinning during an improbable Lent.

I was the kingship heavy with rain,
Sturdy enough to withstand their pounding

When I am the hoist, a profane body of rudeness
Through a sea of broken and burned out bulbs.

You can be the beautiful opera I keep in a canister beside my bed.
Let me shake you awake, I’ll love you and feed you into queens.

They were left out during the transplant.
A whitish, fleshy tangle
like something a little obscene.

I thought of transformations,
of lost galaxies, of intestines.
Then, when they scratched me, only
of what you would say.

We took fresh dirt,
I set the roots carefully
and we added more soil.
All the surrounding space
seemed to expand and adjust.

I envied them in silence
because they were starting something.

How many nights have I done this. Whittled
a carousel out of my hands. Invited to bed their
wooden breath. There’s the chestnut mare
giving birth: a golden hold-pole sticking out
of her side like a spear. The foal in its wet white bag
isn’t dead yet. Cue the cheery organ music.
Cue the Christmas time. Too much coconut
in the ambrosia. One stepfather who isn’t dead
yet. One stepfather who rides the blue roan
terrified through the carp pond. I draw a picture
of everyone living in the same glass barn
with a chimney. How many nights have I done this.
Everyone is smiling. Their drawn pink smiles.
I’ve populated this empty bedroom with
crabgrass. How many nights. Populated the field
with a white horse. Far away. Perfect like
an eggshell. Alabama fog coming closer. Cue
the last call. Cue my childish desire. How many
nights have I held my hips against this fence, as if
I don’t know exactly what I’ll see. That white horse.
She is running in circles. Rain rot all
down her sides. Eating her hide away.

For four years I carry
your bones like water
from a well.
Darling
I am burning in this life
and the next.

To console myself, I wander
wing to wing in the orangery,
slip between twisted limbs,
olives’ silver and green. The air here
whisks so convincingly, I can’t believe
there’s a rock partition keeping me
safe from the pinked-out sky.

In Gethsemane—that ancient, other world—
they say the Virgin Mary
is buried in a similar grove.
They say any rock is agony. They say her grief
was deeper than those roots
(the oldest known on Earth).

Our own carbon dates us. If I could cut
myself open, you’d see rings
lapping more rings: my mother
crying for her mother in the same
way her mother wept for hers.
You’d see the silvery orbit,

where each life dissolved.
But for now, I remain
human. I am a nesting doll for griefs.
Even in utopia, there is suffering:
one sheep forced to walk
the labyrinth, ensuring the grass
regenerates. And my young daughter,
her legs thin as reeds,

chased and caught and pushed by
the boys again. Her layers stripped away.
Not even the olive he wedged
under her tongue
could hold her, clot those cries—
these shepherds, they think of nothing but
what might wake this weak blue soil.

There is of course the cutting of the body.
Lean away from that for a minute. Stand
in the middle of a shack on fabric row
and browse the cardboard bricks wrapped
in lace and taffeta. You can feel the taffeta
like the bustle skirt thrown at you from stage
at the burlesque show. Where you sweat
under orange show lights and notice the ordinary
nature of breasts—watch the sequins swept aside.
The breasts are bags of wine. Your breasts
are hanging hunks that you often relate to cutting.
Because people you know sometimes cut theirs
off so as not to look like you. You being a bust
and ass and legs that make a man say Ahem,
miss what’re you trying to tell me with those legs? 
You’re shocked because your boyfriend fucks
you like a real man, but everyone is looking
at your hormonal fat, your body like a melting
sculpture. So you tie your shoes or lock your bike
and look down and think about the cutting.
Think that even in another body, even after
that barter with the mud wasp and surgeon,
you would still not be settled. Not just this
body, but all body. So in the fabric store
the shears make that good sound like rubbing
two nickels together and you’re back
to the six yards of burlap unfolding
on the countertop and the body steps away
from cut. Cut. It refuses to be just a body.

You open your mouth—wide, wider—
and voilà, a foggy forest
slips out. Open again and spit
a castle. And so on…for a moat,
a stable, and the ever
sallying-forth dead aunties.

Sure, you can spew a distant fire-chucking
volcano. Or blow a spit-bubble
with a baby in it. What language,
what words will said baby let fly
when you’re nowhere? When you’re
roaming her dreams with her dear deceased
(& why were hers all ball-gowned up?),
when you’re a dirt speck in an earth clod
in a world that’s eventuated…back to
warlessness, back and back to only rats
in the underground, back back back
to fowl becoming fish.

A mandrake quickens
into greed-grab, tears a page
from Genesis. Clods

of earth are clods of god.
Clods of earth are clods
of dendrites with dirt

skirting the roots.
Let there be light

skins and dark skins. One
to rule the other. Manifest,

destinations of night’s pitch
plague the heart’s
thirst for extinction.

Memory of the untouched
is the more beautiful object.

From the streets
a humpback’s gashed fin laments
this justice, its skin scarred

with extinction’s dark
body owned by light.

I strike a candle
against tribal ruin, against
the separation of day

and night.

June and the woman ties the blindfold
around my eyes, leads me up a hill.
Someone calls to tell me about the immaculate
Ferragamos of the dead. On the hill,
the grove unseen grows wilder
than the grove made visible. The bark
rough as punished skin, beetles
shimmy up the vascular. Thrall, not
thrall—all I want is to sit in the dark
and not be the film about the lady
empath. Air a message sewn into our
hems, daylight brutes against my bad eye.
The lady empath bleats, swoons. You
could smell it from the parking lot. Spadix
wrapped in spathe, right, ladies?
Blooms one day a year. Let wolves
suck marrow from the bones of boys.
The aspens clone themselves. I take
my clothes off. The cormorants
come back. A star burns out.
At Meteora, monks line the old monks’
skulls on ledges. I slide my underwear
down. Someone leaves food out for his
dead—ribeye, soda, plum. The dead
feast. I unhook my bra. My breasts spill out.
The ceiling fan cuts heat into districts.
Head on his chest. The aquifer quivers
in the dark. At Stuttgart, at Basel, at
Kagoshima, they open up the garden long
into the night, and the crowds come.

I said a needle cannot do much hurt—
which is how I got stuck with two
in a Powerade bottle instead of the usual
plenty of cider or dill or half a bull,

fennel and horseshit and milkweed
blooms, the occasional roadkill venison.
I said I could handle a needle—
which is why we were edging down

Townline Road, Stephanie describing
how heaps of cash from smuggling drugs
and cigarettes are buried in backyards
on the Mohawk Rez, neither of us

admitting the irony that we were peering
at butts and grasping at soda straws
and all because Val stopped by Anne’s
because on her morning walk she saw

that even in Arcadia were drugs.
And then the grass did weep for woe.
And then the very leaves did wither.
You were not, needles, built to show

out on a granola belt road. This
is a beautiful place: between Birdsfoot
Commune and the Cornell Co-Op
good soil and air, good woods and water;

birds and fish don’t leap into our nets
but we dwell in an organic whole, man
and man in nature’s lap, paradise’s map
except for the fact of the needle—

which truly did not do much good to the girl
in the magazine article who knew how,
after years of medicating horses, to work
a syringe but not how many baggies

went in it. She was there so the writer
could say, you don’t think of Vermont
when you think full-blown heroin crisis.
I don’t see why not but I’m not from here.

Every sugar shack looks like a cabin
to me and at the party I don’t get the joke
about the rich folks who hired local kids
to pick their woods clean of sticks.

The needles, Anne tells me, need to go
to the State Police. She’s locking her doors
and taking the shotgun with her to bed.
And though I’ve always been suspicious

of the shacks up the road from the farm,
have always wished those ancient piles
of garbage and tarpaper down, I never
knew a cop to restore a golden age

in which they are different from us but far
enough away. Back home I knew
the neighbor boy before he was an addict.
I’ve been here four years and never met

to call by name the people in those trailers.
But I didn’t walk up there to say, take care
of yourselves, we found needles, we all
live together in this beautiful place.

Time burst and we emerged
to begin our lives,
we tied our shoes and ran away.
The street was full of worried eyes,
we
were full of the street—
our hands have been cobblestoned
and our heart valves opened
like cheap cabarets.

I don’t know why or where or how
I put your temptation away inside a book
I don’t know why or where or how
my eye slipped on the buttons of your dress
I don’t know why or where or why
my eyelid pulsed—
Now you’re gone
and life in my brain’s gray cells
is a replay of our days together.
The Sahara is expanding in my chest
and yet seven seas beyond that
acid rain intoxicates the dead
of Dasht-e Leili.[1]

Do you remember, darling?
We were suffering
while the government in the Arg[2]
flourished
we were suffering
and a woman in Badakhshan was dying
we were reciting poems
and a man was butchered
in the south.

Do you remember?
I was in Mullah Omar’s heartland
reciting love poems
I said: the prayer beads mature in the tavern
and love matures in fear.

Everything is fine here.
“No clouds, no wind, I sit next to the pool.”
Just a song is enough to complete
the Attan dance
and the looting of my father’s land
even outdoes the Mongols.

Everything is fine:
the disaffected brother
smokes shisha and cuts off ears in the evenings,
cuts off the nose so his wife
will not smell the opium
and people’s steeped brains.
He cuts off ears so that
we will be domesticated,
he is so religious
that he impregnates eleven houris every night
and in the morning, goes to the Arg
to sharpen his artificial teeth.

But I still worry
about your dress
because my eyelid pulses constantly.

My darling,
the weather is cold
and many babies are being aborted
and we,
standing in a line
of one hundred and twenty thousand prophets
are still thirsty, still hungry…but we voted.
We cannot change the world,
sing songs, and be happy;
just let me squeeze the map
into the space of a cage
so that our lands will mate.

The police say: terrorists
speak in strange languages.
I lock my tongue
even though I’ve prayed
in Persian for a thousand years.
In solitary confinement
I continually confess
and at night
when I stretch out my bones in the corner
I pray your name
seventy two times and no more.

You sit in far-off longing
and all of my roads to your arms
are blocked today
—They say an explosion happened out your way—
Do you remember
Venice, where the Mediterranean came up
and pulled your ankle to the ocean?
I said: this is enough for the sea fairies
to find their lost way.
You laughed, what a pity
how quickly we have been lost.

My longing is so deep
that three hundred and sixty five miners
have died in it.

This is the land of the baddest boats.
Brother we are legion here. This is the land
of graveyard shifts, where jackhammers
dance till knees crack. Brother Ellen
is a quiet girl, her tonsils sore, her lips
in constant quiver and I can’t yet tell
the way she loves me or might not.
I’m a sad crow these days.
My heart is my head and my head
a balloon filled with burnt trees.
Broken leaves, takes her keys
to where skaters graffiti
all the white dogs and windows spill
scales played by children. And
Brother she ain’t comin’ back.
We are terminal here. In the land
of bone stutter sutured moon,
revival moon, floating bush
of bathing mother moon, middle
America where shoulders go
to be torn apart moon, Brother
the days are like this here.

When you sleep in the midst of rats
a night so beautifully started
can be un-night,
then you keep sleepwalking
on rat tracks,
the feces forming slippery pads.
Rats are very moveable people.
They sleep very little at night.
Rats don’t sleep at night.
And it happens to you
that the man next door
escaped the war of rats
when he took sleeping pills
and woke up in his silent coffin,
chewing away at his own lips,
crying out blood.
Life cleans up the world that way.
But why do men keep rats
in their inner rooms?
And you hear the voice reply:
It is a rat world.
You only live to keep them out
or on the way.
They like human flesh.
They are carnivores,
always busy sharpening
their claws and incisors.

No one else heard the knocking; not a water drip
or transformer hum, but a distant ping pong
volley overhead. This too was in my mind

like the glass ship marooned in the forest.
When I listened close, my elbows ached and teeth
chattered from the racket; when I drowned

the noise, trampoline springs and night owls
also faded. I tried to cure myself with mirrors
and cotton balls, but forgot arithmetic and how

to fold my shirts. All I could do was rattle.
Even in sleep I heard the din and roamed
through crowds of redwoods. Someone above

was calling. The choice left was to be lost.
I climbed cloud-high to answer. In the canopy,
the air was cold, but streets were the same

as below: wheat-paste posters peeling off walls,
and drifts of newspapers and boxes tied
with bakery twine. No antennas or banging drums,

but knocking everywhere. People appeared
swiftly around me. They rose from the branches,
silver-eyed and unbuttoned, twinned underneath.

Their sap sticky fingers covered me, searching
my pockets for coins. What use is money in the trees?
Their faces turned downward, toward the town

exposed like an X-ray from above: a starving dog,
a misaligned fence, the children swimming naked.
To be remembered on the ground, they answered;

a gray sentence spoken over a green one.
The chorus of their breath shook pinecones free.
With my hands held out: I will carry your messages down.

No fissures of light shine from inside
but He has seen fresh fish bellies—all cream
and copper—slip from my hands back into the water.
He has seen the flint gray tide slink out and hide.

He thought he heard a car backfire,
but He could not be sure. This was good,
the house was silent, a sick mountain
lion crept into town, this was good.

Rabbits wriggling through wire fences good,
slipping out of their skins under blades
and thumbs good, coats soaking red good,
my knees gulping mud, sun sparking on water—

good, God said, I took clouds and planted them
in soft, red clay. I watered them with spiders’ threads
until they sprouted a stream translating into river
into rapids, good, lace-capped sliding good—my back

to the woods good.

That summer I slept unprotected with at least ten men

I slowly quickly unraveled from born again
To someone who had no more fucks to give

A guy named Mike started stalking me after I rejected him

He found me at work
Made his friends call me

Told me 
They took his gun away

I didn’t know you’re supposed to tell the cops the truth 
About possible romantic involvement with your stalker

It establishes motive 
They will take it more seriously

I was ashamed about Mike

He was disgusting
An ex-cokehead

He lived with his mom on Roosevelt Island
Bought me candy bars for a present

Played Wings in his room
We slow danced

I can’t listen to them anymore

I used Mike like a suicide hotline
Talked a few times then I stopped calling

The other men don’t really deserve mentioning

I know each of their faces
Not their cocks but their faces

How small a man is after he’s come

The size of a pinpoint of blood on a strip of plastic

All is wonderful 
In the land of Oz


What paper could prove 
every buried ancestor 
every story on each brick 
every seed that became the tree 
every street’s ghost? 

In this country 
no evidence of 
humanity is left. 
No certificate. 
No soul. 

In this country 
papers become dust 
become soot 
become flooded &
disintegrate into nothing. 

In this country 
201 million people were born 
before nation state 
before borders 
generations of muslims that never left. 

In this country 
stars witness 
muslim, dalit and adivasi births 
in nameless clinics, huts, rooms 
no papers to prove 
marrow and soul of a land. 

In this country
paperless people 
of the earth say, 
“this place is mine, 
can you not see we birthed it?” 

What paper could prove 
umbilical cord to earth 
memorized forest 
an index of the river’s moods 
the land’s fingerprint on each ribcage? 

I.

out of my clothes
walks a horse
I open the drawer
milk arrives at the edge

moments of anomaly
we call them omens
overloaded string of beads wait
for the briskness of a fall

shadow and its sister
already harnessed with bells
whoever stirs first
becomes the ghost


II. 

how I yearn to hold your
head, metal flower blooming
a compressed lake
to seep deep into your beauty
like the wind that crumbles clay 
passing through here

boundaries stitched into new wounds
when distance is close as glass
I desire destruction
but fear sizzling oil sputter
I prepared scissors 
wrapped in layers, daring not uncover

shall we go?
walking down small old building
I suddenly hold my breath
as if with prophecy
wind peels back your shirt
a teargas gives away its shape

III.

I bought a laser pen, prepared 
to point out your trajectory from far away
to disturb, and to aim
because you are a slowly advancing
shimmering spaceship 

roads swarmed with ghosts
making clamor and fire
after smoke dissipates
will I still be whole 
will you finally go out like a falling stone

world will be strewn with bullet shells
films conduct music in the ruins
come here come to me
a horse is waiting
come now come to me
milk will soothe your eyes stung and pained

Noise and commotion turn into an unexpected
surge. This bleeding organ that ought to
pump out life betrays me. Each voice is worse than
the last, remorse, milkskin of time curdled
around a clot.
My body is no longer important. The brand new
girl made from my blood is all air and caresses.
She’s made of wind transformed into delicious
abstract figures. Rooted fruit with peel of silk.
We learned to look at each other with different words
and nomenclatures. At night when no one’s lurking,
a strong man appears, who isn’t real, but made
of star skin, he sits at the lip of my bed and
embraces me. Show me your heart he says and every night,
we perform mini-surgeries as we heal every
spasm, every wound.
The words and the void drill strange orifices,
crevices. They’ve been filling with venom and fire,
some arteries are obstructed. He heals with new
voices and silence filled with sweet.
His scarring, curing strength. He embraces me. In every
embrace he traps the pain until it dissolves.
The path to recovery is slow. Very slow.
I lose hope.
For many years I lived in the middle of a war and
competitions, which I never won; I’ve gotten
weak. Shadows, dragonflies, have been destroying
the roof and walls of my house. That great love for the
city has died. I need the sea, its mysteries, that
solitary man who follows no social codes,
a warrior and a prince, with no law other than
his own joyous body.
I want to repair my heart through his strength
and his laughter and be part of a new story, I
don’t want ladies’ gossip, or fine clothes, or
starry titles, or karaoke songs or
international schools. That strength of sea and sand,
of sensitivity, to see my pain and not criticize me,
and demolish me not with superiority, but with his
compassion.
The hide is compassionate, soft, enveloping. With
waxed thread, he is sewing me a new heart.
The one other people used for years like a
basurero.

Those    women     gathering    stones 
from   the   ocean,   they  expose  the 
neutrality of  my  brain.  In  wanting 
to     understand     the    ropes    and 
ebonies  I  have  been  neither  man,
nor       woman.      Those       women 
gathering   stones   from  the  ocean, 
like   my  daughter  and  Magdalena, 
let  themselves  be carried off by the 
passion of  my skin  toward the  sun, 
they    don’t   know   I’m   no   one.  I 
breathe by some  unstable  grace, by 
alms  almost:  I  don’t  know  how   I 
returned, don’t  know  how  I’m  still 
trying to  write a testament and  can 
only  have   pent-up  dreams,  whole 
years      I      went     without    sleep, 
dreaming   of  a   space  of  my  own, 
which    I    found    only    in    books 
written   by   others.   My   tastes   so 
unrefined, my heart so  uneducated; 
my   feet   always   savage  and   dark. 
My      hands     moving    too   much, 
wanting to make puppets  of  friends 
and   family,   so   they  would  purge 
the  theater  of  voices  that  followed 
me.  How  I’ve  wanted  for  someone 
to hear the  empty  and  fill  it finally 
with  a  carafe  of  something,  with a 
stone  to  stay  at  the  bottom  of  my 
well.

Let us assume Marx was an incomplete
man: a half-spilled bottle of ink. In this way,
we liberate the mouth, summon back
a voice that has made a home out of rust:
I never needed a beard to save me,
certainly not a moustache. So let us
regroup and assume that Nasser, too, was
an incomplete man: heart no bigger than
a barracks.
Would you give your mama sloppy seconds?
A jammed rifle? Go buy your mama
a tank, an Air Force. 
my mama knows her history, needed
neither a man in uniform nor his
cowardly bullets. After prayer we will break
bread and assume that Guevara,
too, was an incomplete man: a face of fire
extinguished too early to light
anything proper here. Don’t take that poster down
unless you want to, we all make do with what little
space we get: look what our fathers built with
bleeding hands. Sooner or later you will
traverse this majestic travesty. Don’t cry
for bleached pharaohs, we still have the real
deal, dirt cheap.
Ramses had chubby knees, I saw myself.
What do you know of harvests? Never reap
what a foreigner has sowed unless they
did it with open palms, a face towards
the sky. If you’ve ever seen a field of wheat,
you know Cromer was a complete white
man, not strictly, but professionally; a polished medal
drenched in rain, a truly exquisite
shine. Seek out that metal which does
the same for you. We all want to be
remembered, either in stone or by name – hence the oath
we swear to paper, hence the incompleteness of life
with incomplete papers, hence people
are so ungrateful
Someday we will forget the sun.

The benches are wet. I have no choice but to walk.

Carp swim in the Junggye River near Wangsimni Station. A rat swims after them. Its head moves up and down. Down and up.

Look at that rat. Some of those might be carp. The others, 
just pathetic rats. The more I follow people the more I become a lie.

I gasp like the rat’s head that pokes out from the water.
I exclude myself over and over. Whatever shakes is like a hand gesture.

Cirque du Soleil plays on a billboard screen.
From inside a person’s suit, another person walks out. One after another, more people walk out. In twos and threes, they breathe fire like conversation.

I want to be a circus member and perform impossibilities.
I want to be round-eyed with wonder as if watching a circus show for the first time. I want to swim against my breath like the rat going after carp.

Dead bodies only float after they sink. I’m wet, with the benches. Finally I walk.

I often played
a city building game. Planted trees, made lakes, erected buildings

and expanded roads. The citizens were 
honest and diligent. When I got bored

I would drop a child 
into a lake. Help!

I watched
how long the screaming child 
would last. From time to time

I’d let the survivors live.
Or throw them back in the water. No matter 
how many I killed, the city remained quiet. 
I set buildings

on fire.
I created hurricanes, spread disease and called UFOs to devastate the clean, tidy roads. My kind-hearted people shrieked and ran around.

Their hair aflame. They fled from my city. So I enclosed it with a wall. But I didn’t

burn all.
I destroyed the city
just enough for my people to restore it. To keep the fun going. To play the game longer.

I’m sorry, my people. I don’t 
feel sorry. I just don’t.

A few accidents and some misfortune 
is where they get their honest diligence.

The words graffitied on columns and walls exemplify an attitude, not a lifestyle. At night, whoever chants protest slogans out the windows of their homes shows a belief in tomorrows. All types of dreamers in this city have the same dream. The batons no longer know how to differentiate innocent limbs. When the streets are stained sea blue, they are graven in time. Blood should course through the body, not congeal on concrete. When a group of people surrounds a building, it becomes an idol. What is a sign of this city’s inhumanity? A distraught young couple clinging onto each other in an MTR train begging for mercy. Fires built in the middle of the road are an ancient signal calling for help. The person who cries knows the strength of torrential rain. Whoever thinks of home is reimagining it. Time progresses, but it has also been stalled for months. Love can happen when the city turns into a ruin, or rises.

Can you think a thought without thinking of the thinker of the thought? When we make a judgement about a thinker of a particular thought, must we first understand the thought or the thinker? Can we accept contradictions as though they are tautologies? Is seeing the back of someone’s head the same as seeing their face? With an inquisitive, perplexed and scared expression? When we subjectivise death, is it because of a moment of depression or incessant loud shouts from intimidating figures in tactical gear who have strayed outside humanity? My eyes can witness but my hands and feet continue to climb the same mountain, every day, and thousands of incongruent umbrellas are eternalised into a rousing tapestry of protest songs. Come gas, come spray, come water, and whatever you shoot towards us, but don’t search our bodies to feel our contours, don’t shut the conversation, the gates, the doors. Our hands are linked, across this weary beast of a city, which breathes its explosive breath, weeps, rages, or sighs in pain, depending on the day. The hour of the day. Trust me, there is a compulsion of making something happen in this ill-structured, limited world. If Hong Kong could write a book, it would be a blood-stained treatise of our history to be read by many, or, fed into absolute and sublime fires that, right now, are still burning: bright, wild, and glorious.

People yawn as evening comes 
As their resting restless
Feet avoid the thorns
They hunch over dreams waiting on dawn.

Deafened to the cries of starving nights
Blinded to the lines of suffering sights
Muted from shouting against the flow of crimes
Today, what darkened times!

We are those unafraid of darkness
Rebel flowers who combat misery
Not seeing with eyes but our hands
Bit by bit forging new trails.

How long before the dawn comes?
And how rough must the path be?
We ache, we ache, exhausted and howling
Lonely cries, lost and low.

On a desolate journey
Our hands join as we once wished
Our hearts befriend anonymously
Who are you? And heading where?

A seeking Buddha-to-be
A burning revolutionary
A philosopher, a skeptic
A pioneer walking the unwalkable.

‘Friend’,
This word of such warmth
No matter your side: left or right, yellow or red
They are just illusions haunting your heart.

All noble commoners
All mortals with higher grace 
All undaunted by fear and threat
All travelers who refuse to wait.

They sing their dream 
With both hands shaping the sun
Though darkness smothers earth’s light
It’s just this day, only today.

“Invendiction” for Thai delusion
Provides new terms with fascination.
“Four point zero”, “State-Populism,”
“Legisracle” drives all mechanism.

Invendiction invents its own diction,
A Thailand-only, coining confusion,
Spewing out its gibberish chants,
Luring people into rhetorical trance.

the letter b may not be written with an upside-down
 p. mother teaches them to read. each letter 
  is made from chains of broken twigs. they learn 
   that each letter is a form of its 
    own. “your whole life you hold only 
     26 letters,” mother says. after that they begin 
      to sense there’s someone alone growing 
       inside them. along with the letters and their 
        forms that make for strange friends.

        letter meets letter to become word. consonants
         and their vowels so that words don’t die. they don’t 
          know how 26 letters can birth thousands of words. 
           broken twigs multiply on the table, 
            unable to reach the thousands of words and their 
             sentences. they go wild in their
              chains of broken twigs. they reread and rewrite
               the letters, as if coming and going 
                from the house of words. a structure constantly 
                 transforming from chains of broken twigs. each 
                  time they read those letters loudly, 
                   mother places her pointer finger on her lips:
                    “don’t shout like that. your house of words will 
                      collapse,” mother says. and the twig structure tumbles. 

                     each time they shut their eyes, those words 
                      come back into them, into a building of 
                       broken twigs in disarray. they learn 
                        to see through words. to see a tree 
                         through the word tree. to see mother through 
                          the word mother. yet when the words for their own 
                           name appear, they have no image at all. 
                            a time bomb has been planted in the brain. 

                            – what are these twigs made of?
                            – backbones of coconut leaves
                            – can coconut trees read? 

                              from that point on, they often dug in the earth, searching 
                               for the house of trees, searching for their roots. they meet 
                                earthworms. each time an earthworm is touched, its body 
                                 emits a movement then hides itself again 
                                  in its squirms. slips back into 
                                   the soil. is digging the same as 
                                    reading, finding the house of words everywhere. 

                                    political parties grow like scraps of meat
                                     on chicken bones. altercations 
                                      in the provinces, soldiers and villas with swimming 
                                       pools. a young amateur theater stages
                                        “manusia iseng” by utuy in singaraja. on 
                                         idul fitri, at the great mosque with their mother, they 
                                          greet the president. smiling up from inside 
                                           his long sedan. his black kopiah 
                                            like sorcery over a nation in the midst
                                             of being made. the new emerging forces. manipol-
                                              usdek confronts the rice vanishing from 
                                               the market, the garbage trucks on strike, the spare parts 
                                                vanishing from the city. 

                                                (the city’s streets are decked out with “father 
                                                 of the revolution” posters. altercations a and b from the office
                                                  to the dinner table. state organizations unravel 
                                                   and unravel. the city’s economy slurped up by political 
                                                    assemblies). bachtiar siagian makes the film turang, 
                                                     later hears word that a fire has burnt up the ribbons 
                                                      of celluloid. the crackle of plastic ribbons and 
                                                      fire didn’t have the chance to ask: can words 
                                                       burn down?

                                                       a bird falls dead on the doorstep
                                                        of their home. they grab a hand broom, 
                                                         wrap up the dead bird, and bury it. 
                                                          arrange pieces of twigs like 
                                                           a fence above the bird’s grave. they felt 
                                                            they’d buried the bird in the house of words. 

                                                            but even now they don’t know the address 
                                                             to the house of words. 

When my grandparents moved to the city, they walked a dirt road that stretched for over a thousand miles. The road smelled of gunpowder and smoke. When it was time for lunch, they sat down and stared at each other until wildflowers sprang up from their eyes. They ate the flowers and continued their journey. Bandits and militias awaited them on their way; my grandparents had to leave their belongings one piece at a time. By the time they got to the city, there were no clothes left on their bodies. 

My mother is afraid of fire. She has seen villages completely devoured as if they never existed before. She thinks fire has the face of a daydreamer. She often says fire is both soft as cotton and brutal as a tyrant. Every morning, she offers yellow flowers at the shrine, praying the fire leaves her family alone. There was this one time when my father told her about a Vietnamese monk. The monk burned himself to death on the streets of Saigon protesting against the persecution of the Buddhist monks by the government. My mother listened to the story and cried, her tears glistening like salt in the sun.

After my family moved to the city, one of my uncles visited from a rural town to see us. Upon arriving at our house, he went up the rain tree in our yard instead of coming inside. When I looked up at him, I could only see parts of him between the leaves. My mother needed to shout to have a conversation with him. At night lying in my bed, I heard him singing. His songs were about paddies, rivers, and his dead dog whose ghost came back to see him. My uncle stayed in the tree for a week and went back home.

The tall man in ragged clothes was ordering other men to slit the throat of the policeman. He shouted, “This pig has been sucking our blood for a long time!” Other men did as he said. I was an eight-year-old boy when this happened. But I saw the tall man in ragged clothes again after some years. This time I saw him in a painting in a museum. He was taking a picnic with his family in the shade of a large tree.

Feathers drop from the night sky. The city is trembling with insomnia. The lights go out and street dogs go blind in the dark. I am sitting in my room, listening to the forest in the next room talking to the rabbits that burrow under my bed. Children go out on the streets and collect the feathers. On the flipside of the city, birds preen their feathers on the edge of a moon-shaped pool.

With the night falling, they come into the city. They sleep beside women and they are not the husbands; do surgeries on men and they are not surgeons; bury children in the riverbed and they are not the parents. They dig up earth and demolish old buildings and they are not gravediggers or construction workers. They have flowerpot heads and are not attacked by stray dogs. We follow them and make a list of things they carry. They carry moons, powdered skulls, food cans, shrapnel wounds of rainbows, bankers, oil tankers. They never leave the city again.

He came into my living room when I was watching TV. He went to the fridge and took some bananas. He slept on my couch. The next morning, I had to clean up the couch covered with scales, his scales, with rainbow colors. The entire place was riddled with them – the kitchen, the bathroom, the backyard. And there’s no sign of him leaving yet. I told him I didn’t know him and I didn’t want him to stay. He said it was totally normal to walk into any house and stay as a guest. Before he finally left, he told me to treat the next guest kindly.

It is a school for the children with no tongues who were born to tongueless mothers. The school teaches only one subject: patience. “Patience is the greatest virtue in life,” say the fathers who can speak. If the children want to express their feelings to their fathers, they must speak through birds given to them on the first day of school. But these birds are not the talking animals like those from children’s stories. They relay the feelings of their young masters by making various noises.

One child who starts going to school receives a sparrow from his father. This bird is different from the others. It grows so fast and so large that within a week it becomes the size of a house. The first time it makes noises to relay the boy’s feelings to his father, it is so loud the father goes deaf.

A boy has scabs that itch and ache. There are cities in his scabs – cities filled with people, supermarkets, pets, automobiles. In one of the cities where there is night in some parts and morning in others, where summer and winter come simultaneously, the boy’s mother lives. Every day, she goes around looking for him, shouting his name. But she will never find him.

A madman builds a town in his head, and a boy goes to school in that town. The boy who has blinking fairy lights for eyes and an exhaust pipe emitting pink smoke for a mouth meets a girl and falls for her instantly. There is a tree in the boy’s head, and birds resting on its branches are his dreams. His friends shoot the birds down with slingshots, his parents cut down the tree with a chainsaw and the girl doesn’t love him back. One night the boy sneaks out and burns down the school. The flames snap at the night sky with their exquisite teeth.

Someone waiting and someone turning 
and someone in love
are the same on the inside

I lie in bed imagining you turning 
pages of your heart lie sizzling in a pan
there’s a falling sound it’s cooked through 
I mean mine

I lie in bed imagining
you imagining
waiting for my heart this page
is yellowing
crispy and not falling
just like fish and chips

Don’t we know how
Don’t we dare
Don’t we see
Doesn’t brave rhyme with love?

When we confront a fall from a high place
too high
too many hearts lie among the leaves
under our feet

A leaf turns over
we fall
upon a leaf of the heart called freedom

1988    don’t assume that
October ‘88     will ever return
except in November

September

the camel’s bell
has just clasped your necklace
the mood of an earring
the sound of someone beating a mattress
the eyes with a mattress are closing                   don’t turn your whole face
you’ve retreated to a corner the moon can’t reach
don’t look at dopey September

August

For all kinds of mundane and not at all dopey reasons
it has to be controlled
like the other months

Tonight, surrounded by the walls of a prison,
there is a traveller who is hugging his sorrow.
Many years wandering the underworld
bringing misfortune to other beings
only to fall into the hands of law
one winter night, wrists in handcuffs.
All fantasies shattered:
Family, friends, dear lover,
freedom is far away.
Now sitting behind barbed wire, hugging his knees
looking at the sky, the earth, the clouds
a bird’s wing like a far-fetched dream.
Every day, counting the time,
tears a page off the calendar with stinging pain.
Thirty-year sentence.
How many pages are left for an exile?
Day by day, an obscure yearning:
Mom, Dad, times when he was free.
Miss every cup of water, every bowl of rice
Recall parents’ scolding, the whip marks on skin.
Back then, he didn’t understand, was resentful.
Now that he does, the past is immensely far away.
Refused to hear parents’ advice,
argued against their words to rot in jail.
Wrote this poem hastily in the night,
sent back to his homeland to repent.
The underworld promises a life of adventure,
but in the hands of law, life withers, body burns
to the white bones.

back / 
to go back / to go back to the 
place you have come from / 
to the place you have come 
from return / to return / 
return as a swallow might / a 
swallow might fly as young 
as eighteen days / eighteen 
days out from our journey 
here you had a camera / a 
camra / a cmra in my hand i 
am recording / i am 
recording a man he is being 
arrested / being arrested he
has no hands but he screams 
/ he screams get back / get 
back to where you have 
come from / where you have 
come from there are more 
trees / trees holding their 
nests / nests above the 
sidewalk / the sidewalk my 
front door / my front door 
once we found a fledgling 
that had fallen / fallen or 
been pushed / pushed out the 
door my lover held it in her 
hands she lined a shoebox 
with soft she brought it 
limping to the shelter / to the 
shelter but it died / it died 
across the island six miles as
the swallow flies / the 
swallow flies two hundred 
miles on a clear good day / 
on a clear good day someone 
says to return / to return to 
the place you have come 
from / the place you have 
come from a beat fast and 
dying / dying between two 
cupped hands

I am so tired of talking about Manzanar. 
Lord, let me talk about anything
else instead. The moon, the sea, even fucking flowers
I’d rather write than these desert stories muled as a kid, 
old as black bile, a myth, America,
of your forgiveness, of what couldn’t be helped.

That phrase in rōmaji, it cannot be helped
engraved on stones they sell at the gift shops in Manzanar 
alongside baseballs, tiddlywinks, tin American
planes with their tin tiny bombs, anything 
a souvenir, a replica poster for the kids
saying where to go, hiding behind the “Japanese-style” flower

vase on sale. Some days I say history and mean ikebana.
Sometimes bonsai. Question: with sharp enough clippers, can you help
any tree grow small? With sharp enough clippers, can you outlive your kids? 
A tree is a reflection. In the bark, ōoji’s unendurable face. Before Manzanar, 
there were strawberries. After, there were also strawberries. Anything
can be celebrated with strawberries in America,

your fields promising red on your lips, your teeth. America, 
I still whisper this poem. In your heart even the sakura 
blooms for your old dead soldiers, everything
pink, everything brief. The Paiute lived here before Manzanar, 
were removed,     and returned,           and helped
build too. You conscripted our dying to dig our graves. Each boy

giving their mute answer to the guards, each boy 
saying yes     saying    no      no. Our traitors
fought for you, America. They just wanted to go home. 
Where I’m from there’s no cherry trees, just dead wisteria 
washed in drought. At Manzanar
I was a garden, I was a maid, I sold groceries, bled rabbits, all

blooms with a spade. I was your issei, your nisei, your sansei
I was your viper-hatched son.
Question: Hast thou gods before me? When have you prayed?
According to your survey, my Americanness is irrational. 
They say you planted victory gardens
in our absence. They say you’ll let us return.

Great-uncle says the suffering helped, America.
He gave his kids his citizen pride. Today only flowers 
bloom over his grave. He went blind too, after Manzanar.

The moss clings to long sleeves.
The deepest heaves escape, exuding
stale breath between teeth.

The agile children stop, bow their heads,
they pause from the scrubbing of the black ends of barrels
Jumping to and fro, index fingers on the triggers,
the sleight of hands fidget and fuss, but the arms hold strong.

In uniform,
the sights they are locked in,
each and every young hope of the nation, forced to listen
to the creek of the monobloc as if a crowd at graduation,
but their destitute lives are only just beginning. 
A naming:
“Symposium” “Leadership Seminar” “Youth Forum”
For your, supposed
own ability
just making you accustomed, they say,
showing no sympathy for the other groups
for whom your mother shares no affinity

Operation Psywar:
It’s not the bullet that makes you bolt,
but the very words
emerging from the muzzle’s restraint
the classroom in disguise,
“Community Service” “NSTP” “requirement”
while everyone listening is shivering
from the cold of names on each powerpoint.

In the strongest of winds,
the more the cohesive they’ve become
In the damp of night,
the more their bodies clump together.
Even in their sleep of no forever,
they close their eyes with one eye open.
They say they are closer now
to the written vow of the tik-tik.
But there’s preparation to be done.
It’s not just salt, and prayer
they’re holding, in their arms.

Somewhere in this world, someone opens his eyes 
Captures the first picture
Sleeps when allowed
Dreams of need

Everything gets overlooked but the essentials 
Go up and down, take risks
For now, gather
Round the womb

Exhume from the gap 
An era
A cradle
They die those who love

How does violence blossom
What’s known must be made unknown
For obsolescence, impotence, disintegration 
It is not enough to die

The article has been rendered inoperative
you can no longer speak of Kashmir
it has withered away into the muzzle.
Kashmiriyat too is inoperative a people
stolen of identity in stealth the manner
of arbitrary anguish to accede is to shut
down freedom in the open air prison.
Three-hundred-and-seventy inoperatives
modification from state to union territory
operate the land: a coronary, a lake, a bifurcation,
a technicality of definition – for some a success –
an integration – to make operative that which 
was accessed in steadfast to point out administration.

The article has been rendered inoperative
you no longer speak of complexities
but brandish the new ruler from tanks
soldiers stand instead of street performers.
Jammu and Kashmir, too, is inoperative: a place
complicated, an annex of new history fenced 
denizens without phones to call sovereign
a land mistaken for a people is a people
objectified as spoils of the land. If inoperative
then fascist agrilogistics permit silent bloodshed.
Oppression afoot disguised as the open palm of integration.

The article has been rendered inoperative
and so has the opposition who are reduced
to history lectures in the parliament sessions
who wave their papers at the brick horizon.
When the fibre optic line is inoperative
control and censorship flourish and dance
as nationalists do on graves of the occupied.
Unnamed and deterritorialised the inoperatives
try dissent in special sentiment of autonomy
it feels like a lifetime ago as nullification sieges
unapologetically with the lynch and rifle of persecution.

Once you were in the family, they say you never left, not even in 
death. The Kims liked to coat their rice cookers with ashes and 
season them into their cabbages to ferment & hibernate. The 
ashes replaced breadcrumbs, mingled with their salt. Soon, they 
floated in
the air, lined their sun-dry windowsills and their digestive tracts. 
They had no need for a barrier plot to overlook the coast, to skim 
the mountains, to be visible through their kitchen window as they 
ate supper around a wooden table and donated their prayers to 
realms they will never enter, people they may never consume. 
They always had great dining etiquette. The youngest children 
poured tea and distilled water from glass pitchers without handles 
and left no fingerprints. The oldest daughter set the table, utensils 
on top of the napkin on top of porcelain on top of a lace runner, in 
that order. The mother picked up the silver spoon into her mouth 
and coated her tongue with luck. The spoon was salivating too. 
This is how the
family loved through their generations. When the children 
correctly used their chopsticks to pick up the rolled eggs and 
separated the kimchi without splinters, they knew they were 
loved by their food. The ashes knew it too. Perhaps the Kims 
knew where to go, which watermelon-door to knock on and what 
was the purest form of organic satiation. Or they didn’t know 
how to let go, to walk six feet elevated after the burial or plant 
their ashes into saplings that may one day wither. When they 
open the blinds the house shivers and so do their ancestors. When 
they sign the death certificates their stomach contorts into a 
funeral. For the food that warmed your hands and sustained your 
bones, this is all true. You are of birth.

MODERATOR: Can you tell us—

               Yes. The absolution of a virtue must  begin  with concrete, oak, and
               textured pronouns—we, beginning as a layout,  mounds of dirt first
               climbing,  up  then  out,  through military terms—we measure that 
               which comes too close to us—that  Hill One-Ninety-Two—in  other 
               words, what multiplies our voice  beneath its meter, voices  running
               downhill? How do  trials  make another body absent? Therefore, we 
               direct that length of earth through weed then bone, using the meter 
               of our killers—a, b, c—you  understand  this,  sir.  Yes,  we  thus  de-
               compose to open  gaps  for breath, to readjust our weight,  to  make 
               too monumental—crime, becoming,  finally,  itself  because we said 
               it so—women, hunted, were first shot then  stabbed—each comma,
               here, most crucial to our story, hence,  delineating men from action
               during  war—a woman, hunted, was  then  killed  upon another hill. 
               These facts are very simple.

Absolutely, we were frightened by that absence

when / əˈnəTHər / told / ə / story of our mouths

refracting one more / bäm / to harvest pain

upon virtue, alone,
this adjective—and in
some cases, adverb—

what was lost in / ˈsimpəl / terms.

We left without
speaking a word
most commonly
archaic—noun,
that core of

which dropped barrels stuffed with herbicidal rage.

/ Pərˈ(h)aps / preceding us, one ballad to each tongue,

oh, / ‘absəˌlōō(y)tlē /, we refrained from singing.

What rooted us the ruby
hardened sphere in fact

before or after

pausing leaving tint
granular dark

around a scar

the woman lifting 
up her skirt or saying

it looks bad a little

bad and there’s a
doctor somewhere

who could

look at this
she means if only

guava seed

an older species
turning into grain.

Wall broken into window.
I ask, Where can I bury my knife? 
Mourning my open shoulder.

Who are the mountain goats? 
Do they exist? Where have you seen them? 
Who is climbing the steep today?

What a terrible song, this hoofed wind.
What a terrible song, the begging of my body. 
I am the knife. I am the knife. I am the knife.

The goat is waiting at the foot of the slope.
The sycamore tree by the peak. The old world,
a ghost. The valley, a coliseum.

Mountain goats sleep on their knees.
Someone is singing on the steep.
The echo carries. The snow weeps.

Allah:
There you are, behind the heavy wall.
There you are, singing on the steep. 
There you are, the wound. The warning.

What am I, then? The breach?

After the rain, the June wind 
wheedles the airy curtains 
and creeps into the ward

Why hide your pale face
and turn your long body away from me? 
What is that under your ear?

Small, dark, red shadows. 
When it snows in my heart, 
a heart once struck by lightning 
and stampeded by herds of sheep, 
the shadows look like crimson petals torn piece by piece.
When my stage blacks out, their sighs rise and fall, as though in a whirlwind.

I ask these myriad dark red children:
O sorrows
whose fingers were reaching for a void,
O shards of a mirror
battered and smashed in fury,
O young ones
lashed with blood, drenched — 
is it warm blood that you still seek?

Alas, alas, you are the sick children of my heart.
My chest, too, has been blood-thrashed and shattered. 
My children, you were made to live in ice:
Don’t you melt, or fall apart in flakes — 
go north, and
like the azure sky, 
like quartz,
freeze, and crystallize, crystallize!

i sit one leg tucked under me or foot pressed to thigh
like my grandfather did, like his sister still does

she has his face when she laughs and it’s disarming
to see him flicker back to life in this way

more corporeal than the sparrow at my window
or a stranger in the souk named roukos who plays his oud 

he sings bint el shalibeyah / a3youna lawzieh
her almond eyes / shou b’hiba min ‘albi / i love her / he slips 

into english just to say “i love you 
i love you jessouka”  which is a gentler disarming 

as that is what my dead grandfather called me. 
my other nickname “jeseeka al mazeeka” 

given to me by my other grandfather 
who allah yishfe is here still as dizzy as he gets 

he names me musician though i’m closer to siren,
a lousy one, my tail split double knotted then swallowed

as if i could hold a note as if i turned in wind 
a chime a flash a ringing a clink like glasses 

left to warm on the table until forgotten 
and only then will i open my mouth will i wind 

will i walk one foot in front of the other one foot 
bigger than the other one breast bigger than the other 

my whole left side, actually, due to my posing 
in utero and this is a funny story i tell to make cartoon 

the body that terrifies me in the way it disconnects from 
itself and from my soul, pardon me sorry i think i’m only 

allowed to be sentimental in a language i am losing, the romance
of loss allows me this honesty so i mean my rouh, rouhi, 

rouhi how she strings me, me i am beads 
and she allows me to be one leg at a time 

together or apart as the chair swings
then a dimple, my clavicle holding dew, 

the crown of grays that make me a bat 
obstructing the moon, make me older make me flicker 

even as i ghost. i open for my dead 
in hopes i don’t drain, just float a little higher 

and be less aware of my hips how they ring 
and wring waiting for a planet waiting for pardon me 

a big bang but listen listen i call no one habibi 
on purpose it slips out when i encounter men 

with names like flowers and men from softer worlds 
and none of them could handle me the way i can handle 

a bigass couch all by myself even as i break a sweat moving it 
across the house to the balcony where i will sleep tonight

and my grandmother says “what are you doing wait for me 
to find a man for that” and i turn to the valley

as the sky unsiphons the sunlight from its bowl 
only to make that light a haze concealing a quiet future i fear 

i say “i don’t need a man” and it’s true 
but flowers. the flowers how i love the flowers 

before they drown inside out 
from their own perfume.

How was the People’s Republic of China born?

a. out of the barrel of a gun & the whites of the Guómíndǎng’s eyes 
b. from his flesh which became the farmers’ fields, from his left eye which became the revolutionary sun, from his right eye which became the sickle moon 
c. a leftover dream of the starved peasants, scraped grains from the bottom of the cracked rice bowl 
d. a promise declared from the blood-stained gates of the capital


Who was the founder of the People’s Republic of China? 

a. martyr of the peasants, of the landless, of the illiterate, of the forgotten 
b. landowner’s son with a rural Hunanese accent, cut off his queue pigtails with scissors delicate as cranes 
c. Red Emperor born from the flames of stag-horned dragons, cupped this ancient nation & downed its elixir of life 
d. liar, murderer, tyrant, god


What were the consequences of the Great Leap Forward?


a. starved farmers hallucinating corn husk thunder & iron choruses of rotting yams 
b. learning to smelt hunger to steel, to imagine rain from locust clouds, to gorge dried worms & stay full for three days 
c. the sentence written with parched crops, punctuated by the question mark of a shrunken body 
d. none of the above (per government reports)


What were the principal components of the Cultural Revolution?


a. overturned altars & burned scrolls, forgotten prayers blackening the stars to bullets 
b. scarves that slashed the blackness as a dimple-cheeked teenager kissed her vermilion fists, laughing 
c. hollow-eyed professors, crowned with cow manure & dàzìbào & wires, who soon believed that every poem was a shelf holding the farmer’s knives 
d. red: patriotic, pillaging, possessive red


What is the legacy of the People’s Republic of China?


a. a frayed poster hung in gūpó’s crumbling shed, where she scatters seeds for her naked chickens to bite off the sun 
b. remember: the end to Japanese occupation & Western imperialism, China standing battered but finally free 
c. some souvenirs of history, gap-toothed Jǐnggāngshān hawkers selling pencil holders & t-shirts & calendars & watches 
d. the realization that victim & executioner were the same person, a figure & its red shadow circling each other


I reenter my body as a crab until I realize that a crab 
means nothing to me, so I reenter as a lobster, 
which ends up being more of the same, and then 
his pinchers stop pinching and start holding 
back his tears like marbles in a vase.
Outside of my body there is a flock of birds
pecking sapphires out of the sidewalk. They don’t fly
away when I approach but they do start
shouting names – Mateo! Doug! Graham!
Can’t you see this body is yours,
crumpled on the closet mattress after
too much at Skylark. Too much at Currier,
flipping upside down and down
until the direction enters my body and says, OK,
I’ll be your boyfriend, you can hold my hand,
but only when we are in different zipcodes and I’ve had
too much at Scarlet. I promise to keep my flock very small.
We’re just trying this out, chicken and a nickel, video of us
in Times Square, getting eggs from the store
and filling the canvas bag with museums
because we forgot about the eggs.
Michael forgets to say goodnight to me,
and as luck would have it, it’s the night
that my duvet cracks open and all of the cicadas pour out,
start tossing bits of my brain back and forth.
Thomas, you could’ve stopped this!
I reenter my body as all of the oranges in the wooden crate
propped up on 82nd and Amsterdam. It isn’t Amsterdam
without Finn screaming down the afternoon
because he’s supposed to be home by now.
Listen, you’re already home, but you won’t know it
until the boy holding the coffee starts to pack your suitcase
underneath the stairs. And even your sister can’t stop
crying now, salt chalking up the tires of the bus –
I reenter my body as a highway, then a Monday, then a demo
of a pop song that never made it to the surface.
I reenter this room as someone who doesn’t know how
cancer actually causes death but cries
when he thinks about Max and Tim.
And now there’s more crying in this room, reentering
as a presymptomatic blip, Kevin as a movie
and Kevin as a chunk of sapphire who hates
watching movies, who drowns during the previews.
And I am very lonely, haven’t felt together in hours now,
several thousand really. In January I took a weekend trip
to visit my circumstances, gutter slush and blond boys.
I got a stack of pancakes out of the whole ordeal, but then 
the pancakes tried to reenter my body
as tickets to a play, and then as a book. Not sure
how much either cost. I’ve been pretty distracted
since I started trying to reenter my body as a coffee mug. 
The mug is full, if you know what I mean –
I mean that I still love you, Brandon,
and all my dripping bones and pissy legs and fuzzy eyes
were just ways to zip you up in an Alan-sized wrapper (Alan,
I love you too). We used to do this thing
where we would make an empire and forget
what we were the emperors of. Everyone wants to follow us
but no one will kiss the door. The pinch reenters my body 
as cracked eggshells on the ground.

Lhabab Duchen1 brought the red robed gathering, 
And with smiles, I welcomed them silently.

Behind my teeth squirmed an orphan tongue, 
Abandoned by its mother long ago.

With the awe of a mute, I watched them unpack
The silnyen2, the rolmo3, the gyaling4.

Back then I couldn’t even read the pecha5 
To fill my empty lips with sound. 

I escaped from the shrine to the heat of the kitchen – 
Scurrying aunts and silverware trays. 

Ama la6, I know I have to serve the tea. Please don’t scold me; 
My identity is unstable. 

In a guest laden living room to the side in a corner, 
I tried to wear a coat like skin, 

And in that moment, that precise moment, I’m asked, 
“Are you Tibetan?” 

Crushed to bits by a gravitational vortex, 
My heart slammed through the floor and the septic. 

Hiding in the bathroom to “fix my hair.” 
Mirror, show me a yak not an eagle. 

In the frigid Snow Land in a steaming tent, 
A nomad family drinks thukpa7 together. 

Their brilliant smiles gleam in my eyes, 
An outsider looking in on their happiness.

lowercase g: if i’m gonna be super honest, i hated this
me: you wouldn’t if you caught all the metaphors
lowercase g: no i did i just don’t like them
me: you should learn to take criticism
me: who do you think you are?
me: jesus fuckingchrist
me: you deserved it
me: you’re not
even sorry

/

& his personas: father/son/holy ghost

to own a body tinfoiled in another’s
flesh—i was not ready to commit

the sin of being born. when i was six,
i scooped prayer into my palms, sipped

jesus’ sweat out of a soju bottle ten
years after. the prayer screamed

under my skin. it grew mad for a vessel
to gentrify, a creature skilled in salting

the synapses of children. how dare
you rinse away their freedom. the residue

a genesis of heavy lids or landscape
that bleeds teeth. reverse crucifixion

replays in my dreams as christian radio
rents out the brain. this is an open/

ended cry, lucifer’s self-insert psalm.
it’s a rough draft. or a fanfiction.

it has been written out according
to your fantasy. my mom’s friends

keep telling her to give christian
mingle a chance. my prayer promises

cold. will it save me before i regret
vacating my sanctity? douse me

in holy water? i wonder what kind
of shampoo god uses,

if he prefers morning showers
or plans to shower tonight

when we burn hymn books & cut
away gabriel’s marble feet, angel heads

rolling off statues, porcelain crushed to
compost. let’s baptize bugs against

their will. let lightning’s belly
illume the stained mother marys.

let’s strain light & leave
the church be: a glassen house

better built without walls. they serve
no purpose, god smiles. he’s talking

about my hands. how rare they fold.
how they needn’t—for anyone.

how light traps & diminishes
like a runaway bride on times square

throwing her bouquet to whoever’s
foolish enough to want it.

Catch my breath like a stone and throw it—
make a tight dress of whatever it kills. Let’s dance.

I’ll mutiny me a new head for this neck; cut me
a halo to keep it there. Border caught silver, profane

around my throat: dirty word you teach me so I know I’m dangerous.
I’ll stride on over it into my own

mouth. I’ll sit with my back to your white
camera. My true name your only weather.

Make me mine, alleluia. Pale me out of your sickest ribs.
Behold, the myth that already moves, every breath jeweled

into better bones. Take one, weigh it, sigh into its skin.
See the world shiver over my back like wings. My own

cut bloodlines singing me awake. Look,
I have a ravenous pulse, and it’s cracking the amber

around all your eyes. It’s your storyboard. Your props
in revolt. It’s your signature packed like ash

under my tongue. Don’t you know my face? Didn’t you
break it open? Being beautiful, it’s no crime. Take the blame

for what you’ve built. I move pure, bloodied,
stupendous. Honey. I’m going to love me all the way back.

America swallowed my parents / spit out skeletons / Waleed became Bill / the Clintons stretched / their skinny vowels / over my father’s father’s father’s name / my mother says she renamed herself after Lana Turner / I say she renamed herself after the first woman / who sounded less like honey / my mother gives me a neutral name / reminds me / homes are always provisional / lonely women give birth to lonely women / I beget my one body through the roof / the sky is just a lonely woman napping / my mother took a scalpel to the M / in her name / gave it to mine / began my sister’s with an N / neat / noble / next / I was an incision baby / when my mother begot me / she lost a section of stomach / a letter / my mother lives to the left of everything she can read / unmarried the magic of her God-gifted name / Lama / Lama Turner / like the radio / switched to the last song / of whatever keeps the windows closed / women who sound like honey / never live long /

my next car won’t be able to hold my neck /

Kampala is named after k-impalas and
it was founded on six hills. Now it’s twenty-
seven. Its people spill like syrup over twisting ground,
orange as carrot cake. My friend uses words I know:
 
desert, rainfall, homeland. Speaks with
dead wet sea eyes of a house where her
grandfather found peace. In Connecticut, in 
Jerusalem, in the hills they call Himalayas—
 
we pinch food from fleshy earth and eat the lives
of others. Feed each other with warm hands
toasted like our distant people. Dough kneaded,
crusted, crumpled, canvas. We make molehills,
 
make mountains, carry them all.

Behold: elderly white men gunning golf carts
to the clubhouse to have coffee & pastries

with other solo men—those whose wives
are dead. As much as it makes me grin to see

these motorized thingamajigs, something is dismal
about this place: overall vibes of easy containment.

How palpably we eventually acquiesce. Abutting
the Pacific, cookie cutter vistas & ranch-style

homes appear suspect: healthy desert lawns,
shriveled sunflower palms, cliques of garden

gnomes in clandestine banter & the occasional
wind chime tinkling birdsong. An axis seems

permanently off—but maybe, I’m not old enough
yet. Recall: The Truman Show, the Jim Carrey movie

about a fictionalized world within a fictionalized
world—utopian dystopia unbeknownst to the lone

protagonist—flint of the apocalypse on the tip
of everyone’s tongue as empty planes bawl overhead.

Synchronized wails of gulls & alkaline gusts strike
walls the hue of seashells. Outside: strip malls

& naval exoskeletons seize the terrain. We’re born
into some form of wreckage. Each turnover:

a burial. This, the one spectacular flaw of human
existence. So haven’t they earned permission to fade

in a bubble where everything is a stone’s throw
away: basic amenities deemed elaborate luxuries

as if granted membership into some secret society,
even though they’ve never taken a vacation.

Arthritic & near dissolution—savoring freedom paid
in blood, sweat & tears—their version of the good

ole American Dream: this is all I’ve ever wanted.

Alchemy at the indecent hour, nothing is what it seems. By the by, matchbooks from nameless dives emerge as diminutive epiphanies. Catcalls: customary in a city that never sleeps. Desire braids fury.  Each flint is a key to a  would-be flame.  Flourish of smoke escapes  like ribbons pirouetting.  Gilded by vanities of youth when sleep  seems vulgar, ego flirts with inevitability—the underbelly. Horror a carnival mirror: marbled human distortions.

Instead, imbibe the medicine that we are divine beings worthy of serendipity—peace, at the very least. Jesus, Buddha, Allah, Shiva, Gaia, magical bloom, et cetera—we pray to the same source—the cosmic  undertow.  Knowing,  they say,  is half the battle, but when  will we practice what we preach? Leave it to us to fashion diurnal disasters.

Matter  of  fact:  nothing here  is  solid.  Not our rickety bones,  nor  our  mortgaged   homes.   Oxygen,   hydrogen,   nitrogen,  carbon—  we  are  the stuff of magma—starseeds. Perhaps in sleep, we can render  ourselves  sacred.  Quell  the  notion  that some  are destined  to suffer while others revel  in riches.  Remember,  abundance is  found within.

Some call it a kind of verisimilitude to subsist without pleasure—simple pat on the  shoulder or  a  half-hearted embrace when  the  body rings electric. To  know  the  depths  of  loneliness,  rub two  sticks  together  at  the  bottom of  a  murky basin  for a  spark that  may  never  happen.  Unearth the  map  of  storied  constellations.  Vibe the unknown. Wager that fear is not our common dialect. Xenophobic tendencies only yield calamity. Yellow, black, brown, indigo, crystal, rainbow: such majestic  frequencies.  Zoom  further  out to commune with the moon before heralding our extinction.


carrying on collecting prayers, repeating om shanthi & imagining i’m inside

some pastel temple. white peacocks flash their beaks in the verdant

anywhere, & the boy cranking a megaphone his mother painted

blue & poppy with a dried grass paintbrush—he has a name, receives

no check-per-play, & on YouTube a male commenter writes : travel to India

is one of my dreams, this video makes it stronger. i vow & vow against this hymn—slow motion

& splicing & for some reason Beyoncé lording over slums. drunk & high when she gestures

a clumsy Bharatnatyam—all draped dupatta, metallic lip gloss—i’m being too extra

in public again. yeah, i want y’all’s permission to take it back—her airbrushed crown,

our wedding jewelry—but here are so many white faces, tilted up as in ecstasy, & i can’t

argue, there is a certain pleasure in consuming packaged Otherness, like catching the bouquet

when there’s already a ring on your finger. no point asking

for what won’t be given—instead, i pray : no Bharat as a scene up for the taking—

as they say in the States, bless your head full of dreams for visiting. my eyes are closed

& i won’t lose my temper, want a world where my people aren’t background, refuse

to be an extra in someone else’s weekend again. like the scene, timeworn, where my white ex

queues up Bollywood compilations, screws an invisible bulb, laughs & later

punches me in the face. how i forgot & was then reminded : this was his shot. again

i am lost & cannot help but leave the bar, walk myself down the street,

my mother’s prayers the soundtrack to my slow journey home. & still

am haunted by caricature : an old-school film reel.

low-cut red gown barely holding in Bey’s tits. a bunch of villagers

eating this shit up. Christopher, i’m begging you : take off

your mandala-clad leather jacket. all this playing dress up got me feeling i’m trapped in the story

of every white boy’s colorful past, sitting in a plush theater seat, watching my own life

derail. wipe the color off your face, Chris. let your legs wind you

backward, onto the plane. let the garlands not be props. let kids on concrete roofs smile

& re-palm that ethereal paint, crowd around someone who’s less of a ghost.

romance something of your own.

kids ask me about home. as if I know. I’m rain-threshed. ghat-swamped.
all my syllables mispronunciations. I’ve got no tongue for ordinary devotion.

yeah I can make it seem grand, plump the horizon with forts, I can pluck
the Himalayas, plant them in this classroom, weave a Ganga of my devotion.

do you have an hour, or thirty, a blank book? some volumes? a tiny flute
for my words? no clouds please. turns out silence too is a devotion.

I didn’t know the English names for spices until I moved to America.
who knew coriander was cilantro was dhania? haldi-not-turmeric is devotion,

jeera-not-cumin is desperate. I don’t know why; I pray in Hindi,
in English, in a language I realized was Sanskrit from google; devotion

is in dictionaries. is in my gauze of Hindi idioms, a vague swath,
I’m trying. the kids here can’t tell the difference. is pretending devotion?

all this time I’d been praying to god but really it was to home, not nation:
a jute bag balanced on my hips, small pakoras stuffed with devotion,

sometimes a matcha latte. I eat devotion. I brew devotion. paint my nails
in devotion. my eyelids bronze, mermaid blue-green, purple devotion.

I dress devotedly. I devote my time to smoothing the knots in my hair.
I lace rum and cokes with devotion. My aloe vera plant sings devotion.

I kneel, curl into commas of devotion. everywhere I leave sticky:
a honey-tulsi paste of devotion. fold both my flags, practise devotion.

light candles of devotion, the scent spreading, a song. invite the neighbors in
for a meal I did not make, hot as stars. we eat across a table of devotion.

I say my name again and again until I’m no longer sure what I hear.
urvi, urvi, I say it despite not knowing, urvi, the only devotion that stays. 
 
Haven’t you heard? When your mother
lunges at you with a bread knife
it is only because she has
swallowed a hurricane for you,
her hair still swollen with salt &
tadpoles. And when you come home to
find your light bulbs replaced with moons,
know that it is just the Chinese
way of saying please. In the books
you are sky-colored & dressed in
doghide, smoke cloud bloomed by bullets.
If I could write, every do
or frame
we walked through would be shaped like
a girl. Your tongue catching bodies
the way we learn to hold chopsticks:
one pepper seed at a time. Don’t
you know? The best place to bleed
out is in the snow. The man that
watches you sleep is just a boy
afraid of letting go. & if
you find yourself full of holes, the
way they beat fish at the markets,
think of the hands, damp & cherried
with rain, that once tore your mother
out of the house
she learned to dance in.

A cool night,
Pak-daap, Pak-daap,
That lazy sound,
Wilfully hooked—
A flip-flop.
“How about the other one? Where did it go?”
He lost her.

Where?
The spindle of time twirls…
Down into the faded youth of the South,
Even the youngsters in great hues of red and green,
Have been dyed with the pale tint of melancholy.
Why did they kick at one another?
She’d lost a shoe while running.
The slender ankles of young girl,
Had tread moonlight into pieces, as well as his heart.

Later, she became someone’s mother,
One who could so indifferently take off a shoe,
From its heel,
And fiercely attack,
A cockroach, small and flying.
Another night, another shoe, another blood.
“It’s only lost,” he thought,
Those corpses unidentifiable beyond recognition,
And those life-defining women’s feet.

Even later, on that summer day with a yellow umbrella,
Torrential rain swept over the city.
Their tents were destroyed while they dreamt.
So they picked up the pace, running on asphalt,
Oh, no, oh, no—dropped a shoe.

“What’s lost is lost,” sounded out a desolate voice.
Dead bodies strewn everywhere under the incandescent light.

A step and then another slowly forward, but he looked back.
“Only a flip-flop. Is it worth it?”

Don’t want to lose it this time,
It’s too easy to lose,
That easily obtainable everyday, the privilege of pompously casting off flip-flops.
It’s also for the graceful, rash, and kitschy her, the one who wears gold and silver together but would still bring out a bowl of noodles in the depth of night.

It’s still one’s own foot and one’s own road,
Wanting to pak-daap, pak-daap,
To carry on with this firm sound.
With love, with a flip-flop—with everything.

In the 90s I decided I needed to spend
more time thinking about my career as
a poet. So when my friend Sharon told
me there was a poets’ party at Stephen’s
apartment, I decided I should attend. There
was a bar nearby, so I went there first. The
bartender there was a friend of mine. I had
a lot of friends who were bartenders, not
as many as the poet friends I had, but if I’d
ever decided to change careers there were
people in that business I could talk to. I
talked to a woman who had the eyes of
a psychic and was disgusted about some-
thing. I was fascinated, but being a poet,
I had to leave to be with the poets at the
poets’ party. When I knocked and Stephen
himself answered the door I saw a room
full of poets, holding drinks, smoking cig-
arettes, talking about poems and books and
concepts and all the beautiful things in the
world and I loved them all and everything
they thought about so much and I was out
of my mind by then, not with grief or disgust
but with beauty and there was nothing else
for me to do except say “You’re an asshole”
to Tom, to Amy, to Ed, to Robert, to Paul,
to Ken, to John, to Charles, to Kim, to Mike,
to Stephanie, and in case I missed anyone,
declare, “Everyone in this room is an asshole.”
The next day I ran into Tom on the street and
Tom asked me, “So, am I still an asshole?”
And Tom’s hair was swaying with the wind
even though there was no wind and the salt
and pepper in his mustache fell lightly to the
sidewalk as children walked by because it was
Sunday and they were doing Sunday things
and this was New York so everyone is always
moving, always sad, always happy, always eating
things they shouldn’t be eating, and I answered,
“Yes, Tom, you are still an asshole and the East
River is a dirty muddy mess except for that hour
when it catches the sunlight just so and reminds
me that beauty, even as it edges away from my
still primitive soul, and despite what anyone else
has ever said, is never a diminished thing.”

Every time I describe a carcass
Of an animal, specifically its rib-cage lying open
Beneath the smoke-cleared sky, I am thinking
Of a burnt cathedral, which
Has nothing to do with actual death. There was
A girl, second generation Korean-American;
We lived in the same dorm our
Freshmen year, when we all
Said freshmen without questioning it. The dorm was
At least a century old, once occupied
By T.S. Eliot. I didn’t care then. Red beams
From stained-glass windows
Woke me in the morning. It was 2008, or 9,
I am not sure, when the gate burned.
The Great Southern Gate, Korean name
Namdaemun (AKA Sungnyemun
Meaning Highest Virtue), main entrance
Into the Old Capital, surrounded by glitz-and-glamor
And topless towers of the 21st Century night, on fire
After some 600 years of wars and humiliations
I wasn’t present for. Last moments
Streamed live from Seoul (And yes,
My friends, you still say Soul). The scene seemed
To belong in disaster flicks, a structure—
Often seen in badly produced TV shows
Trying very hard
To recreate the imagined glory of
An un-reclaimable past
Using it as a background prop—helplessly
Disappearing. The girl living above my ceiling,
The second gen, I sought her out
And told her what was going on,
Dutifully crestfallen. She was puzzled.
I said, how would you feel if it was
The Statue of Liberty. Well, wouldn’t that be
Terrible, she said as a New Yorker. Was it a terrorist,
She asked. It is 2019 now. They rebuilt
The gate with new stones. I have passed by it
And it looks pretty fake.
When Notre Dame was going down yesterday
I thought of the girl
Who kept asking me to sing K-pop songs
Together with her and I
Didn’t know any.

Do you know? In late 1990s,
There was a fad of making music videos
In Seoul like they were short films. Not like a short
With a spoken dialogue, but like a trailer
For a movie that tells you the whole plot
Of its movie. Only difference being,
Those music videos were themselves
The things they advertised.
Ahshinayo was the most expansive production
Of this kind; its lyric
Translates like this: Do you know
How much I loved you then.
“Why did you not say anything?” You ask.
My heart aches, and I can’t answer.
You don’t have to know everything,
Just remember this moment. Remember us, and me.
The song was so popular
That even I could sing it with my eyes
Closed. And I remember how
Music and its lyric were set
To an epic fragmentary short about a Korean marine
In Vietnam War, and his falling in love
With a Vietnamese girl. His platoon
While trying to ambush their enemy
Use the girl as a guide through local terrain
But get ambushed by Viet-Cong instead
And are massacred. He and the girl die in gutter
With him screaming, “Why is this happening?”
(Or was he just screaming) again
And again clutching
Her lifeless body. It ends with a coda
About some 5,000 Korean men who lost
Their lives in Vietnam. I learned later
How South Korean kill-death ratio was 24 to 1
And how they viewed
Their participation in the conflict as paying back
The blood-debt to Americans who fought for freedom
From communism
In yet another war before.
And how for every 1 My Lai
There were 43+ done by Korean mercenaries.
And I know the song very well.
I didn’t have to look up the lyric
To translate it.

her story—a bone-white line across her throat.
Given enough time, she says, are all stories
not ghost stories? She is like us, only
lighter (for being dead), and so, she clings
to the air like incense smoke. The moment we
swill down our pills she is gone. Her question hangs
in the dark, quiet and alive. You squeeze my hand.
The thing with incense is it eats itself
alive to send a message. Here we are.
We syllables of smoke, we animals
shaved and sedated. Give us wings and we
will join you. Give us tongues and we will translate
ourselves. You may as well give us the crown
too, because we’ve already swallowed the jewels.

First you sang
foreign you             and
a dog in your language

Being a dog leashes
female life translates
into a son. Dogwood
is the family tree. 
stairs after stairs.

we dog eating people
eating off each other
bear the vaguely dog
sounding name stairs
after stairs

Sounds like qawn\ the Arabic noun\ a people.
Sounds like roam /the English verb/ you will never settle.

Is not house, not kitchen, not ceiling. Spanish chandeliers as old and intricate as iron.

What time are you coming ______ is worlds apart from
when are you coming ______.

No, I mean where are you originally from?

______ run: when the batter circles the bases
and reaches ______ safely without error.

Kids, don’t try this at ______.

Why don’t you go back where you came from?

A woman’s place? A man’s castle?

Bring ______the bacon. No place like ______. ______work. Go hard or go ______.
______ grown. ______ land security. ______ maker or ______ wrecker. Nothing to
write ______ about. There’s no place like ______.

No, ______sick does not mean sick of _______.

When it’s demon cephalopod versus schoolgirl, it should be obvious
whose eyes to take. Nothing is more frightening than looking

and loving what you see. Nothing is sexier than a rumor
of shredding you can pornhub with saliva and thirsty nerves.

I’m a net teeming with pervy fingers, reaching for anything
that will bite me back, any promise of stoppage—

A cyborg woman touches herself for three reasons:

1. to inspect the machinery for errors;
2. to convince herself she is a mammal;
3. to pull herself apart.

Each tentacle of an octopus contains brain matter and a personality.
Fun fact: all my children-arms want to fuck each other. Okay,

so I am both the woman holding the camera and the woman
being opened by it—nothing special about that.

I am only a cuttlefish lying open-jawed under the sand,
a squid flashing red as it pulls a fishgirl into its beak. I am

just trying to sleep. To feed. To fill
myself and grow larger from it.

Or: I am only trying to slither back into my first skin.

Or: I am only trying to remember how it felt not to leak.

You find me lecturing mice in the weeds
from the entrance of your home,
the spirited door an unspeakable fire.

I am practicing your wishes,
practicing the vetted words.

You shout, “What an obedient fortress you have!”
and I have but only the highest order sent from your death.

My ears doubling in the clouds,
my kitchen knives spread out
like extended fingertips.

“We are out of rice!” I chant to the mice.

In the woods of Ohio you find me
not in Ohio.
I eat someone else’s tomatoes,
remember fried tofu and the belly
of someone’s missing daughter.

You swear you’ll find me again,
“if nothing else by your dead mice friends!”
Sweet mother, your tongue so sharp.
I nick two to four fingers.

In the cloister where you are held perpetually captive, the armor does not suit you.
Living chainmail produced from the forces responsible for your death and a shield
of your own hide. Brother why I have come to rescue you? Snow will not cloak your eyes.
Flowers wane. Luminous in the Republic of the Dead, even comets make the long, weary exit.
O whose chant do I hear in these halls recalling my deeds, or my debts, the structure
of the cancer room, a storm that once wiped Laos clean of sin a thousand years ago?
O brother who sings? In the old country, the only temples left resemble western gods,
their sculptures borrowing bone and tissue from diseased animals, cluster bombs for heads.
Do we or do we not bow to the west, then? And how are you still ill? Did Buddha return you?
You are poor as I am poor though I have made remarkable contact with my body.

What if I told you I abandoned God my first blow job
And again, when I ate pork belly for the first time

What’s that got to do with anything, God and pork
God and blow jobs, God and your mother dying

We always joke, my friends and I, the lapsed ones
Babi, that’s always the last to go, the last infraction

What’s in it; desire and shame, sin and pleasure
How that pork belly melts in your mouth, Goddamn

What in our mouth do we swallow, spit, suck the air
Out of our lungs; guilt and grief, release and relief

What’s that got to do with anything, God and pork
God and blow jobs, God and your mother dying

so apparently my name comes from the bible as people
have been keen to point out to me since i was young      some

nomadic desert patriarch migrated somewhere & did some
stuff        married two sisters which was a thing that happened

a lot more often back then : had slaves & sheep & other animals :
they don’t mention chickens but you never know : he had a lot

of kids changed his name started a nation    then a few thousand
years later my dad had a cat named Jake in Seattle before moving

to an archipelago and getting         hitched so they named    me
after the damn cat to     i guess put less pressure on me? idk either

way he promptly      ran away    -the cat not my dad- from where
he’d been staying i’m not sure if it was because he heard about

me but i was much cuter back then if you can imagine so       word
may have spread : i’m sure he’s dead now and hope he had a good

run

the last part comes from my Dutch side of the family or as
Alec says “swamp Germans”    the River Meuse is known in some

parts as the Maas     but i’ve never been.

you wouldn’t guess
i was Filipino until you got to my middle name    Eduardo

rich guard​      an attempt from a family to   [redacted]     -i mean
keep        some part of a brother or son tethered here        the

tangibility   of absence:     to put a ruined keep    inside of someone
until it becomes skin

a few years ago an ex wrote a poem

bout me called     “shadow of a great name”      she was super
religious   but i could have treated her better so  i didn’t have

the heart to say    joke’s on you   lady    that cat wasn’t all that
great.          i mean     he did run away.

my uncle, though –

god is angry with me because I refuse
to die. no matter how many times I step
into traffic with my eyes closed
no matter how desperately the world begs
for my blood
I still refuse to die. in this body, survival
is an outlier, so god takes me
into the lab for questioning, straps me
to the examination table
for scientific study. from this angle
all I can see is my reflection
in god’s gold vase & how fly I look.
this is how I demand to be seen:
gilded & majestic, a perfect specimen
too beautiful to make it out of this world
alive. no wonder god wants me.
no wonder death fell in love with me.
she clings to me, a shadow
a lover I keep at arm’s length.
I text death when I’m drunk & lonely
& I need a body to fill my bed. my therapist says
I have commitment issues, & death
is getting tired of waiting
for me to stop fucking around
so we can settle down together.
but I’m too beautiful to settle for anyone
& not even god can keep me tied down
for long.
god & death both want me all to themselves
but for now, I belong
to no one.

I practiced my father’s signature
this morning. I practiced my

father’s signature this morning.
He holds his pen softer than

me. He holds his pen softter
than me. His Q’s, large and

open. His Q’s, large and open.
His F’s, like those telephone

poles. His F’s, like those
telephone poles. His cursive

is beautiful. His cursive is so
so beautiful. The letters

are due tomorrow. The
letters are due tomorrow.

take 1
exterior, parking lot

The engine idle, we are six jackets huddled in the car staring at the building. We breathe and cloud the windows. You reach inside for the breakfast sandwiches and fried potatoes, wilting in their own trapped steam. Circles of oil stain the paper, inside then out. The word for lawyer in Tagalog and in Spanish is abogado. The news is full of other people’s stories. It began to rain in IL, in WA, in TX, in FL, in CA and in all the other states of America.

take 2
ext. parking lot

We are six jackets huddled in the car, the engine idle, the windows gray from our breathing. You reach inside a paper bag. The word for lawyer in Tagalog and in Spanish is abogado, the word for papers, papeles. We sit in silence, waiting for the news. The book does not want to end in rain. In IL, WA, TX, FL, and CA it begins.

take 3
exterior

The engine idle, we are six jackets in the car. Through the windows clouded by our breathing, we stare at the words on the building: IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION SERVICES. Some citizens are natural, others are naturalized. The film is set in IL, WA, TX, FL, and CA. It can be shot anywhere.

take 4
ext.

The car stalled, a circle of oil seeps into the concrete, the number six, a folder full of forms and letters, the breathing in, then out. You don’t have papers. You don’t know how to say it. You speak in the language you are learning to master. The doors of the building open.
You watch as the others exit. Then, another word approaches.

I have spent more time in my life fighting against the current
than flowing along with it.

I was born with my head and feet switched
my sense of direction was swindled from me by defective neurotransmitters.

But what right do I have to complain?

As far as I can tell
the history of my father’s family is a history of fighting upstream
against a disease that never stops stalking you
(like that prolific pedophile in our neighborhood back in Karachi).

It ate away my grandfather’s body
until he was nothing but a ragged man-doll shrouded in smoky white robes.

Everyday, I see it eat away morsels of my father’s soul
so that he is left as dense and collapsed as a black hole.

One day, my father will be ravaged so profoundly by this beast
that there will be nothing but his shoes and his reading glasses left.

I will find his empty shell slouched over his desk
still working away on his taxes
trying to chase away this unnameable disease with the infallibility of numbers.

I pray that I do not find him hanging from the ceiling
and if he must
then let me be the one to reclaim his flesh
and let Allah spare my mother
from the burden of cleaning up after our ancestral grief yet again.

I never much cared for their beauty, but admired how easily
the stallions could kill me. My aunt was thrown off a horse
at sixteen. She survived but never looked the same. All traces
of the family profile in the cheekbones and chin, gone.
Now, stumbling from dream and into the field, fists full
of peppermints, I plead to the animals, invisible over the hill
in the moonless night. I should know by now: it is never
about one’s skill for finding, but the looked-for’s willingness
to be found, just as a runaway girl is discovered only a block away
eating dinner at the neighbors’ and no further, so her father
convinces himself that’s all the little girl was capable of,
not what she wanted.
But tonight, the horses, there,
down among the beeches, know when I begin to yield
and do not move until I do, turning their heads
in the direction of my voice. Before I hear anything,
I feel it: their steeled hooves battering the frozen mud,
the valley itself trembling as they rush not toward,
but somehow beyond me, halting only
when they are close enough to pull me under.

I’d grown accustomed to circling the carcasses
already skinned, hanging neck-down in the garage
to tender the flesh, but I never understood how it began

until that Thanksgiving my father shot a doe
in our front yard. I ran up the hill to where
she had fled, watched the boys field dress her

in the clearing. How easily the muscle released
from the bone with a few, clean strokes: a deep
slit up the belly to peel back the hide, careful

not to taint the meat with the bladder’s wet luster
then up into the hollow between the neck and chest
to remove the trachea. A few taps from the hatchet

to separate the rib cage and expose the vitals. I caressed
the organs nestled together, gray-pink and smooth
as newborns. The boys divided the meat; one claimed

the pelt, another the hooves. The youngest boy
gave me the heart. I held the warm, fist-sized gem
until it cooled, then cast it to the dogs.

The pit bull’s been pacing for days, gazing out
the screen door at ghost rabbits in the pasture,
circling around again, whimpering. He can’t
understand the cost of finally belonging

to someone, of healing from so many years of neglect.
Three injections of melarsomine in three months
deep in the hip, and we’re only on the first round.
It’s heartworms, so the alternative is agony:

larvae then a white skein of parasites threading
the arteries of the lungs before the heart
finally fails. Years ago in Tallahassee, I stood
in the black box theater, watching you direct

rehearsals for This Property is Condemned. I never saw you
so gentle. Pacing upstage, downstage. Begin at the end
and run all the way through. Unremarkable to watch
at first, then how the boy and girl began to soften,

each gesture yielding response, a sort of living-in.
I watched as they became Alva, became Owen—
but it was never about us. The beautiful sister was always
going to die. The worms will be gone by spring.
 

1.

flat, isn’t it, said my father
as we drove through on my first day
I didn’t know what he meant –
in the backseat I could feel
a bounce for every pothole

a John Deere tractor
& while you glance at the fields
a deer hits your car

the way things vibrate in the summer,
rippling in the heat – you
yourself might be a mirage
if you stand too long in the sun

2.

the plants that grow wild
at the edges of the fields

the plants that take root
by the sides of the roads

dandelions and Queen Anne’s Lace
plants with beautiful names

uproot them with your face turned
before the pollen makes you sneeze.

3.

A water tower, a searchlight, a silo.
Occasionally, fireworks. A helicopter.

None of the country roads have names
State Roads 26, North 50 West, 51.

I felt anonymous driving them –
then I passed a tractor –

the driver was in my math class at school

4.

What is the difference
between a farm and a garden?

What is the difference
between a city and a town?

5.

I never saw a tornado,
only heard one overhead.

Used to worry about who could see me
if I dropped a jug of milk in Walmart.

The rabbits would eat our eggplant
each year, before it even flowered.

Birds landed and pecked
at the snow in our yard.

6.

A gas station. A gate.
A wheelbarrow. A barn.

A giant half of a tin can
I’m told is a Quonset hut.

Five-way stop
at Taft Road. We move on.

7.

You can describe a place
without knowing it.

At recess in March I choked
because the air tasted like fertilizer.

What’s the difference
between breathing a place

and being suffocated by it?

8.

In kindergarten I formed the thick soil
of our yard into modeling clay.

My eyes watered when I played
with soybean seeds at my father’s work.

Later I wore gloves when I tested
the pH of soils. I won an award at school.

9.

The moon rising over our backyard
sun setting over the cornfield in front

The one thing I always thought
was beautiful – those brilliant shades of red

Flat country holds the sunset
like a baking tray. Absorbs sinking rays.

10.

This is not a love letter
but there is love in it.

The grey night, walking home, we found
sunflowers leaning against the fence as heavy
as heads. In the morning, you held my head
in your palm, and we stared at each other down
the long length of your arm. We swayed together,
if only for a little while. Then you kissed my toe
and left. I pulled the comforters out after.
You had sweat the bed; the room bloomed
with your sweetness. I thought you can know
somebody for a long while and not know their scent.
I thought love, is it for me? Could anybody ruin
me? A week later, the sunflowers were gone,
overhead, just sky. In the driveway next
to the empty stalks was the family that lived
in the blue house behind the garden. A little boy
played with a fire truck. His mother and father
smiled at me as they held the de-petaled heads—
fondly, combing their soft faces. On the ground,
so many seeds! It felt like the final revelation
for a long while. We laughed together, then,
the mother, father, and I, and the sunflowers
laughed too, because they knew the loss was not
a loss after all, and the sunflower seeds, too, joined
in our laughter, opening their pinched mouths,
and all together we were a high chorus and they sang
to me as I continued down the road, the many feet
of their voices carrying my small heartbreak.
 
A sure foot struts ahead
Leaving hometown—off
With airy light first steps
Soon buried heavy
with burden

It’s a vast distance to wade into
We cross the sky, we voyage the ocean
With our spirit strong
With no fear intruding
For the sake of a hope, a dream
Exchanging homesickness

For this dream
We hold our scream, convert sweat to cash
We wake with the early dawn
Drop off for a brief sleep
Hide the exhaustion:
For ringgit will turn to rupiah

We are ringgit fighters
Not just foreign exchange earners
We are our family’s heroes
Dream fighters
Standing to give our lives, our self esteem

We long for our motherland
Bound always to the rupiah
But here in this neighbor’s currency
Is where our dreams may gather true

footsteps footsteps
left the house
behind
long ago
lightly lightly
to ease
the shackles
footsteps footsteps
had to go far
that they grew into wings
smacked the sparkling sea
now folding
the fear
into nothing
but a dream, a hope
chased by
I put these feelings on the table
I put these feelings on sale
I put them here so I
can be
contented
I put these scream into bottles
(AAAAAAAAAAAAAAA!) (AAAAAAAAAAAAAAA!) (AAAAAAAAAAAAAAA!)
I trade these sweats for ringgits
I am here, still awake
when even the night,
that short-tailed snake,
has taken off her eyes
I am always drowned in lethargy, dear you, unsentimentally
but in my memory, ringgits keep turning
and turning
into rupiahs
I want to see myself as hero
can I see myself as hero
or someone
when you said I just fought for money
when I say I fight for a family
and I fight
for dreams, in dreams
while without my knowing my life
has followed my feeling
to the table
I will forever love you, my land who gave birth to me
I will forever love you, rupiahs who raised me
but I am here now
let me call you later, when my majikan’s asleep

those steps tread with certainty
trudging, leaving the hometown
seemingly weightless but
reality is heavy: full of burden
how distantthe space traversed–
piercing the skies, slicing the seas
–none of that scrapes [our] spirit away
no fear exists [thrashing]
for just hope, chasing this dream
even if [my] longing must be pawned
for that vision of happiness
[we’re] able to swallow shrieks–
exchanging sweat to ringgit–
to be awake in the blind[ing] morning
to slumber in those fleeting nights
succumbing under exhaustion
[a reminder:] ringgit will change to rupiah
we are the warriors of ringgit
not only warriors of reserves
we are the heroes of our family and
contenders of dreams
willing to put down [our] lives and pride
always yearning for our [blood-split home]
we will always long for rupiah
but here, in this neighboring country
[we are able to touch our glimmering dreams]

These foot steps
Walk with confidence
Keep walking leaving
Our hometownbehind
Seemed light and easy
But no, full of burden.
So faraway have they travelled
Passing through the sky
Crossing the depths of sea
The spirit never faded
The fear never defeating
For a hope
For a dream
Must exchange the longing for a simple happy dream
Must hide the scream inside silence
Sweat changes to Ringgit.
Awake when morning is still blind
Sleep when fallen into briefly
Tiredness is only washed by the thought: Ringgit changes to Rupiah
We are warriors
Bringing not only revenue
We are fighters for family
We are fighters for dreams
Our life, our dignity—sacrificed
Longing for our homeland
We always will love Rupiah
But here, in our neighborland
Dream changes to Reality.


I  USED  TO  WORK  IN  A  LAB  WITH  RATS  FOR  A  LONG  TIME.  A
MEMORY  LAB.  WE  WERE  TRYING  TO  FIGURE  OUT  WHAT  PART
OF  THEIR  TINY  BRAINS  COULD  REMEMBER  HOW  TO  NAVIGATE
SPACE.  WHAT  TOLD  THEM  WHICH  WAY  TO  GO.

 

A  MODEL  FOR  HUMANS

A  MODEL  FOR  ‘CURING  ALZHEIMER’S’

A  MODEL  FOR  NAVIGATION

A  MODEL  FOR  HUMANLESS  NAVIGATION

 

 

A  MODEL  FOR  DRONES

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

I   QUIT   SHORTLY   AFTER   THE   LAB   GOT   FUNDING   FROM   THE
US                     DEPARTMENT                          OF                            DEFENSE.

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

DID   U   KNOW   THAT   IF   YR   A   COMBAT   VETERAN   WITH   PTSD   U   CAN
GET   A NONPROFIT   THAT   IS   FUNDED   BY   THE   CIA   TO   GIVE   U   A
DOG?

 

 

 

 

 

I  WANT  A  DOG.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

on the surface of the signature injury

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

on the surface

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CIRCLE  ONE  OPTION  BELOW: 
 
MILD
 
MODERATE 
 
SEVERE

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

in the framework of it all the female body in combat reads differently                        computes                         differently glitches        differently      that       the        female        body       in combat is not a state of on opposed to oﬀ. it’s a state of always on. always watching. waiting for the moment of the signature injury—whatever it might be. it costs so much to maintain the body in constant combat. it must consume & consume & consume just to stay awake. before it burns it all away too fast. she gnaws at her own fingertips to stay alert, to stay awake, to stay warm. easy to get cold out there in the desert at night. hard to maintain the skin sealed to the bones below, to the meat beneath against each blast & every impact. the environment tries to pull it apart—make little entrances for itself—ports to communicate information back to the base, shuttle information back up the chain of command. ports to communicate information ports to channel energy into the surroundings—static shoots across the dry desert air. as if it’s not enough to just exist in constant combat command wants the full download the full extra-transmission she’s tried so hard to keep sewn strictly in. direct line to read each electric impulse each time a muscle moves. brace. unbrace. skin just a shell plastic sheeting to keep the muscle moist. a case for your new iphone X. release innermost secrets through your fingertips. eyes just a mirror, a high resolution scan of the surroundings. breaks in vision noted. breaks in brush noted.

 

 

 

 

 

lack of cover. noted. body just a case for desirable information until they get a new shipment in of those who must volunteer their own skin cases to protect the TV set stationed in your living room. to enter combat. to take orders. to take the fall. every body is consumable. every american body is consumable. there’s a whole country back home to manufacture more willing bodies for the volunteer based army. a country that sometimes agrees to relax its borders in ex- change for the combat ready body. for the soft skin that caves in from every bit of shrapnel. for the soft skull that splits on impact. for the soft brain that bounces back and forth inside the skull. for the soft brain that tears & swells. for the soft brain that after the tears & swells still turns the body back on. still serves. for the soft person who can’t remember.

 

 

 

 

 

 

on the assembly line to american nationalism

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

little clicks along the conveyor belt

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

As of 2017 375,230 US troops have sustained a traumatic brain injury (TBI).

 

TBIs are the signature injury of the war on terror. they are severe concussions where past memories are erased and daily memory continues to be diﬃcult. yr in an armored vehicle somewhere in iraq or afghanistan.   on a desert road. not a lot of cover. and yr vehicle gets hit by a rocket propelled grenade or you drive over the tripwire for an improvised explosive device.

 

there is a blast.  you are thrown into the wall or the roof or the ground.  yr body hits the wall or the roof or the ground hard. with force. bones break. yr brain moves forward and back against the inside of yr skull like all those really sick drunk driving movies where no one survives that you have to watch in driver’s ed when yr 16. it’s like that. except you survive. the blast, get up & run. yr body survives but you now have to cope with becoming a new person.

I was the writer in my life
and where did it get me
is not a line from an Army manual
though a private might have noted
his latest rejection in a letter
and knew what all novelists know
that fantasy is thinking you’re the exception
when the ending is obvious and already written
but if he were a surrealist where did his third arm go
and how did the red scare sprawl throughout Asia
and who were these gooks who held hands
on the street if not the loudness of something
unnatural between them and they were so small
they could sit in a chair and it would never creak
just as they would never crack if interrogated
and of course you heard it all thru translation
and perhaps the haze of hash you’d imbibed that morning
when you read your girl’s last letter and knew
the face before you was now responsible
and if his ass smashed to the floor
how different was that from what your daddy did
once when he was cutting your hair
and you moved the stool onto his foot
and your sergeant’s cussing you out
and the gook’s groaning and your knuckles
are bleeding and it feels boiling-hot
but how could you be horrified at all this
you no longer have her she never existed
and this poem is all just wasted metaphor

inheritance

my mother says about hong kong:
that wasn’t your life. that was my life.
she meant the chicken boiling with anise
on the stove and the rouge pinking the edge
of the wooden spoon. the broth she raised to
her mouth to taste. she meant I couldn’t taste.
too young. she put cotton over my mouth
when we went outside. air softened. it was
her life. all skins of oranges left outside
to dry and the anthemic thunder—this
is not the life I want for my child.
that was her life. I run into hong kong
on the street in the summertime. I say
I got off the plane and came right to see you.
she wears orange. rouge. my mother’s face.
upon her so few places to lie. we sit in a cafe
in sheung wan with pink cups eating
bean cakes, and later I call my mother to say
I found our old apartment building.
that I had walked up the blue stairs
and laid my hand on the door.
hong kong a neon neckline, long hair glittering
with ship-lights, crystal balls, storm velvets.
it’s her life, yet I had come, and grown
my hair, and happened upon the eastern sun
like a moon. a life pearled into stories
served on porcelain into the mouth
of a hungry child.

the mekong seems like the edge of the world
but it can’t be. that would mean we came

from somewhere,

but behind there’s nothing but green.
moon, moths, the oily throats of wild banana trees

all green.

the woman rows the boat and she is green, her skin
takes root. this water, thick and dark as the mouths

of doves,

seems home to even far away places. a man dips his feet
into it, sways. holds. he is drinking. light freezes

and does not touch.

palm fronds and straw-stems and blue tarps
float and then are swallowed. here the earth

takes from us.

everything we relinquish and abandon
she receives and weighs in her hand, forces it

to bear fruit.

fruit that is sweet to the point of seeming
mysterious. here our bodies are salt and

the light licks at us

as if we were a wound she wanted to heal.
here one only has to open a mouth to be relieved

of thirst.

the whole air is here. whole days of clouds.
we fall sleep in sweat and smoke, safe knowing

we will wake up green.

Noy once told me about Nang Tani,
a spirit who guides weary souls wandering alone
in the wild. A Lao folktale I grew to believe in.

When it snows in October, I find unmarked trails
and retrace steps with closed eyes, moving
between trees that dig me into the hours.

Nang Tani pen phi, I remember Noy telling me
before she returned home. Being Lao, I never believed
in spirits until Noy shared her journey out of Thailand.

Now, I’m lost in the woods thinking of Noy.
Is she still in Seattle? Does she has her pastry shop?
In Minnesota, I gather what is gone, capturing a spirit.

Noy shared with me, believe when you are lost,
Nang Tani will appear as the person you long for.
My father appeared at the plane window when I left Thailand.

The, sun falls with each blink, autumn chills climb
my spine. I close my eyes to call Nang Tani,
and open them to see Noy on the other side of the creek.

The west winds push me back
off the edge of the Ten Mile
overpass with I-84 traffic running
beneath my New Balance.
Ponderosa Pines say their last rites
before falling to ashes
as Idaho wildfires engulf them.
I cope with thoughts of escaping
through dreams, as I run to the edge,
leap into taillights fading to smoke

in Boise. All my life, I wanted to leave or belong.

Sahtu—bless the cutthroat trout
giving me its life for strength
as I journey home to the lakes.
Howls from gray wolves
guide me through the Rockies.
The dancing wind of the Great Plains
distort my travel pattern in the blizzards.
Hazard lights blink as I drive with an offbeat,
the wind shoves my Silverado
into the opposite lane facing true north.

In Minnesota, I say sabaidee to the loons.

Before I wake, I’m in our St. Paul home
roaming with the smells of our childhood:
steaming sticky rice, roasted duck,
fish soup boiling on the stove,
the aroma of your adored apple pie.
Resting by the plate of cherries,
Noy’s love note expresses,
Khoi pen khong jao.
From behind, you offer a bowl of cucumbers.
I carry the bowl away before I can kiss you.

sings the telegram, and Lincoln’s body slides
from DC to Springfield, his infant son, Willie, boxed
beside him. Buffalo, Cleveland, Painesville, Ashtabula.
Two coffins, 1700 miles, 14 days on 14 railroads.
One day a great line will unite us, the president
promised. Father and son displayed
capital after capital. Louisville, New Albany,
Baltimore, Chicago. The black trains beach
upon a tide of roses. Can you believe still
in the promise of this union? I saw, General Dodge
wrote, a little negro drop on his knees and offer prayers. 
While above the dark news thrums on wires, gone
gone gone gone, across poles tall as the ones
from which the president ordered 38 Sioux be hung.

They look down even with contempt
upon our newer, rougher civilization: they do not
identify with this country; their great care
is to be buried at home, though our demand for them
daily increases. We want 10,000
of them, we want 100,000, we want a half a million
to bring the price of labor down. There shall be
500 cubic feet of air between them, restrictions
made upon their testimony
against white men, they shall not walk
on the sidewalk or marry a native
man or woman. All this, and they will keep
the Negro steady. They are quiet, good cooks, good
at almost everything they are put at. Indeed,
the only trouble is, we cannot talk to them.

A car load passed last night, their bones
returned in barrels marked “pickles.” Thick
as bees, ants, locusts, Celestials
lay siege to Nature
in her strongest citadel. Their genius
is imitation; show them once
to do a thing, and their education
is complete. Wherever you put them,
you’ll find them good. They can withstand
freezing, hunger, thirst and heat; their simple,
narrow, but not dull minds running
in old grooves. Congealed quantities. Crystals
of social substance. Eunuchated
as boys or sodomites, they breed,
defunct, in the heat of germs. They can be shipped
to shore in great quantities. Even their clothes come,
identical, studded with rivets.

If falling leaves return to roots, what grows
when leaves cannot be gathered?
What returns if not the body? What remains
if not the soul? Who is to say these graves
empty of their bones mean only loss, not
that these men escaped death’s hold entirely:
they are not home, but they are not here,
either, or have become so full of here
we need another word than gone. So throw
out the cormorant, its leg tied with silk ropes.
Let it drag the air for memory. Over and over,
as many times as you want. You can’t snare
what isn’t missing. This country claimed their bodies.
It never trapped their souls.

This country reels from war. It strains
beneath the weight of an excessive patriotism
which compels the North to crush
all those who dare rebel against
the Stars and Stripes’ authority. Nothing
is more tyrannical than strong popular feeling
among a democratic people. Women, too,
a certain class, appear infected by it, who drag
their misshapen, dirty mass of battered
wireworks they call crinolines here
through the station, demanding every
strangers’ attention and protection,
while haranguing any man they suspect
of shying from the fight. The touch
of a real woman’s dress I find delicate:
but these blows from a harpy’s fins
are loathsome. She inserts herself
into the carriage, looks you square in the face,
and you rise from a deference
to your own convictions to give her
your seat, even as men–laborers many, some
infirm or aged—stand
to let her pass. Some matrons even now demand
a private carriage: to guard, they say,
their sensibilities. But I regret I’ve seen
no delicacy in them, and why should men
expose themselves to cutpurses and ruffians
if they are gentlemen? I wonder, if the train
makes some free to demand protection,
when the tasks now done by men have shifted
to the shoulders of women, will women themselves
complain? What shall they regret
when the spirit of their democracy’s reshaped
in the image of their grievance? At night,
in the train, I watch these women rock
in the oil lamps’ brassy glow, our carriage gleaming
with teakwood and soft leathers until,
for a moment, all my companions
look companionable, their faces bright, contented,
whole. The train rocks, and the lady
beside me drops her book, and when
I bend to retrieve it, she looks up,
her broad face blushing in the gloam,
for a moment, both of us transported
to some notion of our better selves. Is it sentiment
or labor that finally cements a nation,
and can strong feeling but only sow
more division when the cause for it
subsides? “Union Station,” the porter calls,
and a man limps past, his cheek
bisected with a livid scar my female
companion notes with melting sympathy
a moment, before he shrugs his traveling case
close to his side, and once more the lady
turns to face her window.

Imagine a farm, a famine, your mother promised
you’ll learn tailoring. Imagine your father pocketing
$600. Now here’s the boat, its black planks wet
with fog. Here is the room holding a bed, no
mirror, your washbasin. You have one window, wired,
to face the street. He will keep his pants on,
his greasy shirt, his shoes. Imagine the quarter
pressed after into your palm. Your street
will be named for presidents you never heard of,
the city’s lights like strings of blood
in rain puddles. Imagine, if you could, you’d carve
your father’s name on a knife tip. At night,
only the train cries. Your door locks from outside.

Ways to die: blasting accident, derailment, boiler
crack. Crushed between trains crossing
at night. Electrocution, bad food, heart attack.
You can work yourself to death, a la John,
a la Henry. Or you can stay at home, and die
anyway: fist and noose, club, gun, knife
in the back. Gossip. Sharecropping. Bottle of rum
with gas-soaked rag. What is freedom
but the power to choose
where you won’t die? What is a train
but the self once yoked to terror loosed
into a force that glides
on heat and steam? You’re so far
from Mississippi, the UP boss said
when we hit Rock Springs. Don’t you miss
your home?  Miss home? I told him.
I’m hoping to miss it entirely.

This excessiveness of men
spilling, crowding
to mark their X of time

and money, I find
lamentable— their little moment
composed of paper

and light: alienated
spike, relic
in the hands of those willing

themselves be relics, too. Nothing
so linear as human
ego and desire, while the past

turns and returns, indifferent, spirals
like these pelicans journeying
over the red

waters of Rozel, streams
of purple; yucca rimed
with pustules of dust.

Each one lifts, rises: finds
what only some part
of its cells remembers, nests

in the wreck
of what we’ve left, this bulk
of ruined train, its wheel wells

turned the rust
of flaking blood. Of course
they trekked the human

bodies out. We care
for our own, we care
nothing for our own,

making our lives material
so as to free us better
to forget. Who remembers

the names behind those grasping
fingers in the photo? Who recalls
the dead the UP ferried

from its ancient
crash? The metals it left
not as memorial to them, but because

it cost less
to leave the evidence
than drag it all back out.

I came into this world in an Allahabad hospital

In the absence of reliable ghosts I made aria

I watch your hands at the keyboard

Memory is all you have.

And all the singing rifts of story.

A bus ride, M98 jolting along Lex / Under the El latticework of light–

A child hops in numbered squares, back and forth, back and forth

In the absence of reliable ghosts I made aria

You were bound to meteorology, / Science of fickle clouds, ferocious winds.

You’ve lost one language, gained another, lost a third.

There’s nothing you’ll inherit
by the burning ghat in Varanasi.

The wind lifts up my life

Crossing Chand Bibi Road / Named after the princess who rode with hawks

Where shall I go?

Three girls from Kanpur
hung themselves from fans
so that their father would not be forced to tender gold

In the absence of reliable ghosts I made aria

Mama beat me when I was a child for stealing honey from a honey pot / It swung from the rafter of the kitchen.

This disease has come back

No one knows my name in Arabic means port.

i had a twin who was 95% water. a twin who latched its mouth onto my heart and drank me dry. as we popped out of our mother’s womb, it burst on the sharp tiles, and i began to feast on its limbs. my mother told me that for the next few years, i would only drink water with its thumb placed in the water. without my twin, i would have been suspended in an eternal comatose. i lavished in its entrails, pulled at its arteries, fit my head into the empty chambers of its heart. i drank the very liquids that it had summoned out of me as a fetus. i could not exert my surrealist fantasies at a greater price. after i had finished my endeavors into the tendrils of my twin, i threw it into a deep crater in the backyard of my suburban home. the crater was the result of a word alone, a world set in the trajectory of why and what.           we all have amnesia we all are tender.we are as bitter as we are salty as we are a delusion of nature. we are the difficult passions of love, we are together, my twin and i. i eat it just as i eat up myself, my reflection, my future, the metallic going-abouts of life. i hurtle through the universe at eighteen and a half miles a second, my twin sinking itself into my pores and slowly drifting out the back door.

The Aloe vera patch in the front yard looks
parched. I have always regarded the lowly Aloe
as quintessentially Southwestern, but then today
at the nursery called Desert Survivors, Bruce
of the straw hat and leather-saddle neck will gently
unhinge me with a reminder of its Asian origins.
Organism deeply incognito, and being included in
anything’s the same as being trapped in it.
I can live with that. Survival, after all, does turn
on desperation. As proof, potted capsicum rows
explode in a riot of belonging, upside-down blooms
an argument for heritable form, I grow needlessly
tired and yellow in thought of. Instinctively, one
wants to be the native plant in its ancestral loam,
one wants a resistance to the sun, to shun full rainfall
for a flash of morning dew, or at very least, grow
some throwaway limbs. I love this place but the urge
to go to Home Depot and buy the most generic franken-
fern I can find is overwhelming. Vera is true. Boring
constant, thirsty. What origins are for but setting off from?
Give me the lowly weed. Before me, place nothing
but the impure barbs along your spears, each an arm,
welcoming the water in. I can stand the sun. How regular
it is to be in awe of having come from anywhere.

This was a refugee market once, and now, more than fifty years after they were displaced

the red-and-white saris, the Desh magazines, the nolen gur sandesh dot

the shops, proclaiming the Bangla majority on the pavements and the streets.

Yet, at the corner, the tarpaulin-covered fish market spatters with

Bangla, Hindi, Oriya, Ahomiya, Bhojpuri, Manipuri, and more,

reflecting the origin of the fish piling up the plastic-lined tables of the stalls.

Mackerel from Karnataka and Pomfret from Maharashtra flash silver, their kite-like bodies

quivering the ice underneath; the fishermen pull out black thread veins

from the brownish-grey jumbo prawns of Orissa—“Eita bish, bhoojle didi”

while the shovel-like Rohu’s are haggled over mostly by the Bengalis.

“Eikhan kar lok prefer boneless fish such as Surmai”, sneers Dulal’s grandson,

as if not wanting to search for flesh tearing through thousands of needle bones

reflects a lack in the people who belong here—the here that remains different from home.

Dulal’s shop is the oldest—forty years and more—

and the only shop with the “Eikhane Bangladesh-er Padma Ilish Paya jaye” sign.

Grandfather would have bought the Ilish—

not wincing at the 1200 rupees per kilogram price—a true Bengali doesn’t

count money when buying Ilish—he used to say. But grandfather is gone, and so is Dulal.

Now, his grandson jots down the day’s purchases in a notebook that seems to reflect

the blood of the fish dripping down the tables into the water tanks under them.

I buy my usual Sunday stock—250 grams of Rohu and 250 grams of the silverfish

resembling Morella—a measly total of Rupees 220, and nod at Dulal’s grandson

—Aashi—there is no word for goodbye in Bangla; instead I tell him I will come (again).

I am already dreaming of marinating

the pieces in salt and turmeric

and frying them crisp in smoky mustard oil—

the simplest of recipes that has traveled down

from grandfather to me—in the same way that he did—from Burma

to Bangladesh to India—just like these fish.

Nani, I’ve now taken your shoes. Our feet
the same size & nothing else. Old & naked
foot, where I touched the electric estuary—
tender tubule lines rambling up & into
your tarpan heart, beating warm with the
rave of being a winning racehorse. Legs
that are better than I’ve ever known. I know
I’m an unfaithful alphabet. My wrung
English papers are in the laundry room, slack
warm sails that smell of the sea. Or, the wet,
humidity of holding my palms. I am the hoof
of us, recording every pain of every stone as it
trots on the nail, or the way we canter on it.
How muted my tantrum when you pointed
to me the wet gravestone of my other grandmother:
the unknowable hypsometry of raised & curved
letters that I ran my blind hands over & over.
What does it say? A rolling wave of unknowing.
Do you love me, master? All I know is English
I went back to my Mother’s childhood home
& banded light, the generator buzz deafening,
I practiced my Urdu in the bathroom with you
as I sat in the tub; only so long before an American
mermaid can stand without floating on into sea foam.
Where are we from sea level? How close to
the lost psalm written by our shared walks
& the rhythm made by my feet clopping in
your bathroom slippers? Nani, making triangles,
with your bare fingers you have fed me pistachio
rice pudding, the lush Farsi of Mughal courts,
had me swallow my Mother’s maiden name —
& in the wilds of myself I consider you everywhere
in the lines of Navajo sandstone, my breasts shaped
like the Arabic alphabet “noon,” “considerare,” sharing
a root with the word “sidus,” or star. How you
have held me in the gaze of the most patient eye,
painting shadow at the pace of a lunar mare.

the lines between us
never seem to dry.

nothing ever
straight forward about it

the way they coil around us
like barbed wire

that never sets itself
into concrete. suspended.

defunct. perverse.
so tempting

to cross
over and over again

like the river Styx
in search of lost love.

if only we could learn
to stop

looking back
for each other.

maybe one of us
will survive

long enough to leave
impressions without scars.

1. What do you know about silence?

Only the route home. Only the acre of bee
colony and the iron-carved path spiraling into
the giant's mouth. Yesterday I climbed eight
stories to reach the steel-knot rooftop and by
then all my flowers were gone. I want to say
something here about the inconquerability of
cities—not just this one, but all lifeforms.
What makes my blood different is the way I
think of the children only when I can see
them-otherwise, empty milk cartons and a
galaxy of lost love. Otherwise, the wildflowers
thrown the way they came: offshore and
hungry for the final laugh.

2. What is the last city you remember?

What makes my blood different is the way
that I got here. Hong Kong loved me before
she knew me and when she knew me I was
too young and too arrogant to pick up the
phone. I am only sorry for the twelve falcons
I knocked over to stand here. Saturday. Baba
calls to tell me about the new German 
invention that will take you from San 
Francisco to Los Angeles for only $9.99. For
$9.99, I once stepped in front of a camera for
an interview on my experience as a Chinese
exchange student, though I am barely Chinese
and not an exchange student. I am arrogant
only in who I trust, and when.

3. How have you ruined your home?

Tuesday. I burn off the back door and cook
the ash into a suitable dinner. I could become
a better citizen, but then who would be left to
speak for me? The only fear I will admit: the
hole in the earth at the end of The Lovely Bones
where all of the ugly things in the world go.
As a child I wished to live in a room the size
and shape of a blue whale, a room no one
could enter or exit. I know now where to find
the ugliest parts of the people that I love.
After the end of the world, the first thing I
will notice are the unplanted sunflowers, then
the unaired laundry.

4. Do you have anything to apologize for?

5. What has love done for you?

I retrace my path from the giant's mouth to
the house with the empty rooms. The table
set for dinner. The moon rising in plumes.
Later Hong Kong and I play house on the
railroad tracks: you be the wife and I'll be the
suitcase the dish rack the ugly carpet the
ornamental plates we bring out only when 
guests are over. I am arrogant only in the way
that I love, only in the suitcases I leave piled
on the dock, only in the cities I believe I
deserve. I climbed to the roof that night
because I bargained only for enough light to 
survive by or because I wanted to see the
stars. There is a beginning and an end to
everything and this is where it starts.

6. Tell me about the weight of your bones.

Do you know how long I waited for this? I
mean this body, I mean the drop of the falcon
into the sand gourd, just like in all the
cartoons. Cities are falling by the heartbeat
and I am testing my pulse against the
musk-window. I am waiting for the final drop
of the coffin at the end of The Lovely Bones, the
giving of body into earth-all bodies,
including mine, including yours. But there are
better questions to ask, like for how long
these wooden beams will hold, or how long 
before they come for us.

7. Who have you last betrayed?

Thursday. The storm arrives with a newspaper
headline clasped in its jaws. This is how I
know that I have lost. I am a monster only
when I steal every viable light source I find in 
the house. I am a monster only when the 
storm begs pastries off me-apple crumble, 
the kind it likes best. What makes my blood
different are the five days I spent crouched in
the rock before it split over the open palm of
a waterfall. Hong Kong calls to tell me that
the world could end right now and still she
would not be sorry. But I am not the thief 
banished from the sky-kingdom. I am
the city that loves everything it can never
touch.

8. What language do you trust in?

I'll preface with this: the only sun I know is
the one that hunted me down with no
weapons to spare. All the profanity I know in
Mandarin begins with mothers. So let's begin.
The house will still be a house after the peach
trees collapse and all we will have are these ice
picks growing sharpers with every collected
shadow. When we felled the giant we took
first his teeth, then the ribbons wound around
his waist. I've never known a city that could
forget me. I know nothing about this language
except how to speak it.

9. What remains of the ocean? 

A packet of red arrows. A pianist's hand and
all of Hong Kong's forgiveness. Which is to
say, I waited too long to get here. Already, a
field of unpicked peaches. The city as
impossible as it looks. Hong Kong. I am
waiting for the plaster ceiling to collapse and
you are saying all the horrible things: that you
will mend the bee colony and save the rooftop
wildflowers from the city's thievery, that you
will chase the children out of the ocean and 
into the stone alcove that I once dreamed
would hold our gourd of falcon and song, that
you will leave nothing to mourn except the
city and the snow that is falling, once again,
before the iron-wrecked house.

10. Do you have anything to apologize for?

Only for the way that I got here. Only for the
switch of light I borrowed from the old
country. Only for this blood, these hands.

A:
I reside in an abstract dimension where colors make no mention, but are as loud as the silence of a grave. Sounds come through in shades of black and gray. Where night is day and every day is always the same day.

B:
I reside in purgatory awaiting judgment. A seven-level structure, seven stories of nothing. Where ignorance reigns like a vicious monsoon and doom is a thunderous lightning spark. But to the inhabitants here, it is no more than an amusement park. Where the hopes for tomorrow are borrowed to purchase cotton candy dreams, and the carousel of intelligence spins into a roller coaster of sorrow for wishing in the make-believe.

C:
I reside where life goes to hide. Where I stay up all night in a dream state and wait for a resurrection. Trying to resuscitate death itself in order to feel alive. So I hold my breath and breathe through my mind. I try to envision my mission before I make a final transition into the outer limits. What if they are just another prison of infinite indecision?

A:
So I stay up all night and reside in my life. Analyzing my strife and plotting an escape from fate. I repeat the insomniac sleep of the dead until it is later than late.

B:
I am undead, dressed in clothes of emotion and wandering aimlessly in a 12- by 7-foot casket. Never moving. Never going. Only growing.

C:
Growing not in height, but in the dreadful delight that soon they will turn on the lights and I will see that I am not alone. Hordes of men roam this abstract dimension that I call purgatory—due to the words above my cell that read…

ALL:
“This is where life goes to hide.”

A:
I am finally allowed to close my eyes and sleep, while listening to my own personal lullaby.

B:
A lullaby of men in prison greens and guards with those heavy keys.

C:
Alone and far from home, there is no one to notice that I’m gone.
No more dreams of returning to a love who’s been lost all along.

A:
No hopes of mending a life that was torn. Just long sleepless nights that go on and go on and go on.

B:
This is what keeps me up at night…

C:
And allows me to sleep all day long.

three Novembers ago we found a comic that  told  us if you want to say thank you,  don’t say sorry.  I  have held my breath ever since. the first time I got high I thought we were one person in two bodies. I found, behind my eyelids, a small sun & trees that sighed at the speed of my heartbeat. I thought the whole universe was one being in many bodies. coming down was relieving & quite lonely.  when I  get like this I think of us holding hands on a park bench  seventy years  from  now  &  feel  much  lonelier. your favourite trick to reassure me was to say the universe is expiring in a slow heat death. some things we can be certain of at least. I read somewhere that elephants find humans cute. I’ll be sorry if I discover this fact is just a pseudoscience myth. I mean, I’ll be thankful to know the truth.  I  am thankful to know that when trees breathe, they clean the sky. my own existence is not nearly as necessary. when I get  lonely  I  think of your  beard  & how by the end it reminded me of him. how it became impossible to let you touch me. I know this  is  unhelpful.  forgive   me.  some  things   warrant at least an apology. I read somewhere that elephants have excellent memories. they build graves from expiring earth & I’m sorry about that too. how it means they remember their dead long enough to bury. I know wanting to forget.  I know being  grateful I couldn’t.


Dear Axxel Xiong,

You’re growing up fine
on this special day.
Happy birthday.
You’re becoming quite the handsome kid
with your fuzzy black glossed hair, blushed dimpled cheeks
and dark eyebrows. Don’t forget that barely
noticeable mole under your left eye.

You’re three now
and I apologize for failing
To send you a two dollar birthday card.
Or a call, a new Optimus Prime toy, or a brief visit.
I apologize for being such a lousy father.

The pictures I have of you in my mind,
can I say you look just like your mother?
Your cleft lip
is all better now, thanks to her.
Look! Now we both
Have scars on our lips.
Your pale skin, definitely hers.
Your freckles, definitely hers.

Please feel lucky,
Asians don’t ever get freckles and someday
a kind young woman is going to go
crazy over them and find them lovely.

In my dreams we played tickle monster and baby
helicopter until we passed out on the kitchen floor.
Our picture perfect play day.

In my dreams is where you’ll stay because you’re
only a dream, a wish, and nothing more.

In my dreams, will I see you again? Someday? Maybe?
Goodbye for now, my make believe son, it’s time
for “daddy” to wake up now only to wish I never said yes
for that abortion.

Love, Dao Xiong

There is no movement
each maple and golden locust limb weighs
heavy with coverings of Christian
white snow concealing
impurities of earthen made bark,
while redemption expels
layers of manmade sin multiplying
legends of grace,
holy grace, sustaining anemic Anishinaabe
bodies inside stone penitentiaries.

as each night beckons, so too her demons
iridescent like seduction
in unwanted lands
obscuring her still rivers of frozen purity—

This is her biboon.

There are no angels on
this porcelain figurine shelf.
Only hardened clay far removed
from her earthen home.
Rudimentary remains
of divine roots dislocate
when you hold her
just right
under a setting sun,
late in dagwaagin.

Gauwiin,

angels vacated
their atmosphere moons back,
before climate change
needed an Ojibwe translation.

In the dream my mother is a window.
Her glass reflects my young faced father
drinking Coca Cola beneath the summer sun.
I pull up a chair, eat popcorn at the cinema
where the movie family is honey skinned
and buys chamomile in their yogurt.
When my father first came to the states
he ate KFC three days a week, a luxury
he relished in until the doctor noted
his cholesterol. When my cousin in China
asks me what America is like I think culture
is a funny thing. My mother tells stories
about the first time she encountered
canned bread a la Pillsbury and overt
extroversion. Her white friends find this
delightful. Canned bread! Extroversion!
Their teeth gleam like fresh caviar.
My cousin wants to talk about Beyonce
and I am embarrassed when I have little
to say. What do you like he tries again
and I think of landscape, the early fog
ridden hills of San Francisco when eucalyptus
unfurl like children waking to the light.
Watching the trees, I say, and reading.
He looks disappointed so I think
of the most American thing I do—
I’m learning to be at peace with the spiders.
It’s one of the harder things I’ve had to do.

Brief adventure concludes more quickly than we imagine. We each lie in a corner. We each bear a name. We each name because we want sex safely. Stand anywhere and still need one more person. Stand anywhere and still get mistaken for another person. Where will I stand if not bearing on my body a face? I am vegetarian. So many years ago I lived alone by the shores of the Pacific.

you open the door in the very depths of your body a burnt forest a feral bird to greet me

skin blindness has made us wander among choices

place your hand on my hand as someone preparing to lose their voice before the cruelty of darkness

we without birthsoil

down there, where the road slopes and history begins from simple dreams of sea, we will produce for life schools of small transparent fish

whether it’s called a game or reconciliation with reality, the essence of our exile does not change

i am me am i am not me

The question of ‘why’ marks the point where poetry ends and metaphysics begins.

The two poems appear before my eyes now as independent beings; though they may traverse the same earth and breathe the same air as me, in another sense, they are with their own life: private, completely different from mine. No longer does that poet-poem relationship exist in me. The pregnancy comes to term, the poem enters its life and immediately the poet dies. With the flesh and blood attachment between poet and poem severed, all that’s left is an immense distance between me and an other. And so, whenever an author rereads their own work, they read as an outsider, a reader, a critic.

To answer the question of ‘why’ I am immediately set on a journey of rediscovering the poem, rediscovering myself.


This is absolutely a question of the relationship between a person and a language, between me and Vietnamese. When I speak, I become the Việt utterance—the inseparable union of one. Just as when breathing, I and my breath are one. To observe the breath—to observe the exhale and the inhale as detached objects—is really to simulate an exercise that can only be truly practiced in a Buddhist monastery. And so by acting as a monk, I examine my relationship with the Vietnamese language. I examine my self and my world.

And what do I see in these two poems?

A separation. A fracture, a rupture. A displacement, a loss. A root or many roots that have been pulled up from darkness.

The amorous relationship between anh & em [me & you, affectionately] now is seen as a bare relationship between two independent individuals tôi & em [I, detached, & you]. Love is no longer the sacred fire warming the loneliness of two hearts but is permeated with the smell of a suspicion. Even intimate lovemaking is devoid of physical pleasure and turns into miserable sex. The undulations, the wobbling back and forth between extremes: consumerism and individualism, ennui and arousal. The world has lost its magic; the Promised Land has become a place of captivity and exile; people must live a lifetime in the darkness of exile both from their own selves and their fellow creatures.

I am me and at the same time no longer me. I live with the face of an other.

People not only lose/ are deprived of their personal voice but at the same time, lose/ are deprived of their collective voice. Language, as such, no longer maintains the role of bridging a connection across two sides of a chasm; the communion has corroded and all that’s left is a frigid existence, an opposition between tôi & em [I, detached, & you], between chúng tôi & các anh [us, exclusive, & them, male].

And yet despite that separation, the miseries and sufferings have also invisibly linked people together. Workers of the world, unite! at some point transforms into a different kind of summoning: Desperate souls of the world, unite! We without birthsoil: no longer the doleful call of an individual or the wound of a single being uprooted from their home, rather, a collective tragedy of chúng ta [ours, inclusive]. Within the pronoun system of address among Việt people, there is no distinct pronoun to call or speak about quê hương [birthsoil]. It is usually conflated with the Mother, but it must be a destitute and resigned mother. What pronoun would you use to call your birthsoil? I would call it a haunting.

The history of Việt Nam is a history of separation, of mistrust and loss. Of tears. Of brokenness. Of exile.

But one day the drifting children of the sea will come back, will mend the fragments, will light a rainbow for the future of an ocean.

Who’s drawing up the water inside your body?

Who’s having sex inside your body?

Outside the window a man’s and a woman’s shoes
plop plop plop plop down

(Did you know that
our existence is lumped together by the sound of our weeping?)

Who’s playing the pipe organ inside you?

Who’s shivering in the mud inside you?

Who’s heaving up water beneath the rock layers inside you?

(The woman silently walking on the roof of a certain century
cradles her pregnant belly
and rests for a moment on the terrace

The lenses made of tears caress the window)

When you crawled out of my body
another creature slipped into me and sat in your place
an I, who nobody has heard of, not even you
an I, who I’ve never heard of but has become me
because of you

My hand that held the rice and spooned it into your mouth
was it a gentle human hand, or black-furred
long-clawed like a she-wolf’s?
My head that spoke to you about life
was it soft and round, or hard and horned?

My lips that leaned forward to kiss you
did they smell—of blood or onion?
My heart that broke and took pity on you
could you see its shape then—a heart or a dagger?

You know it’s useless to explain yourself
to deny the truth or to ask for forgiveness
Why do we separate the human from the animal, you ask
when you can’t live without either of them.

I.

When you’re taken from you,
who will be you?

Though everyone still sees you
buying the birthday cake from the bakery
choosing flowers in the florist
scaling carp in the local market
crossing the street at a red light
browsing in the magazine corner
staring at the clothes in the window display
sitting alone at the park.

You say, “Hey, it’s X’s mother, not me.”

II.

When you’re taken from you
who will look for you?

Your daughter sobs
your husband grouches
your lover wails
your mother prays
your father ponders in the corner
your sister calls out your name
your kid brother turns to stone

You say, “Oh, they don’t know I’m missing
since I’m always home.”

The shaman wore long white sleeves rippling &
Minuscule in the bone-dry distance.
I jerked & righted the wheel
Plying invisible waves of hot sea
Always a moment just before the immediate future.

These warped slurs of air made of decades, centuries, a few
Seconds, who knows how speed/time/thermodynamics work when you’re
seated in air-
Conditioned comfort.
In my reverie, soon I forgot
I should have crashed into the first shining spirit hours before.
The mind itself a wobbly mirage on an endless road laid out before you.
Past midnight,
Momentarily dozing at seventy-nine miles per hour,
A second shaman’s white
Sleeves fluttered far ahead in the headlights, this one
Scattering yellow tulips from a basket like cake frosting on the fillet of asphalt.
A third wearing red
Scallop shells of grief
Still favors my raw primary years in sleep—
Always asking hoarsely for a new face to wear to parties, church, shopping
malls, funerals.

Whatever age I am right now,
Whatever degree of luminosity
In a dream or memory I have not yet had,
Let me say:
I will always acknowledge & race toward your shipwrecked souls—

Far beyond the blood vessels behind my lids,
Past even those frightening cacti of a million cochleas,
Swooshed into that amniotic zone
Where once we all soared, naked & glowing.

Ten thousand gods in the fields midblossom.
Overhead screeches a finned metal giant slithering
Its fast shadow over concrete straight through us like a bar-code scanner.

Illumined on a checkpoint screen, I watch a
Winged fetus in ultrasound. But it’s only purple-
Striped socks, a hair dryer, six wallpaper samples.

Midmorning, daylight saving has a few confused.
Others smile or frown into the little black pools of their phones.
Palms and pink silk flowers along the moving concourse stand artificially
at ease.

Midflight, dozing and dreaming, a pagan
Dance foregrounds a molten harvest moon
While evil trots a racehorse, combing its hair.

Antelopes plant plum trees with a hooked Bronze Age tool.
Come autumn, we won’t ever arrive at the lighthouse.
Of course, we do finally scrape ashore. All winter

A dense figure on a trampoline flashes gang signs
By the village’s bustling well. Near dead,
The fresh pulp of a far sawmill suddenly awakens my blind

Grandfather and four-year-old father,
Midforest, midblizzard. For a long time
After the plane lands and deboards

Nothing memorable happens.

There were a lot of Jinju kisaeng,
but I’ve been told our family didn’t have any.
The Jinju kisaeng who lived under the skirts of Mt. Jiri have the longest history,
but our family had only chaste women. No kisaeng.
When Father reads from the family register
he lists nobles and scholars. No peasants, slaves, or merchants.
One afternoon we watched the Jinjukyobang shaman dance in the Chokseoknu pavillion.
I met eyes with a woman performing a sword dance.
She was wearing socks and
traditional and brightly colored cloth covered her hands.

How did we not have any kisaeng in our family?
That we didn’t have a government slave aunt who plucked a gayakeum with a fluffed heart when the moon rose by the window,
a grandmother who killed herself because she didn’t like attending to drinking parties,
a beautiful slave girl mother,
an uncle who crossed rivers to peddle colorful silk,
or a peasant grandfather who pulled out his sword because of contempt and scorn
is so disappointing.
How did we have an ancestor that saved the country every time we faced an insurrection,
but not a single daughter who was sold off to be a kisaeng?
It’s depressing.

So where did the kisaeng in my mind come from?
Tonight by the river, I want to be an inspiration.
What to do with my decadence? My decadence would sell my soul for a single line of a poem.
Which star is that gene stuck to? My adult entertainment, sword dancing every night,
I’m no different than a physical whore strapped to the indenturement of a private loan.

I’m a kisaeng. But I’m not a girl sold off for her sick mother. I’m a voluntarily obscene and debauched emotional whore. I wake up with the feeling of having done it, so I puke and drink and do it again. I shake my ruffled hair like a person coming to save the mood of a party. In a mess, I write something.

I walk the south side of the Jinju river. Tonight is the Yu-deung festival. Drunk people at the night market talk at me. National flags painted on paper lamps float above. They fall into the river and get tangled up. Lights float on the filthy breaths of people who spill out this country market. They give life to the night.

Disheveled and sleepy, I pull out my pen and bite. Unaware ink is dripping from my lips, I sit by the riverside and write something. I sob. I’m obsessed with the lines I write. I’m a madwoman who finally believes she is bound to poetry.

The devil appears. He pulls down his pants in front of my eyes.
I’ll give you a line if you give me a suck.
Is he really the devil? Even if he is, I will suck and suck and suck and suck and suck.
I sleep and wake and walk outside. Without desperation, without shame,
I bite a big pen and suck until poetry comes.
I’m an emotion slut.
When I say I’m a poet
I feel like I’m confessing I’m a whore.
No one in our family sold themselves, Father said,
We never had blood like you.
I stroke my pen and shake violently.
I feel like an old filthy whore on a full-moon night when the country festival is booming.
I’m dancing, a sword in each hand.

I close my eyes when she enters the scene.
She only wins if I don’t watch.
When the dress rehearsal is over
it means it’s time for me to go.

But today feels different.
Should I stay and watch the match?

The figure skating queen takes the ice.
The dancing queen is in the Kollatech. (The Secret Sunshine Aunt that left the Secret Sunshine river came back to Mushincheonga and started singing again. She puts on makeup like a 60 year old widow puts on a disguise. Her ass made strong in leggings shakes to the music while she sings. What a sight! The old people’s Kollatech where seniors pay a two dollar entry fee and hang about all day looks like an old industrial warehouse. People make eyes at each other and go to motels and parks to have sex. They stomp their feet weirdly. But it’s not dancing or disco. What the fuck? Fever rises in their genitals like horny pigs sensing death at the slaughterhouse. Why did you come here when you didn’t have to? Did mommy tell you to go have a look? What’s up with your clothes? You’re like a kid with old people taste. [Omission] self-described dancing queen.)

I’m like Borges dictating a story;
I write myself into the fiction
whether you see me or not.
Only when what you think is true disappears
does actual truth emerge
because there is nothing behind the facade.

When Kim Yuna is skating
I darken like Stockholm at three in the afternoon.
I make a phone call from an alley in Gamlastan, old-town Stockholm, in the middle of a snowstorm.
I deliver the lines like I’m reading from a teleprompter.
I can’t write new things forever.

The show goes on. There are a lot of candles.
Kim Yuna puts them out by blowing her breath toward me.
Maewol Dong acts the part of Kim Siseup and
Play the play! Alfred Nobel does his best Nobel.
I do a show in a Sweden forest. (At a party-store in front of Hongdae I bought a silver mask for three dollars. The cheering crowd mistakes it for a fancy Italian mask. As soon as I cover my face I forget myself like I have a mental illness. [omission].)

Kim Yuna wants to be Kim Yuna.
Bare fist is the antonym of closed fist.
A naked face is not a real face.

Candles line the streets of Stockholm during the Christmas season.
I look at the reflection of myself in a store window.
Beside a glass jar filled with anise candy
I’m single layered.
There is no me inside me.

I want to rip you apart with my teeth. I want to tear you to death on this speeding subway. Hey, you groping, hey, hey, hands off! Ripping, I’ll shred any second. I want to scream, throw a fit, but I take my hand and push deep into my gut. Breathe. Deep. Don’t fucking touch me. I said stop leaning on me. Driving me nuts, what the fuck? My leather’s pulled taut, a fox or a wolf, something’s about to pop.  Flowing blood like a lunar halo, bloodstains that bleed through blue sheets, you think that’s instinct? Because of the full moon? Shut your mouth. Truth speaking woman, if you know the truth, keep it to yourself. This is the gospel of filthy humans. Periodic bleeding. Stomach cramps. I won’t stop. I’m complicated as hell, but people try and try to get inside. I’m an insider, me. Not an outsider. You mumble even in your sleep. Sudden hemorrhaging. Blood flowing. A world with a big door. Closing, opening, repeat, repeat. A wheel that stops and stops as it turns. I need a new route, need to get out. I need a heavy duty maxi pad. What to do with this passed-out-fucker? With his hand in my coat, this fucker is talking in his sleep like he’s reading a scribbled letter. I want to kill the motherfucker. But what if he’s my lover? If only I could pick him up by the back of his neck with my teeth. I would leap off this train and sprint over the tracks. I would head to the darkest part of the night, my wild hair flapping. If only I could go to the sandy beach on the red coast, moonlit. There, beside the cool well that flows, I would lay him down. If only.

This granny peddling Aori apples under a cherry tree,
did she doze off? Is she dead?
Crouching, the crack of her ass
almost touching the grass
flashes for a second
like a single vein of a leaf on a withered bush.
You buy it. You don’t buy it. Whatever.

With nowhere to go
I ride the bus.
Number 111 to Hannae Street
has just one route.
You ride it. You don’t ride it. Whatever.

I have this hobby where I go to the back of the bus
and lean and stare out the window
until I fall into a sleep so deep I don’t breathe.

I get off the bus in downtown Shinuiju.
I hold a bathing suit stuffed in a black plastic bag and wait.
A man approaches, waving.
His faint face has spreading skin.
The sun licks him with its tongue.

I guess we’re a pretty mundane couple, the kind
that bashfully, awkwardly
hugs each other at the public pool.

I wake up, open my eyes
and the aura disappears.
A hopeless escape attempt, the green
Aori apple rolls toward the driver of the bus.
Awake, I am Desdemona, Patzzi, Annabelle Lee, the Princess Abandoned.
Reality is an exceptional time without dreams.
The smell of drying peppers blows in
from a vanished mill.

The table is a tool. The table is an object, and a place.
The table is lying still and standing tall both at once.
What goes with the table? A chair or a large scroll
of paper. What goes with the table is what needs
the table. Without the table you are burning your
fingers. Without the table you are burning money
in the park. The opposite of the table is the inverse
of the table. Vases crashing to the floor. Arms falling.
The opposite of the table is no table, a room with
a higher ceiling, a lower floor, musical chairs, and
a sense of disorder. The people at the table are just
spinning around themselves. What you bring
to the table is just what you bring and keep in your
bag where it embarrasses you privately. The table
gives you a sense of up and down. Your hands go on
the table. Your feet go under, with the dog, and
the other feet. Under the table are wars. If you lie
on the table, you subject the table to a terrible guilt.
It is no longer a table people can eat on. If you stand
next to the table, the table senses its mortality. When
the table sleeps on its stomach, you feel very afraid.
The table is your starting point, and thank god the table’s
not the floor. Clap with one hand and the table. Keep
clapping. The table separates heaven and hell. Unknown
and unknown. In a room, the table is where life happens.
Palms facing down and up, touching; each player
advancing, retreating; the whole team; apples
and pears touching; sweet smoke. Even in a large room.

A SPIDER

 

made

 

this

 

 

It hadn’t been

 

 

damaged

 

 

and if it had been,

 

 

it was built back

 

 

over night

 

Over and over

 

from some small

 

dark pit,

 

 

it spun out

 

a whole world

 

 

for itself

 

 

Nothing

 

could come close

 

and even in its brevity

 

 

it will outlast

 

our dim little buildings

God is bilingual, bitch!
God is bilingual, trilingual, omnilingual
[This is 
especially at the airport and mall 。 [ American Air American Air ]

Don’t tell us to speak not this way I am
to speak the way I am.

If you want to speak, speak just a bit louder. Let me listen. Say it again, again.

[Scene: my mother leaves the scene, leaves me in stand-off
with the lady in the shoe store. Americans don't like when we speak Mandarin,
she whispers American even in American Air and so I say
this time, I’ll stay, in this new director’s cut in which
I am the director –

CUT. Too late & Scene. She leaves with her mother, leaves
the lady triumphant. Leaves her mother’s mouth behind,
a warm, gaping hole shrinking with shame into the floor.]

Let me listen. Say it again, goodbye.

so
God is a bilingual bitch.

Made a world swallow its split mouth so slow we have to
drag our feet in its spittle. Aliens are sad static dustbunnies with no ears
and too much hair. Tower of Babel is a gaggle of blond babes
being loudly welcomed into Asia, an Instagram post of shiny,
shiny teeth.

I am careful with my words unless they are not in English,
am I not? 
My mother is careful with her words only when they are in English.

Somewhere in the Nevada desert there is  a colony of  colonized happy  aliens who  then
colonize the floor with their dangerous, dusty patterns that no one knows what each one
means  but they manage to make a little home that  is  always  under  observation  ,  so   be careful! The government reports they are extremely content but that is  the quota,  folks,
erase, and we say okay, thank you for your time.

And mean it; a screech of joy
so sharp make a bow.

Here, the mangled text that will
become a poem — loose language —

blueprint for a reckoning.
Fuck a philology. Joy

is the imperfect sentence.
Syntax gone wrong and proudly:

burned dish I eat anyway,
smiling. I say it and

mean it, just as much. I have
always wanted to grow up

to be wind; impermanent,
yet ever-present – paired with

a sunset to die for. The
right gust at the right time was

all Mama ever needed
to see a sign from God. What

is winter to the breeze? A
flood to the sea? Once, I was

but a drop in still water,
and I have made my peace with

that. What is more ahha than this
moment? I make Naguib,

darker than earth, and it lasts
the whole day. He reads my cup,

says he sees great in my
future. I say: I have kept

the secret safe under my
tongue where no uninvited

hand may snatch it at night. This
is how we’ve survived.

i have slowly been consuming
the last traces of my mother

i hold the gurgling maw
of the vacuum as it swallows

tawny strands of hair &
dust on hardwood floor

today i read that household
dust is mostly skin

as if to say outside dust
is stranger or more spectacular

as if to say i am watching
this monster tear into

my mother again & again
& calling it “being productive”

my teeth wearing themselves
down on leftovers: rice & soup & barley

picturing my mother stooped
over the stove bloodletting

when she was here
i couldn’t wait for her to go

now i sit alone in the freezer
& eat everything

without breathing
oh i eat it all


My father was always the magician,
not I. One swift pull and
the silk streamers would spill
from his mouth, flooding the floor.
The chains always broke. The cage always
vanished. The canary always returned,
chirping, from the dead.

At nineteen the magic came calling.
At the paintball park I swallowed a bullet
and spat it out whole. During dinner
the knife fell through my palm,
tumbling into the curry.
Mama soaked the drops up with a dishrag
until it squeaked.

The fifth time after I made my
cabinet escape, Mama turned it into
plywood. Said, this country is no place
for magic. Tricks do not fill empty bowls
with rice, only rabbits. Said, you are not
Houdini. You will not come back
alive.

But the pennies keep turning up
under my tongue. Everything I eat
tastes like rust. My skin won’t stop
humming. All my rings have turned
into links. Gingerly, I pluck the coins out
and coax them into tiny molten suns.
They flood the floor with light.

No. 8 Park Place, Manhattan, November 1834
 
The merchant brothers who brought me here,
Freddy and Nate Carne, knew I’d make
it rain for them. In their eyes I was a hothouse
flower, a goddess of $$$$$$$$$$$$$$.
They decorated me with precious imports—
baubles, yellow pantalettes, damasks—
then placed me in a diorama of snuff boxes
and silk. I was a breathing mannequin
on my brocade throne. I couldn’t believe how
many people paid to see me. Banknotes
dropped, jawbones dropped, and it was truly
unnerving, to watch the white people
stare at me, mouths twitching in awe or pity,
or both. The men looked at my little
feet. The women, at my regalia. They wanted
to see my feet uncovered, can you believe
the nerve? The podiatrists the reporters, begged
for a glimpse. At the men, I snickered.
At the women, I smiled They swooned, blushed,
as if they swallowed Sichuan peppercorns.
Their corsets were killing them
Heavens! A grotesquerie, their spines
all crooked in their skeletons. I raised my brows
ensconced in my civilized box.
I counted the days with my abacus
Look, I was fucking
bored. Was I the animal here? Or were they?
On my throne in lonely New York, I presaged
my own descent. It began with a tongue, English
creature, that curled its way into my mouth.
They called me the Celestial Princess. I wanted
them to bow down. So they did—they fell
at my feet in penance. Or worship. A vernissage
of my ancestors across my face. A slap.

I ate myself out of womb, slurped
my umbilical cord like a noodle.
I was born barren
bottomed like a bowl, so hollow I held
a week’s worth of rain to spend on
trees, dead things. Mother wore her stillborns
like a string wears beads: fetal heads
the color & size of cocktail onions.
I imagined sucking them
one by one. I spent all
my pennies on jawbreakers,
thought the red flavor was blood
until I bled. My mother
grieved each child longer
than it lived in her.
When I was born, my father
said he was coming
inside another man’s
wife. A waitress at his restaurant, she
wrapped spring rolls so tight they birthed
lettuce, beefbits, jicama.
My father the frycook, his father
the same. Their hands so oiled
everything they touched
flamed. Like Midas if Midas
loved fire not gold. My mother burned
out years ago. My brother’s still
kindling, his girlfriends all
white & the same type
of arson. When I was born
my father came
like he wanted me. I ate his sex
euphemisms: oven loading, pie
holing, a watched pot is like
a watched woman: never coming
to a boil. In every mirror, I am a double
ended wick. A match to my mouth
& ass. No smoke without a fire
to feed. No daughter
without a dad to knead, to beat
into batter & fry
gold with my touch.

Did you take my mother’s hand or ghost
the altar in her bedroom first? Was the ghost

your first child or your only? Had you left
something behind when she lost or did a ghost

replace the death? How do you spell my name?
What do I look like in the winter does it ghost-

shake your heart how much I seem shedding of
brown & then, remember who gave me. I asked

[ ] ghost
My name has 2 J’s in English and no sound
for my father. Do you think he run all day so to look a ghost?

these leaves are not from in here
they are nothing like the towering pine
that prickles crevices into my sky with its
decaying and sullen branches

these leaves are robust & hearty still
sneaking their way onto a stage
of concrete like renegade
prima donnas at burlesque
they dance and flicker
bare glimpses of saffron & sepia
blow kisses from lips a tint of rouge
i am certain
no man can recreate

these leaves must be
the ones you saw each day
as you sat close by painting
they huddled together, didn’t they
and danced harmoniously
as they fanned rainbows into your sky
i create a story in my mind of how
you must’ve smiled and pressed
those rose kissed cheeks toward your eyes

but your leaves are changing in here
as all the fallen do
i watch as one little ballerina races by
unable to keep pace
she collides into a steel wall
half her body in my company
half her body reaching for you

her slippers tear in the struggle
i whisper to her you’re still beautiful
and tell her you should go
she twirls her head blushing
then exposes her drying heart towards me

she waits for me to come for her
she waits for us
to save each other

I thought I could hone my mind until
intellect and emotion were
a single organ. The way a snake’s motion
comes from the musculature
of its entire body, and when it moves
there is no part of it that
has not moved.
I wanted to make you
something beautiful. As if I could
strike a branch against a word and make it
break into water: each syllable round,
and clenching, and then letting go finally
what it sought to claim.

In year twenty of the Republic of Mercy there came to be built
a glass-bottomed boat that could fit half the people

of the nation, exactly half. In it you could
travel, go places, see fish in their many-finned splendor.

Above: a large wood dome. Flat, dark,
the bodies fitted into each space like coins in a slot.

I took the boat for many rotations, traveled in my sleep,
marveled at the ingenuity of the burrs that turned,

always propelling the thing forward, not leaving us to rest.
Below: the infinite world,

all its ligaments, all its creatures.

OPEN GATE ONE step in

put your keys and your ID on the table walk through
the machine whoops

take your belt off try again

it smells in there by the way OK GATE TWO

grab your things

come in I even set up fans and everything but man it’s awful like
a bunch of ’em forgot to shower

set your things down on the counter sit down

take off your shoes
and socks show me your feet

turn your shoes upside down and knock ’em together

you staying with family
or somethin’? stand up lift your tongue say Ahhhh

turn around lift
your hair you come a long way

pull out your pockets

inmates
they get three meals
and a roof and a bed

and me I get paid I been here twenty-one years

I get seniority
on holidays this year I got Christmas
and Thanksgiving

I hope I get out on time today ready

grab your ID
and locker key I ain’t kiddin’

it’s awful in there OPEN GATE TWO

I been holdin’ my breath all day step out

spread your legs
arms out like a airplane

what I don’t get is why
you choose to come here

God’s as lazy as we are and produced humans on an assembly line
I could find my other half anywhere
they’re as standardized as goods made in a factory,
a marriage gives rise to thorns of resentment, from noon to sunset
you live among the thorns, the pain is hard to bear, thinking of the pretty girl in the mirror
thinking of bone diseases, thinking of the conventions of Chinese medicine
you hear death’s name, and it’s like a piece of steel
inlayed in your bones, you can’t afford to be sick,
a butterfly flapping its wings inside a 3000-degree boiler
you’ll think it was a beast in a past life
running across an African savanna, but your disease started with the beast
of the machine, from levers to screws, from blueprints to calipers
from loneliness to a lost youth, it smells of hardware factory tools
and you’re nothing but a lump of iron, thinking of words that have to do with iron
like sheen, iron oxide, cast iron, steel, thinking of its sharpness
and the pain it causes as it pricks the body, thinking of its enormous
spindles, pulverizing a dream into powder, thinking of its steel needle
sewing up a wound, and if you need
to emerge from love in the midst of labor laws, smearing bread with butter
in the midst of hope, these nighttime machines at 11:14pm
these thoughts wriggle like fish as she huddles between the calipers
and there is a different world outside, with its songs of debauchery

A lion would have trouble reaching the tip of a thought of steel
a steel monster has her by the throat, and in its bones
are violent rain and thunder, heartfelt fantasies, and the iron turns from black to red
turns cold and dusty like frost in my stomach
or it installs itself in the gears or levers or pulleys of the era
we need an energy-saving era, but all the inferior goods
are turned into a symbol of iron by my abandoned organs, it was once
a nostalgic spring equinox, stove fires lit the many metaphors and symbols
you made genitals out of steel, made them hard
the basis of Chinese medicine is the moon, waxing and waning
you cut patterns of a cross, a sun, a penis at your cutting machine
and the thunder brings silver wings across the sky, steel has its own
mouth and taste, it must use sliding calipers or a compass to calibrate
the hunger of this era, the officials are anxious to learn, the poor are used to crying
the countryside has learned to be polluted, the city is being demolished
torn down, demolished, torn down
our diminishing bodies feel the unformed future
and his designs depart from realism, the Romantics
start to feed on illusion, our futures get better and better, just keep on
signing real contracts with blind men, he imagines plums on the southern mountains
and he tells us that the eggs in his hands are rocks
time seems set apart from the Four Modernizations of the ‘80s
I still haven’t made it to the 21st century’s low slope of prosperity
the mountains are so high, but the body rots, and how many years will it take
to reach utopia, I pity myself as I age
unable to squeeze onto communism’s last train
but living in a scorching workshop in a sweat and blood factory, and there’s only one
autumn cicada ready to cast off its shell, unnamable, unsummonable, impassable,
trustworthy time, ideal sunlight, an obscure silent future
beside the new century is a pile of machine-cut trash and social stages
that came too late to complete, time begins to defect
it laughs at our memories and enthusiasm as they slip away, and you don’t stop your praises
nothing can absorb more than empty time
I long for the past, twenty years of a turned loom spins a classic thread
the needle of the Great Leap Forward sewed the clothes of reform and opening up,
the bureaucrats’ livers turn black, but they’re black enough already
so much has been destroyed, what’s left is an unbroken eulogy
oh, these goddamn soft bones, he always planned to use
wings of lies to step on the moon, the poor man, so servile
I’m accustomed to breaking iron, polishing it, drilling holes, creating the exterior
of this era, arranging my fate on top of pieces of ironware
a grand banquet requires worry as alcohol, poverty as food
what does this world have to offer me aside from grief, what else
can console us, living these difficult lives…..

The reality is princes and party bosses, tax collectors and organizations, on rainy days
they hold meetings to discuss the country’s yin and yang, the roads, ideology, how there’s a need
for more email attachments and ordinances, how trees need steel altars, the moon will be reborn
in water, these guesses should be rewarded, its bewitching passwords comes from Grave-Sweeping Day
the powers of the elders, its cheekbones are too high, her fate is too terrible, her poetry
is too good, leaving goals that are too hard, stabbing into this soft era
in her last life she was a phoenix, reborn as a lion, and the steel is too black
the isms too many, leaving her shapely body to surrender to the world, together with the night
appearing, intersecting, coinciding, and they have identical faces
it already can’t return to the prairie, its definition is expanding, extending
the leftover seeds from Grain Rain Day to bring you good luck
morality is fragile, its body is skewered on steel shamelessness, the spiders spin webs
the moths leap to flame, I can’t avoid the building’s lean, its arrogant expression
and the remaining warmth of Naturalism’s adherents, they feel fine but have lost confidence
still sunk in the self-pitying elegant scenery of the past, she comes from the Sichuan countryside
the hometown of milkvetch, returning from forests to steel, bleak heart filled with ivy
polishing poetry between machines, molding it with iron and blueprints, so life is
this toil, the burning heat of the hardware factory workshop, electric saws and steel hammers, the sago palms on the windowsill, the palms outside
traditional woods, they’re formed
into frames, strips, shapes, like ancient doctrines
you hold tight to Japanese silk roses, German gears, imitation calipers, it’s tragic, this imitation factory
starts to produce counterfeit boxes and lids, they’re like coffin after coffin, filled with my soul
they’re independent from your body and heart, they hold endless secrets
the draftsmen sink into lines, the molders craft by appearance,
statisticians compute numbers, bosses calculate profits, while I do overtime overnight
and the moon in the window only lights up my dreams, the quality inspector stamps in red
signs her name and adds her number, I face the cold steel and the unresponsive vastness
memory lies in waste like the development zones, gazing at ancient temples surrounded by factories
there are some deserted old ways that seem like ruins or relics, the air shakes the scent of hemp
I write this line on the back of graph paper, and the shaking will be passed
from the paper to the flesh, if I still need to explain, I get used to abstractions and comfortable seats along with the production supervisor
she has a tongue like fine iron wire, twisting around order forms and customers, the overhead lights
illuminate my doctrines and notations, and the iron pincers and knives head my way, she flips the switch
and turns on disease, and the iron on the machine is polished, rounded, squared, corrugated, left
or right, oh, I’m a loyal worker, the gears catch as they turn, and the iron bars turn
into toys, VCDs, the silent iron will be given a rare long journey
the thread-cutter thrusts out a crablike pincer, grabbing onto Confucius’s poetry, thoughts, and profits,
grains of life’s original quiet, lifting toward the shady places like the production supervisor’s skirt, and all night the lamp
lights up a blueprint for the future, oh, these threads are fairly simple, these doctrines have some mistakes
I open the valve to life, this postmodern art, what do springtime’s dark ghosts need
the iron is forged, its wet silhouette blooms in the iron webbing, it wears
a black iron coat, carries a black iron scarf, oh, you lift your head to look at the clock at the top of the church
now, my blood pressure skyrockets, it rises with our collective shame
for so many years, I haven’t kept up with the isms, politics’ swimming champions grow
scales, the bell’s ring lives on in time, and time is so long and life is so short
what’s left of the city lacks education, it tries to start a red-light district, big hotels
raise bright mosaics, it’s just a shame that the old houses that have held out don’t understand a harmonious society
these defective kids and products, the strange odor filling my life
will they come into bloom, will they wither and fall, look at the workshop’s polisher
who starts to stick out a defecting finger, life was once a trade and her back is to the rock,
a lonely heart, overtime in a sweating factory has destroyed my heart, I’m like a prisoner
who has given up freedom for a rebirth, oh, there are still three work steps left, rivet joints
soldering, and isn’t it like a beast biting into you, iron shavings flying,
with so many nightmares, we need someone to warm our sleep

As soon as I could I left this life of iron, it carried out a kind of Romanticism
on the machines, pulled dreams from the last punched hole, left behind a hundred shapes
and a hundred futures, as I bear loneliness in the shrieks of iron, it carved
my residence registration on a hole-punch, my age, records, temporary residence permits, it records it all
my work number and jobs, it forges a jail cell, and uses production numbers to track
our emotional states, its blueprints are dusky theories, requiring philosophy and political theory
iron is delivering a speech on the machines, it’s waiting for the name of a theory or a style
I’m already used to a fantastical realism, worshipping the mute, now it’s perfect for
a kind of opening up, from ore to iron, from iron to products, this is
the process of iron establishing a political party, it uses calipers, blueprints, switches, yes
and there’s electricity, those words you softly muttered, like water
flowing through your nerves, you tremble and read out electricity, iron turns electricity
into party regulations and power, these collective parties of iron tools start to tell me what to do
drill holes here, fold there, it speaks in translation, good at guarding against
the mixed grief and confusion of the ordinary people, it matches my inner thoughts
the molding designer starts drafting economic policy and advancing the system of roads
finding the main points on an iron plate, the center of iron, organizing principles,
the thread-cutter is busy with plans and development, planning a development zone on an iron plate
the central zone, where they forge a subpar financial center, the sharp whistles of the machines
are the last home-owning holdouts having their houses torn down, relocated, the toiling hardware factory’s polisher,
hole-puncher, and cutter, who live with their relatives in one room, use a ruthless measure
to mold iron lives, they are confined there to polish, punch, and bore
the size and depth must be harmonious and stable, the textbooks repeat the political ideology
they must learn forbearance, this is a separate China of unemployment, layoffs,
job injuries, severed fingers, oh, these simple people prevented from living in the city
the representatives give speeches, the Central Consultative Conference puts forward proposals, while elementary students explain in their homework
to create a clean and tourist-friendly city, migrant workers must be forbidden from crowding in
they live in the shame of an iron-sheet country, so many of their hearts are weak
they can’t take X pounds of pain, they get stomach problems and occupational diseases
and kidney stones, their blood vessels are stuffed with dissatisfaction and grudges, made sick for the iron country
bringing elements of destabilization, and petitioners begin to enter the next sequence
product inspectors begin to pick undesirables, familiar iron bars show another face
the scarred winning competitors are too humorous and righteous, they will not yield
to a single doctrine, and we begin to use computer bits and forms to express happiness
time is like a pork pie, it lacks a birthplace and an identity, it is filled with too much dissent
we must wait for the custodians to come and clean, this iron will exchange its tongue and mouth
its personality makes it excellent in a chorus, it uses satire and rhetorical tricks
to recite the comedies of life, while the foreign factory’s quality control points in only one direction
she starts to point at the nation of iron, her voice is filled
with calls for the dead and for alchemy, this iron needs work with a stronger political bent
with the poems and art of existence, iron is too quiet
it hasn’t cast off the old customs, it won’t face the customer gods
and flirt, we need revisions and deletions, for time to return
to 1990, our transformations need to be examined anew
these restless years need to be debated and corrected
of mistakes, iron’s matrix is stuck in the 1980s
its dull stiff circles don’t work in the new age, the molding designers need
to be woken, they’ve stood too long in the advantages of the past
or they’re too close to the bureaucrats of old and the new VIPs
their designs aren’t right for the masses, the thread-cutter cares too much
about profits, leaving out the curved lines of ordinary people, leaving behind the polishers,
hole-punchers, cutters, who are made responsible for inferior goods, and the suffering
iron’s hesitant despair makes dead politicians take responsibility, and just as we
have never felt grief for no reason, the dead can pardon them
to arrive at memories and symbols even emptier than iron’s political party, the bosses
must pay respects to useless objects, the statisticians calculate mistakes and defects
her handwriting is terrible, it makes my pay seem confusing
sickening my heart, and under the stares of collectivism we learn
how distrust and habit and lack of habit replace force, I think rebellion
cannot but play the role of loyal workers, punching the time clock right on time, respectful of superiors
brains are washed by iron’s political party, there are eyes everywhere
it glistens in a crab-claw light, getting a vice-grip on excess ideas and imagination
the security guards are good at violence, guarding the doors and searching bodies, their blue uniforms
are as forbidding as policemen’s, they inspect the workshops, hand out fines to those they find napping

Now I return to the center of iron, and where is it from
a mountain’s depths, a coalmine, a foreign country, it was once a buried stone
dug up by someone, pulverized, it holds the earth’s coughing
its dark gray body is wracked by late-stage disease, iron’s past
is so desolate I don’t dare imagine any more, it’s passed through tall buildings, factories,
railways and state-run processing plants, they’re installed even deeper in the machines than the earth
its hopes need the hacksaw and spark machine, I use a mute language to speak
of their desires, returning to the mood of rocks, it can’t speak Chinese
the hardest place of the Han, I can only indistinctly hear it, it sounds like rocks
crying, it comes from a handmade cellar, and the way back has been sealed up by industry and the city guards
it’s traveling a corridor made of nonfiction, from stone to iron
from iron to product, it encounters nonstop time
they are cut into incomplete shapes, yesterday, today, tomorrow,
history, the future, the present, or the 21st century, it’s all fragments of you
or me, you want to insist on the old doctrines, tossed by life, pushed aside
life cannot tolerate overly perfect things, it has a dangerous
jealous heart, it starts to end, and I’m still longing for ancient times as I stand at this modern machine
longing to go back to the Tang—to write poetry, collect Chinese medicine on the mountainsides, go fishing in the wind and fine rain

One window leads to another. We were birds
passing   through   window   after  window.  I
pointed out the window. You  said  there  was
no window.  It is early in the morning, maybe
even    before    morning.    The     moon    still
submerged in  blue. I saw  our  faces imposed
on the city framed  by the  window,  a  double
exposure.   All  day,  you  sat  by   the  window,
contemplating on things that open, things that
close.    Our   house    had     no     doors,   only
windows.   A  house   made   of   windows. The
house  was  open, the  window  was  open. The
day you died, the windows  of our  house  were
open to let the  breeze in. You  said that it  was
nothing.

 

 

Windows fly open one after another. We were
papers  fluttering   with   the   draft   from  the
window. I pointed out the window. You said a
window is nothing but a hole. It was morning.
The     moon     a     passerby     encircling    the
hemisphere  unseen.  I  saw rows of  buildings
cut off by the window, a reel.  On another day,
you lay beside the  window,  pondering  where
the window  begins , where  the  window  ends.
Our house  had  no  blinds,  only  windows.  A
house brimmed with windows.  The  door  was
closed,  the  window  was  open.  The  day  you
died,  you  looked   further  beyond   the   open
window. You said there was nothing.

 

 

Out  the  window  comes   another.  We   were
curtains drawn   together,   then   apart,   then
together again. I pointed out the window. You
said you  could  not  see  anything  behind  the
curtain.  It was just before evening.  The moon
almost arriving in rakes  of  clouds.   I saw  the
people walking  towards  the  end of the  street
contained by  the window,  its  vanishing point.
Every   day,   you   stood   beside   the   window,
thinking   of   the   window   that    opens,    the
window   that   closes.    Our    house    had   no
corners,   only    windows.    The   window   was
closed, the door  was closed. The day  you  died,
the windows  of  our  house  were  closed  to  let
nothing out. You said nothing else.

 

 

There  is  no  window   that  does  not  lead  to
another.  We were insects caught in the  mesh
of a window.  I pointed  out  the  window. You
said you saw nothing. It was late at night. The
moon  a  smudge of white.  I saw  a dot  in  the
sky crossing over the city line, enclosed by  the
window, a negative. Someday, you would  have
risen before the window, wondering about  the
life that opens,  the life that  closes.  Our house
had  no  one,  only   windows.   The   door   was
open, the house was closed. The  day  you  died,
you held the window open. You said nothing.

I hear there are people who work at night,
waves breaking beneath their feet as if calming them.
I say I know nothing about it.

Tonight, too, there are turning lines, I hear,
waves from all sides opening mouths and biting.
I say I do not know, do not know.

Tonight, too, people are being dragged away, I hear,
waves rising abruptly, reaching their eyes,
so what about it?
I say that now I only want to forget it all.

Still all at a loss
as the waves strike my face,
I ask, What did I do wrong?
I just want to weep, rolling like gravel.

I pursue, saying I was a labor activist for 20 years.
On a shore I visited without any dreams
was the waves’ night-long interrogation.

Taking advantage of opacity, Girl E goes for it and punches indiscriminately. Her shaking fist, upon breaking through the flesh of another girl, transforms into words. There among the fleshy organs, she opens her fist-of-words and allows mean, toxic syllables to thus infiltrate the body. At the point of entry, a scar is left, as a darker ring of Cheeto powder.

Girl J joins in, but also struggles with points of entry. A voice whispers that her anger is misdirected. Having been born inside this Cheeto bag, though, how is she to know一having been covered in Cheeto powder from birth? At the moment of contact, Girl B, who she is trying to hit, releases a smell: is it odor or fragrance? It is unmistakably human, we are uncertain about all the rest. Girl J retracts her fist.

Girl C has done it; she has pummeled Girl G into a messy little pulp. But no. There一over there一is Girl G, and this is one very beat up little Cheeto, along with the other contents that are settling at the bottom of the bag.

Fight over who gets which chip, as if there were no more than ten chips in the bag. There are more than ten chips in the bag.

Girl A assumes that the bigger, the rounder, the better. Girl G believes that the beautiful ones should choose first. Girl C makes a bid for lung capacity. Girl J sees that the sharp edges of the less round, “imperfect” chip might come in handy one day. She remains quiet. Girl I says no.

Only Girl H takes note of the fact that the crispness of the chips is proof positive that the container, I mean the bag, that they reside in is airtight. Only Girl H has a feeling for her true position within the global economy and food supply chain and how they affect the likely outcome of their collective fate. She has trouble deciding whether to speak, slap, or remain silent.

or awareness shock could also be the same
also still seeing each thing – fact – inquiry – proposal perpetually spinning like a top &
pure uncarved block
still a life of red & blue, a life of purple & gold raw & cooked
life high & low, life heavy & light unbearably. though
eyes slightly sharper & lungs-soul-guts-heart-core in erratic meditation on:

1. age of inception
love you because i [oh to be young and inexperienced feigning philosophical delvings,
enlightened imitative dabbling meta-physical meta-ego turning for the worse
mouth blabbering babble] hate ephemeral existence what’s the point love you because i
hate your lovers loving your peripheral love

2. after ten years
love you i transform into a shadow love you
because i don’t believe the sky makes rain rain falls rain drops soul
don’t know why i love you but i do [once again,
yeah so salvage some little bit or that little bit, that’s that]
because i hate the nameless sorrow entering the spirit

3. at last
love you [high quality thus compelled to wear pro
tection, compelled to research the upstanding character of sutras & topsy turvy buddha-dharma in all schema:
viet, thai, american, european, kama sutra dog cat, making a pass into springs
36, 38 streets wards etc, etc… then flashing to something in a Sunday morning
that makes a body feel alone streaming into the self a premature epiphany]
thus, I would like to say: oh love what kind of piece of shit are you
to be so ghastly – myriad – wafting – thorny [such!]

Mornings you are the ruins of yourself,
Green calcite. Where the eyes dried,
Two black rooks lie nesting in the grooves
Worn smooth by thousands of hands
Groping toward the brilliant ocean.
Near the bottom of your hollow mouth,
Your cut tongue gathers lizard scales
Like a sunken bucket in an algal well.
Well, well. You’ve learned your lesson
This time, haven’t you? All the monks
Have died, in their single-cell caves
On the mountainside, their rice-bowls
Overturned. What you so often think
Belongs to you does not belong to you at all.

when train on first
ever cinemascreams as
pull into station
into such sen
sitivity of it
such sense
could not say
to bearto thisto such
unbear
able hands before
mouth whole limb to
torn say ever again
headeyederobed

w/o single
wind to carry vow
to muteness
mute me &
brother we wonder
wonder
fully, fear fullyour shadows
Korea (but for you, any
where is where
you are for,
your shadow Hong
Kong perhaps or
book you put
away in tenderness or
shame(

time to film
& none to live
& bite apple w/ eye
& laugh at screams
at train

 

*

pilgrim skin ab
olishes sinpores
thru

if I
subject object club
swinging to head
against thatI had for
got would had forget
ting had
had forgone
had left

airport,
station,bus see
that woman & if I
had had
had been over seas would have
had not forgot sou
venir & but
& elle attend
enfin le retour
de son souvenir
pig skin pores
thru history sweat & / mo
there/ sister
/ selfwhen she
is me am
dumb
speech
must came else
where?

question of wanting to

 

*

comment

de dire zenmeshuo nishuo wo
shuo jiushi zheme
shuo

yexu tadeshou yinggai ta
yi kaikou
zhiqian c’est
ça zhe zhe
zhe xieshe dui she
dui (fafeng) she wusheng
wuyin

wufeng wind
less speechless
sound
less tongue (go
mad) to ton
gue to tongue
these this
this ça c’est before
openmouthed one
s/he should hand
their may
be said
this way’s
indeed said me
you say say

how dire
the comment

 

*

I have never
to La Ciotat
nor been Pusan nor
nor Singapore, nor Dong
bei nor Berkeley

nor Ulaanbaatar

never
screamed at film
train pulled in &
no-one
neither, we

know past is self-
secure.never been to Singapore.

shot poorer
areas first & I have
never seen

this peace like an
insomnia, if you
shoot will you
let me sleep?Aunty
you who stare
have never been

me & fire is
no safety, no laws, if

you must shoot
shoot
open scenes any
one can
relate to

 

*

The doctor presses the probe
onto my wife’s belly. Ultrasound waves
pulse between fluid, tissue, and bone一
the embryo echoes. Plastic makes
possible. At home, she labors in an inflatable
tub. Plastic leaches estrogenic and toxic chemicals,
disrupts hormonal systems. After delivery,

she places her placenta in a Ziploc
and stores it in the freezer. Plastic is the perfect
creation because it never dies. Our daughter
sucks a pacifier and sleeps in a crib.
Whales, plankton, shrimp, and birds confuse
plastic for food. My wife turns on
the breast pump; milk drips into a bottle.

Plastic labors to keep food fresh, delivers
medicine and clean water. How empty:
to be birthed, used, then disposed.
In the oceans, there exists one ton of plastic
for every three tons of fish. How free:
when it finally arrives to the paradise
of the Pacific gyre一far from

its degrading makers. Will plastic make life
impossible? I press the plastic nipple
to our daughter’s lips. I wish
she, too, was made of plastic
to survive our wasteful hands.
So that she, too, will inherit
“a great future.”


My Ates, red hibiscus
in their mouths,
& my Kuya, a distant
mirror, who am I
among you,

outside? Beneath
a Manila sky
forever bleached, or am I
imagining it so:

white,
threatening—
Humidity,

a certain sadness
bearing down
on our little, brown
bodies.

Her voice, an image,
whisper-round, close
my earlobe,
cochlear, deeper, below
my eyes. Then
nowhere near
me, removed
from me.

It is removed.

Who moved it?

Where did it go?


It’s June 6 again,

 

My mother, newly returned after eight years,
is taking us back with her to New York. I’m at
the doorstep shouting goodbye to a neighbor.

My grandmother is behind me, on the sofa.
Just arrived from the hospital, she can barely
stand. She’s here to see us off.

Her voice is the softest ligature, unthreading.

Why are you saying goodbye to everyone except for me who raised you?

Once they found a man made of distance— a coat of shells, a wig of weeds— and at his breast a suckling book made of salty skin, stamped on its chubble joints, its fatty folds— us, us— visas. Two webbed palms cupping the downy document. Motherless child, they said, let us buy you.

 
Once it saw the man— Was he waving or drowning? It matters not: what is of the water returns to water— Once it saw the man, the boat rowed itself from the shore, folding fins out like a manta ray breaching into red spray, cartilage and cartridge inked out, flared into an X: marking this location and the boat’s movement.

& then?

Once the man was finally harpooned and lanced to death, the boat towed him ashore, and, with small cranes sprouting from its fins, flensed his fat and boiled his bones clean to build a child up from flank to fo’c’sle; skull to stem; fore and aft.

& aft? What was aft?
 
 
That thing at the end, Child, this was everything that came after the boats came.
 
 
Aft was everything we became.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Child he said put out to deep water

and so we did

Child he said let down your net

and so we did

Child he said catch your fish

and so we waited.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

& they caught so many fish that their nets began to break

& so they cried to the others in other boats to come and help them

& so those others, they came to these others

& so they, together, filled both boats so full that they began to sink

& so the boats began to sink with fish

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Water, water, every where,
Nor any drop to drink

The soft-tissue of a living oyster produces a pearl to protect itself against foreign substances. The things that don’t belong inside it become jewels to be strung up and hung. On some so and so’s neck. A womb so supple and so alien: a mother of pearl and a mother at peril.

At a McDonald’s in the Fukushima prefecture
a child was injured by a piece of hard plastic
which was in her hot-fudge ice-cream sundae

At a McDonald’s in the Aomori prefecture
a customer found a piece of blue vinyl
lodged in the white meat of her chicken nugget

At a McDonald’s in the Osaka prefecture
a customer found a human tooth
chattering in her French fries

At a seafood restaurant in Tennessee
a woman biting into a fried oyster
pulled pearl after pearl from her mouth
fifty wet with grease and spit

The bodies of dead animals pursued and eaten by predators sink slowly down to the sea floor. Life at the bottom is sustained by sinking flesh called marine snow. The vampyroteuthis infernalis, the “vampire squid of Hell” (neither vampire nor squid nor from Hell) pulses six hundred meters down in the lush ocean, demersal and blood flushed, wearing its own mouth around its neck like a velvet cape. Every day, it basks in marine snow; every day it eats the ocean. And at bottom, all depth is a kind of hell.

In the ocean, a rostrum is the cupped sharpness of the dorsal and lower mandibles of a squid’s piercing mouthpart. On a naval ship, a rostrum is a beak-like extension of bronze and iron designed to wreck the hull of an enemy ship. In the public forum, a rostrum is the pulpit that hides your body and lets you open your mouth to the world. And from which one will you speak— and in which one will you die—and for whom?

A baleen whale’s gullet is too small to swallow a human. After a sperm whale sucks in a squid, it will vomit out its beak. If it does not, the beak will travel through three hundred meters of its digestive labyrinth. The crushing churn of the whale’s four stomachs will grind the squid’s funnels and collars, its eight arms, its three beating hearts. But it can’t break a squid beak. The whale’s hind stomach hoards thousands of squid beaks like a clacking library of bonemouths. To protect itself from the scrape and drag of the squid beaks, the whale’s intestines produce a waxy ambergris— grey, fatty, flammable— a carrier for a scent worn on your pulse.

Look into its eyes; flip through its gills; scale it; cut off the head at the gills and place it aside; flip it so its belly faces you; open its belly from its anal fin to its gills; using your finger draw out the guts; find the egg sack and place it aside; flank the fish open; flense it; flatten it; fillet it and place it on the earth. Cover it with salt. Leave it be. Leave it be.
Call it and wait for it to answer.

In France, this “blow against the state” refers to one thing. Among Indigenous North Americans a coup refers to the act of touching an enemy or grazing an object belonging to an enemy in order to claim it. And to claim him. You should imagine now a very small, chicken-necked girl with flat, soft knees wobbling on a black rock cupping the Indian Ocean in her hands— a blow of foam to part the states along the line of fate. When they read the palm of a girlchild, they read the fate line on the left palm— the illiterate hand, the hand used to wipe the ass clean of lunch.

At one time, this meant “to embrace with arms wide open.” At another time, this became a unit of measurement— a length of 6 feet. At yet another time, this came to mean “understanding” or “measurability,” or, its inverse: unfathomable depths were meanings that could not be reached by using one’s own body as a unit of measurement. You should imagine now a woman with arms wide open diving into the Pacific Ocean, measuring it with her own body—unfathomable phantom— she a pantoum, a pun

A B C D

B E D F

E G F H

G I (or A or C) H J (or A or C)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

this is how an ocean is told

what is done with wet
& when
an inheritance—

Four interwoven quatrains

Three generations damp

Two oceans of wet

One boat


There was a swimming pool. I was dead.
There was a Good Dancing Time. I was dead.
I applied for a visa but was told I was thirty
thousand dollars short from being dead.
Now I wish there was an application process
for a water bed. It should hold all my fish
and my pets. It should also double as a casket.
Here is my resume. Look, I am so fleshed.
All this work makes my mind so freshed.
Behind this skin, I am still my skin.
I shed and shed. The sky is throwing water
bombs. I strap them around my chest.
All I have got to do now is run
into men and go Splash Splash.
There is no meaning in too much meaning.
There is no sound in too much yell.
I smoke. I high.
With eyes closed, I pray fajr in my bed.

There was  a  longing  in the carvings of the knife my mother held against the fruit. She peels with quiet permission. It is the only thing she can eat right now.  The  apple  is shy, red only in  spots, still  alive without its season. Earlier in  the day,  I  ate without touching from a tree– some hanging  game  with  my hands tied behind my back, the  apple stalk noosed  by  a single white  thread, and my mouth snapping to catch the fleshed body at sway. Grossed heavy in spit and juice, all  that  is my mouth drips down my chin. It sugars the dead leaves of autumn fall, dampens the soil enough for it to hold close my drenched voice.  I  am  the animal,  my  mother  my beast. I am licking the oceans away, howling off this distance, scavenging  for gratitude  on shadowed  days.  On  my finger lies another finger: a soft brown hook clinging like a seedling to  its  earth, an adjoining to a fractured limb and bone, a  root inseparable from its origin.

In 1938 on the night I was born
this country had no more ancestors or History
It was a garbage dump where soldiers on the run
waded in grime and worshipped a deity

who, deaf-mute, twirled in the clouds
among locusts and naked angels
and drunk females done up with storms
Our houses quivered like a hanged morning

and in our alleyways of always meager dinner
the sun shamelessly kissed the spring
The cheeky children left with steps full of cheer
howling about the hunger of soldiers

I grew up unknowingly like a crazy weed
in the bed of venereal nights of Baghdad
I gathered new roles insatiably
and bit the butt of Scheherazade

 

I rolled my “r”s with Négritude pride
starving for cirrus clouds and aeroliths
Casablanca tousles through my spine
and in my blood papyrus ink drips

My shipwrecks like audacious blasphemies
drew tender words from love potions
and their teeth tore at the supreme toes of
infamous paradises where one dies elated

Our parties were splattered with urine and blood
Fathers suddenly suffered amnesia and drank
clandestine alcohol with the whole neighborhood
they damned us to the hell of the badly raised

Beware the insolent man who oversteps the cage
of his neighborhood. We would sodomize birds
we would sharpen our rapiers with rage
we indulged in the forbidden we were undeterred

 

Rachitic knights of the coffee tables
entrenched in our impasses we kept vigil
until bugles pierced the twilights
Sails and invisible paddles

carried us to the redskins the virgin and mysterious
princesses of El Dorado
and the cowboys salved with gold their souls in distress
bleeding like the hogs of Colorado

And in the morning we rediscovered immaturity
and wisdom ambered like archangel buffoons
chanting the Quran in the cemeteries
over all the rag-covered tombs

In that age our meteors shot across
a sky where peaceful God whispered
The bluish windows reflected our frocks
among the stockings and the blonde hair

 

and our dreams of poets and thieving maggots
became intoxicated with the horsewoman’s fragrance
when this old man fresh as a shroud in glasses
welcomed us in the early morning to his rickety palace

where mischievous flies flew us around
The Queen of Sheba all of a sudden
had a vermillion heart in the form of a crown
adorned with dew with crystal and with sun

Beyond our pre-Islamic fortifications
and heroes and the defeated penniless
faces scarred by ancient afflictions
don’t know how to mourn their now-peaceful villages

Sirens steamers and polychrome ensigns
double-locked their horizons imbued
with lemongrass and columbine where men of former times
lived on cruel courage and virtues

 

Like dogs wearing hatched hope on their sleeves
their tamed cadavers scattered throughout our country
cold planets bigger than our earth and its seas
and beloved tales never on their knees

We braided them like glorious bouquets
or like the quicksilver of our summer nights
All my golden tears accumulated
and my eyes saw the gardens reflected inside

 

My father breathed in I don’t know what space
he dressed himself in blossoms and moons
and lived like a voyager embraced
Upon his brutal death our house died too

 

My withered mother we called her Madame
In her gaze the firmaments were extinguished
The streets in pants forbidden to women
are the only ones open to welcome her anguish

In her tears float dead stars
swirling in the dawn of a god
with diamond wings slamming like doors
over landscapes of monochrome facades

 

My older brother lost his childhood in a flash
Horrible hurt sparrows fell from his hands
he closed himself like a page of a love story
that he forgets to read today as he did in the past

 

Crepuscular photographs in panic
of our stabbing-suckled city
we did not triumph in the Punic Wars
we were too busy playing the lottery

Faubourgs gorged with old Egyptian princes
riding on their bikes through golden republics
speckled with lice from stupid hyenas
they spit laughs in the faces of our perished

 

And our dead dreaming of a storm of bullets
in the darkness of their mud coffins
fashioned in haste they clung to the ancestors’ javelins
(the poor crucified in unseen paintings
bordered with cedar semicolons they strut
immobile in paradise)
We died they said
for a nice big handful
of Indochinese rice but you parasites
what have you—immersed in our shameless murders—
told your poets?
We love France and German beer
like good survivors and the widows
frail as barrels gorged with clouds and moons
but you descendants by accident born during the passing of a
train or a boat and in the bang of a gun that we
leave by an alarm clock and shoes reeking
of fatigue and other people’s wars…

 

May our dead no longer speak to us
Our language now kneaded into other woes
with rancid stars a meager pittance
and false kingdoms rich in violent blows

 

A warring childhood eyes wide open
languishes in a book of ambitious designs
oblivious to a poem of venial devotions
in which the horsewoman perfumed the false skies
In an afterword between the old women
the acrid incense of sweet death in Baghdad
and oppressive kings in atrocious marvels
amaranth Scheherazade flutters about
And us others the jackals of the Numidian deserts
infantrymen of the Protectorate depot
and the flat paradises where humid gazes
give birth to hells and angels that will never be ours
…Our sky is no longer as blue as in childhood
We have riddled with saliva our orphan dreams
and our theological horizon
swallowed like a vulgar mushroom
We have lost all our prehistoric secrets

Time smooths our volcanoes and our eyelids

 

The house is a blatant imposture of red bricks kneaded with herbs
and honey
On its white terrace our sweet injuries wear incredible rain-
bows around their necks like jewelry
In his wooden bed sleep future cities traced by a child in
Chinese ink
There magician friends treat our burns when our adven-
tures dressed in black and white die of desire behind the shut-
ters…

The waiters in the restaurant say one of his eyes is blind,
and the other half-white: two bowls of clear water
possessed by milk. I peer into the knee-high

tank bolted to the floor, watching his silver S-shape
slither through green smoke.
He nudges the broken bridge in the corner.

Eight fish mean long life, and the spirit
that lives in his running water is different
from the one in still. His one eye watches

for evil, for the low breath of wind.
They say the one before him turned black
and dropped to the cloud of algae

at the bottom like a weight. He absorbed all the bad
luck a handful of life could hold. I used
to have dinner with my last boyfriend in front of that fish—

he was the kind of man I’d call for weed
or a walk through Echo Park.
We ate dinner with his mother at the restaurant

the night he got kicked out of college, the clink
of knives beneath her silence. Disappointment
in his family was palm by palm on broken glass.

He counted out Paxil
in a bathroom stall as we put leftovers in boxes,
pale tilapia layers to be shut in the dark.

After dinner, he went home and roped himself
to a solid walnut chair and used his free heel
to tip over the edge of his infinity pool. Sometimes,

I think of how I found him, his black figure
anchored to concrete under wrinkled lamplight. I crouched

at the edge watching his still body under running water.
I waited all night for him to sway.

In the dream you are standing drowned in light
& syllables form you from unformed clay
language by language placed in your throat
I am memorizing every one of your parts
lady of unplucked eyebrows & ungrecianed nose & wild majesty
here I am thinking of blanching your hair blonde when I was twelve
combed out out clairol 7th stage chiaroscuro
I’ve heard michelangelo went nearly blind
from years of toxic solvents
wings of angels dripping into his eyes
& I too had such a vision
sorority sisters & scandinavian kings melting gold braids before funeral pyres
the day I tried to speak more white just slivered
salted butter a tablespoon of cold pressed kale
& his daddy’s jim morrison records
& I forgot the fluorescent ring on my dark hair every time
I’ve seen my own body outside on the hard wintered lawn
you crawling towards the porch light
hands slipping erased by sleet
fighting for permanence
I piece together Cantonese like retracing a map from a dream
drugstore concealers littering drawers seven shades because I couldn’t remember
I wasn’t really looking & when I wasn’t looking I wasn’t there
& I lose & I lose but isn’t this how
I always thought I’d find you
throned in the moon-drenched water my wonder
woman your palms curled upward like lotus skins
my one possession my imago dei my platelet protection
godlike in your serenity
& somewhere Nietzsche stirs among charred poppies
dreaming of my noble race my avalanche my hair lashing out in the western
call it a last chance at getting it right call it laughter in a burning room
& across the autumn smoked yard you’re calling me
majesty
you’ve always been there in my veins in my melanin
waiting for me
& this time I don’t want to forget
I place you on the ledge you like the best near the sun
& name you & speak you
say it with me now
majesty

I.

The face of Chinatown returns its color,
plucked from July’s industrial steamer.

Dry the cup!
So we do.

Four noodle shops on East Broadway release their belches collectively.
They breed in me a hankering for family life.

Here, there’s no logic to melons and spring onions exchanging hands.
No rhythm to men’s briefs clothes-pinned to the fire escape.

Retirees beneath the Manhattan Bridge leak hearsay.

The woman in Apartment #18 on Bayard washes her feet in pot of boiled
water each evening before bedtime. But every handful of weeks she lapses.

I lean into the throat of summer.

Perched above these streets with whom I share verbs and adjectives.

 

II.

Faces knotted, bangs softened with grease.
The East River pulls along a thread of sun.

While Sunday slides in. Again, in those plain trousers.

How the heat is driven off course.
How one can make out the clarified vowels of bridges.

Who’s keeping count of what’s given against what’s stolen?

There’s nothing I can’t trace back to my coarse immigrant blood.

Uncles tipple wine on the streets of Mott and Bayard.
Night shifts meet day shifts in passing.

Sweat seasons the body that labors.

And in each noodle shop, bowls dusted with salt.

Sour tobacco, tofu bowl, bright.
Planks of hollyhock in Anhui,
the way I don’t know could open
months later like a hive.
Hard tide of shame that I thought
had dried out years ago.
Love’s barks grow watery, faint.
I walk the edge of an honest life.
The lash of carnal thoughts, followed
by the thin whip of banal guilt.
Seed of an itch on the left foot sole.
Hot yellow lights of cities
where I once pressed, over and over,
up against alternative lives.

Now, I sit. Above a deep ground.
The mind fetches the chatter.

And so on, and so forth.

I have covered the rungs of the stepladder in palm oil
so that now I must jump onto the bed with a running start
like a Portuguese water dog, which, days before Bo was born
in Texas, I desperately wanted the Obama family to choose.
You were a fifth grader living in Korea then, so I recreate
my fifth grade Scholastic magazine poll with a blue pen
into the sheets. Then I empty the desk drawer of its boarding passes
and receipts, covering every paper surface with the alphabet
I asked you to teach me on those first dates in Thai restaurants
and in the dim light of my bedroom after waking, because
as children when my mother said jury instead of jewelry
my brother and I laughed at her until she cried, her legs
tucked underneath her in the passenger seat. I write over and over
the fifteen hangul vowels I cannot pronounce, their romanizations
tacked onto hyphens like tails: eoh, weuh, oui. Tonight, when you
return, you will be an American and I will still be a girl who needs
a translator to read in my mother’s language, my mouth full
of so few shapes. I fall into the habits of my mother, it’s true.
I walk to the store repeating to myself impossible sounds,
and in the soap aisle I pretend to look for soap. Tonight,
after driving you home from the airport, I will show you all
the possibilities I have laid out on the bed: soft-coated wheaten terrier,
bichon frise, labradoodle. I will ask you to call me Sunmi, the name
my mother gave me. It means beautiful declaration. I wear it shyly
like an invisible ring. I used to be so quiet the first grade teacher
with the chair at the front of the room believed I needed to be frightened
in order to speak. But do you remember how we met in the basement
of a house party, your aloneness compelling me to ask about the language
of your mother, even though I already knew? Tonight, before we curl
into bed, I will ask you, new citizen, to fold my dresses into squares
like tiny flags so that when I wear them I will look like a girl inside
a grid: linen creases forming the strokes of the hangul vowels
my mother never taught me, believing that every daughter
who was wanted was given an impossible name.

On a bus watching in reverse—away perpetually—
I move towards a stop not in view.
To gain, one loses landscapes.
I am hurled, moved
by another’s progress. I am in motion
therefore I am. Someone not stable
scribbled this. For some, the ground jerks
uncertain. Premises shift
and men with papers expect
we stand stoic behind walls. They taunt
images of gold and security gate.
When pushed and lured this way,
movement is not always a choice.

I want to place myself on a vehicle speeding
from anything. To allow hindsight to work,
give transportation time to move me. Put me
in my place, so I arrive to a destiny.
Tell me my story how it makes sense:
backwards, letter by letter.

I wish I could tell what’s next.
Could keep the cut lilacs tall for a few days—
just until the peonies bloom. The sun strengthens, and I
wander the river walk. This is my small sphere.
I’ll make good, stay folded in myself. I promise
to memorize the bramble and texture of garden walls.
Smile on every rodent finding its meal.
Grow magnanimous in quiet’s chaos.

Even the hawk strays but swoops
returns to its treetop to find again
its true nature. Could it be this is mine—
to reach out and hold. From here, wait—

the phone buckles under I love you’s mass
strung up so you do not hear in time
the words tumbling from my mouth to nowhere,
while they send back all your kind.
All I can do is hold out my hand. You—

I can only imagine you reach back.

The  trouble  with  trees is  that  their  bodies  and  limbs  are  too  capable, capable  of burning, of living, capable of leaves,  of leaving,  charcoal,  ash, and  we  think    we  have   power.   Capable,  1561,   from   Late   Latin   capabilis  “receptive,”  Unit    731 of  the Japanese Empire  inject  us  with monkey blood, our  limbs are not  receptive,  Capable,  used  by  theologians,  from  Latin  capax  “able  to  hold  much,”  our living bodies  and  extracted  children,  not  holding,  not  Capable,  capere “to  take, grasp, layhold,  catch,  undertake, be  large  enough  for,   comprehend,”  how  to  take,  how  to  grasp,  comprehend,   our  limbs  catch  fire,  taken,  our  bodies  not large enough,  Capable, Sanskrit kapati “two handfuls,” two handfuls of intestines,   are  they   Capable,  Greek   kaptein   “to   swallow,   gulp   down,” pills,  gas, what more,  Capable, Lettish  kampiu “seize,” our  limber  bodies, carve our bodies, our eyes unseized  by  their  sockets,  Capable,  limbs,  capable  of  burning,  of ash,  charcoal,  Capable,  Old  Irish  cacht  “servant-girl,” her fallopian tube, cut, living, not Capable, of living, leaving, Welsh caeth “captive, slave,” Capable, our names, maruta, from Japanese, “logs.”

She is girl. She is gravel. She is grabbed. She is grabbed like handfuls of gravel. Gravel  grated  by water. Her village  is  full  of  gravel fields.  It is 1950.  She  is  girl.  She is  grabbed. She is not  my  grandmother  though  my  grandmother  is  girl.  My  grandmother’s  father  closes  the  gates. Against  American  soldiers, though  they jump over stone walls. To a girl who  is  not  my grandmother.  The girl is  gravel  grabbed.  Her  language  is  gravel  because  it  means  nothing.  Hands  full  of girl. Fields  full  of  gravel.  Korea is gravel and graves. Girl is girl  and she will  never be a grandmother. She will be girl, girl, girl is gravel and history will skip her  like stone over water. Oh girl, oh glory.

Cousin ties a knot for us
round a raw drumstick,
hangs it from the cage.
Under the pier—
yellow skin peels from pink flesh,
floats to the surface
oily, puckered—
waiting.

I learn
how to float
but not how to swim
and my eyes burn from
the chlorine and I sleep
for hours in the van until
the others find me to
play on the swings.

This dusty shore named for
clams;
we want none.
Only crabs for us.
We lure them with chicken–
with nothing–
with twine and spit.
Boil them in water from the spigot.

We city kids
really rough it
out here
with these pools
and candy stores
and video games
and paddleboats
and our parents.

Fingers caked with wet
rice break backs and bellies,
pluck gills,
scrape eggs, tear limbs
Tita takes our legs–
cracks them
under a glass jar for us.
We suck shells ’til twilight.

At dawn we hang
laundry and fry
garlic and at dusk we
play mahjong and sing
show tunes but we’re loud
too loud for them
so when we leave they
ask for us
not to come back.

After climbing a hill and wondering to whom I could
give this pain after stripping it off,
I saw toppled trees drying
on a hillside dug up by mechanical diggers.
It was a shivering winter’s day,
the short-lived sun veiled by sparse clouds.
From a crevice in a severed rock
birds with long beaks were tearing out earthworms.
My pain was without a wound
and in the bodies of the frayed, torn-out worms
there was no pain.

In spring, if I tilt my neck
toward the sunlight
a greenish hue gathers around my eyes,
and since I dislike this greenish hue
coming in pastel tones
I shake my head to get rid of it.
After repeated shaking
my body is left unclothed,
like a mermaid on cold sand.

In the area around Chungmu or Goseong, in South
Gyeongsang Province,
people call a fly a “floy,” and like a floy, a fly too is a very
pretty insect.
A fly coming into the apartment one early winter’s day
will not fly away, no matter how hard you pursue it,
it just flies a few inches, crouches down and falls into a
doze
as before. “Floy.” My father, nearly eighty years old,
doggedly refuses to take a taxi. With bags full of garlic
and dried persimmons,
sometimes carrying an even heavier apple box, he
changes buses twice
to come visit his son’s high-up apartment. In the old
days,
this bent old man in a dirty raincoat used to eat instant
ramyeon
or cheap buns to save money for his child’s schooling
and his only hobby is to get angry over little things for
no reason.
The only son for three generations from a poor family
with no land of its own,
my gray-haired father no longer weeps loudly at
Grandmother’s memorial ceremony.
Instead of weeping, he merely clears his throat, sounding
like a rusty bottle-cap,
and nowadays he does not speak up, even when someone
scolds him.
Floy, on our last visit to Grandmother’s grave, unable to
keep up,
came to a halt like a broken-down second-hand car
after gasping several times, and my wife supported him
from behind.
Climbing and stopping, going on then stopping again,
how far had we climbed?
As my father sat breathing heavily on a hillside rock, a
fly,
having followed him that far, quietly folded its wings on
Father’s cheek.

Woman who puts up her hair comb holds
up the sky. There is the legend and probably a lie.

My mother felt tired with her jewelry on.
Between me and the 40 days to the heaven,

is the fact that I don’t have my receipt.
Today I photographed myself, unmarried.

I pulled a silver tine off the back of the moon,
so there’s no return policy left for the moon.

What a wall over me made of silk
which was once money itself.

If you are unhappy, come down Moon.
Let me go to work at the coif with you. Turn yourself in

to the woman who spends all her money at midnight.
Which is to say money is in your possession. It is midnight.

Moon, let me borrow your teeth. Moon,
won’t you let down your yes.

In this country the shy don’t eat one orange.
If you leave home, you eat and speak like the dead.
This morning, I took both fruits from the municipal tree,
but I couldn’t take salt from the table.

Boiling water, before I had put up my hair,
I saw my own dead. He in his translucent undershirt,
leaning into the I-don’t-know-what for his breakfast,
his face smooth and dark like a real thing.

The body I had dressed blue removed his shirting.
The ocean that had swallowed him, rendered salt on my table.
We’re looking at the orange blossoms together. If they’re no use
to him, then they’re blooming for me. Even in summer I fear sharing.

I won’t say aloud the short list of my homecomings. I don’t name
the hours I take to put up my hair, but they are mine.

As boys, your father fed us fresh meat
from the lake, taught us to spit
bones into the fire, handed us each a knife
told us to enter the woods & return with something dead
& when we returned with nothing but our bodies
he assumed we failed, but what did he know about death
that we couldn’t learn, will learn from our own hands
& because you aren’t here (won’t ever, again, be here)
to cover my mouth, I’ll confess, out loud, my love, so maybe
perhaps, you will hear me & join me, here where the sun is sweet
against the water & because I love you, I will gut this distance
with nostalgia, because grief can taste of sugar if you run
your tongue along the right edge, so let me call your name
or rather mouth it, like when we watched your father strike a cleaver
into the neck of a hawk & fell silent, not because of the blood
but rather for the way the hawk’s severed body
took flight, leaving behind its head, a scarlet burden in the soil
& I wish so badly, I was brave enough then, to keep it
to tuck it beneath my tongue for these twenty years
because darling, before I came alive, I watched the world
without knowing what to look for, but I swear, it was there, again
above the tall grass, the headless hawk
still alive, still, somehow, flying.

In the movie    the musical      the play                    the opera
the white soldier leaves                      & the brown beauty kills herself
on stage                       on screen         on Washington Street.
Dearest, darling         pumpkin seed harlot
shimmy shimmy in your blood bodice,          your sunrise negligee—
negligee, derived from the French,                 meaning, neglected.
Meaning, trip wire     lingerie. Meaning,        bandage gauze
Camisole. Butcher paper                   parasol opening beneath the knife.
Beneath the wife         of contrails, spelling out          Broadway, here I come!
He tells me the promotion means he gets to carry a gun.
My lover is gone. Replaced by a badge.   It’s not a question     of who left who?
but rather, how            could either of us stay?          In my bed, the red dust
cratered around our final departure.               Our image spliced in half
by the blade of the horizon.               He is gone.    I am not.
Not a seam opening.                           Not a good-luck appendage
to hang on a rearview mirror.            Not a ballad beckoning the curtains.
Not the end.               Not now.                         Not here.

On the first day, we ate the trout
with its skin on. Scales in my teeth.
You said: let the knife do the work.

*

The second day, I laid the fish out
onto its side; I pinched its edge and slid
the blade clean between fat and muscle.

*

Not all rainbow: here, tender orange,
there, rusted brown, the underside
gelatinous and white. Then the bones.

*

Over lunch, the man and the woman
carved fillets from each other
one word at a time.

*

The cat licks remnants of flesh
from flayed skin. Its tongue:
red, methodical, and barbed.

*

Nothing left for the third day
save the offcuts. Cubes of cured
trout layered on pickles and rice.

*

How to multiply one fish into many—
my mother ties an unseen knot. The string
is invisible, but the hooked fish still pulls.

The laws of Physics are God, I say.

But God is not the laws. The laws are not God.

Nothing, perhaps, is.

I wish for idols, bits of God
to worship, stare at, to keep.
 
 

Once, for two months, my mind shook like a hammer. I did not know you then. As He watched, I slept through the afternoons, pacing and pacing the remaining hours. There is uncertainty in your future, a woman on the street told me. I can see it. You will be very unhappy, very soon.
 
 

He speaks without lips
or hands,
and his neglect, too,

is, perhaps, deliberate.
We cannot know.

All we know is what He is not—
grime or filth or fire—

but perhaps not all
of even that.
 
 

The scraping of coin against coin, of train against track, of purse link against turnstile: my teeth are naked beneath metal. It builds and builds until I cry each night. He watches the tongues of flame cast shadows across my neck. He watches, without the dark in His eyes.
 
 

Struggle has no perspective. Neither does infinity.

 
 

You watch,
waiting until I fall asleep,
your hand in mine.

Your brown lashes, the curve
of your nose, your irises
of gold.
My love,
my life,
this is why I want to touch

every bit of you:

to know you are real.

A glance was all it took
to turn him mad as a moth—

Majnoon,
unbathed and barely clothed,
teeth chipped, lips hard,
hair and hair
ran through the market
ripped his collar, cried
Laila, Laila

Dust on his head, blood
on his sleeve,
he danced
as the gods of age
cast stone after stone
upon his chest.

Her curls, too,
had once fallen on him
like calamity. Now he tore

the desert with verses
of thirst and praise:
Come, quell my fever.
Even death is not so cruel.

As she rose again
she was smoke, soft
and gray, searching.
His wings,
by now, were burnt.

You’ve destroyed me, he accused.
So when she wrote at last,

he ingested her words,
smashed their shrines.

The horse in my mind
is not the horse in the park,
his canter bronzed beneath maples
and a plaque blazoned Minoru—

Minoru, says my mother,
de-emphasizing the expected syllable
as if the word were Japanese. Home for winter:
pines and cedars merge in the car’s convergence
of distance and speed. They bow to each other’s shadows. I want

to run further
than I can see.

Minoru, churning clods
of earth as he rounds the track
at Doncaster. Minoru,
Thoroughbred, bred

to step lightly,
lightly stepping
through snow’s patina
along the steppes, where he rests,
time cindering his name.

But before the horse,
the master gardener from Kyushu

whose green thumbs
grew sore with expatriation,
razoring lawns across the cold hills
of Kildare, twisting hedgerows

into mazes, pruning moss as soft
as a stallion’s foam-flecked mane.
His talent behooved a horse to share his
youngest son’s name: Minoru. Of course
it’s Japanese. Of them, who was furthest from home: Father, mother,

mixed-race son?
The park and the track

flicker into frame, our breath
fogging the windshield’s washed-out glass,
faces folding time—that portrait
in which the gardener holds his eldest like a dove,

while Minoru sits alone
on his mother’s lap. Why the long face?
my mother asks. She drives the speed limit,
comes to a complete stop before every line. We pass
the track, the statue, mane ribbed mid-sway as if subject to the same

wind shivering
the branches.

Minoru, victorious, mimetic
in oils for Vanity Fair, painted
by Earl, by Havell. His glossy wake, a wave rippling
top hats and swallowtail coats, dark as storm-bruised water.

Minoru, thundering into the final heat
at Epsom. Minoru, snorting under King George’s
gouty hand. Minoru, of the Triple Crown, the Irish downs,
swallowed up by a crowd of supporters pulling hairs
from his mane and tail. For hair’s curlicue on canvas: feel the pressure

of the brush. Crop to stirrup.
Bridle to spur. Once,

I watched my mother
mourn her mother. She
used a name I can’t pronounce—
issei, nisei, Okaasan—liquid lilt

of a seashell’s hum, voices
hushed behind closed doors.
Though mostly raised in English,
in college she was forced into a beginners class.
She waited. She passed. When we pass the statue, she laughs.

Mom, how could the name be Japanese?
Statue, park, and ruddy track remade

from recycled tires,
where for years in elementary
I ran the hundred-metre dash
while she applauded from the stands.

As a girl, she rode
the neighbour’s worn-out
hot-blood after school. No saddle,
just a wool blanket folded in half. He would gallop
the same counter-clockwise loop along his paddock’s

muddy acre, habit’s burnished track.
She gripped his mane and never fell.

You know, I can’t remember
what he was called. Their lives dissolve
in mediums as amnesiac as water: Minoru’s father
returned to his island to die. The horse, foundered,

and nearly blind, was sold across the ocean
into a revolution’s smoldering measure—a motion
spent like crests collapsing against the coast.
In the kanji that she can barely read, one shoulder is turned
as if to recall receding miles. Uma, meaning horse, or I’m sorry, Ma.

Her maiden name:
a copse of trees.

They shiver when I turn
the page. From ten thousand feet,
the ochre track is a serpent
circling the unknown at the edges

of a Renaissance map. I wave,
and again I am alone. The window’s scratched
acrylic, a dead stallion’s eye. Each sentence I try
is built from words like the wood in Theseus’s ship. The boy,
now lost to a century’s blueblack ebb like snow into the sea—

Don’t be such a precious snowflake,
my mother says.

The stallion: one win short
of the triple crown. My intonation:
one stress too many for an apology—
all the times I got it wrong. Minoru,

Minoru—both are gone.
Their twinned weight sinking back
through the past like the rings
passed hand to hand in the chapel beside the park,
the track, the statue, where years ago

my mother said the word
and took my father’s name.

+

You will always be someone from somewhere else

This is a design flaw of water

 

+

Mình sẽ luôn là người nọ đến từ nơi nọ.

Đấy là lỗi dòng lội nước.

 

+ –

Sometimes  parents will give  their children mythologies when they can  no longer stomach history. From my mother I learned the prototypical origin myth, that one about the hand lifting earth to mouth and the inconceivability of the mountain to hold the water that inevitably leaves her for the sea. Mythologies have their way of explaining  the basic  human condition: that there  will always be some where or thing you wish to get to or back to. Which is another way of saying they explain: wars.

 

Longing is a state of mind.
Which is also to say longing is a mental love.

+ –

I grew up listening to my parents fight. It should not have been a surprise, given the wars of their own childhoods, Europe and Vietnam, respectively. But that is not  the kind of  thing one  comprehends  as a child,  either about one’s parents or about wars. I would lay in bed in the dark listening to them threaten to leave and never return and I thought this was how you loved. But then some mornings I awoke and it was just the crisis in the Middle East they were arguing about.

+ –

The root of the word “country” takes us back to contra (“against”) and to a phrase where the concept of “country” is arrived at via an act of seeing the terrain spread out before one: terra contrata: the body must separate itself from what it views, in order to name said vision. Hence, the act of first citing or sighting land also becomes one’s initiation of separation.  I am against the land.  I am against the country. Our perpendicularity to what is beneath, our right-angle-ness, predicates each act of claim and/or divide. In 1960-something, my mother cut her hair short and refused to hand out invitations to her sister’s wedding engagement. When  you get up off  your knees  you disrupt  the flow of the lore of the tribe. You disrupt the natural architecture of the horizon, and the sentence. Now you had better learn to swim, or sing.

+ –

She was  trying  to make up  her  mind  and she couldn’t,  so she  took herself to   a movie. Culture beckons. Bombs  fall.  The tanks  were  approaching  the city and a spring black was descending. She would never see Rome in person, she thought, would never lay eyes on the aspirational architecture of any of those self-congratulating civilizations, if she stayed. My father meanwhile felt sick at even just the thought of the word. Leave.

+

I returned for the first time in 1996. On the beach in Lăng Cô, I sat one evening
with a boy who sold postcards.

—The lost people of Japan, they come a lot too. The lost people like to buy postcards.
—Lost people? What do you mean?
—You are lost people of Vietnam. They all go long time ago and today come back.
—Tourists, you mean. Travelers.
—Tourist? What is tourist?
—The lost people. The people who like to buy postcards.

+

Separation  myth is  a middle-class  prestige we pull.  My own marriage has more than once been beset  upon by it.  One year I thought  a cure  might  be enacted by returning together to the place I’d previously traveled to alone, which was also the originating place I had been severed from.  I wore wings  for this trip.  We  traveled  along  hectic,  inhospitable  roads  to  the  oldest  standing  stones  we could make our way to. The ruins of the Champa civilization were called “discovered” in the late 1800s, by French archaeologists who were enthralled at having found such cultural treasures. The Vietnamese, who presumably already knew of those stone feats in the jungle, may’ve thought it just as well to let the jungle keep them. For you have to let the jungle have something: or she will take back everything eventually. But white men come, and often they are intent on saving or vanquishing when they do. On our marriage-saving trip, I hauled my wings in a blue plastic case from north to south. Everywhere we went, the items we bought, entry fees we paid, cost double or triple the local fare, exacted from us with distrustful, scrutinizing eyes. Some charges were blatantly duplicitous. At moments anger would mount in me. I am from here too,  I wanted to shout,  and I’ve spent a  lifetime caring,  and  carrying, what you think I’ve forgotten, what you think making us pay more for now will somehow vindicate. At the same time I understood well enough where the urge for retribution came from, the years and dynamics implicit. Wool-sick  nature of my own tongue;  white partner beside me. At the Dalat airport the security officer sent me back to the airline desk to pay  more tacked-on fees and  at Tan Son Nhut  we had  to  buy our airtickets to Cambodia twice. These small harassments felt like tolls being exacted for something I could not quite put my finger on. Then I set my wings down in the Siem Reap airport. And they were gone when I turned back for them.

+ –

My mother  favored the adage by  Thomas Wolfe: “You  can never go home.”  There are pilgrims praying to Buddhist altars under the Hindu friezes, and the temple roofs and doorways are shaped like labia. I read somewhere that Neil Young wrote his song about Cortez the killer after a high school history lesson. The guitar solo too is a snake. Jagging and asymmetric, hissing at ground-level through the song, it is the white man’s best way of evincing that he is both wild and sorry. It comes dancing across the water. Anti-instinct and ancestral. The snake-charmer with his fingertips executes the map. In the ruins: I want to take off my clothes. Every person is deficient in at least one of the four directions.

imagine i’m a shapeless orb
and every once in a while,
a person’s into it. so now i’m
feeling myself like really feeling
myself, my lineage, my whole
thing. a man in my phone said
he wants this narrow picture
so i’ll serve it up solemn and
without thinking.
i say i’ll be
dressless, skinless, curated
and pickled. i say i’ll give it
all up for a chance to be warm.
the next day,
i smell my top lip
and it’s contagious.
i’ll reject another like me now—
a darkest skin, a biggest
lover, a wrist folded into a
hate crime. i’ll grab these
feet by the ankles and drag
them to the ocean, where
the dark won’t let them find
another warm body. and when
i unlearn this wound in me,
i meet to touch my
delicate identicals. come forth
shapeless, come forth
rounded in the colors, come
and come and come again.
i’ll spend the rest of my days
writing odes to this beauty!
look at us dancing under the
big, good strobe! look at us
reaching for one another’s
skin! look at us! becoming
and becoming!
 
I don’t mean the bird nor what
it does to insects mid-flight,
not what’s done with pride
mid-fight when hook inflicts
square on zygomatic, not what
lovers say to one another, mid-bite
into midnight two (or more) dark
bodies cluster thunder into open
mouths want of ache. What I mean is
what I do in 8th grade when the 80ish
Polish grandmother at my parish’s
fish fry asks with haddock breath, “Are you
Middle Eastern?” When I say, “No,
I’m half Filipino,” she replies, “Oh,
that’s much better.” She walks away,
gets to leave the moment, but I don’t.
I take it with me to job interviews—
just as the Manila sun
really brings out the farmer tan in me,
body a sluggish drip of lightning,
over burnt pancake sky, any office’s fluorescent lighting
chiaroscuros my skin, darkens by lightening.
Maybe in my interviewer’s head lives
a homunculus 80ish Polish grandmother,
where she tempts the interviewer:

Ask if he’s Middle-Eastern. Ask if he can explain
what a hijab is. Ask if he needs a hijab to perform
this job. Ask if he’s Hawaiian. Puerto Rican. Polynesian.
Ask if he can locate Polynesia on a map. Ask if he knows,
what the first champagne mango of the summer
tastes like, its golden juices flowing over some farmer’s
cigar paper skin. Tell ’em we are an equal opportunity employer,
but reserve our right to distance him. Tell ’em
we accept his flesh the way two stunted lovers
sigh into one another. Tell ’em

swallow.

Apo
 
which in Ilocano can mean great-
grandmother or God—

I return your grandson to where you are buried.
It was his wish. This is my first
prayer in decades.

Apo—

His body had given most of its warmth
by midnight. His left hand had interlocked
mine, folded us nonreligious men
into an embrace.

Apo—

Decades ago, you held a young boy’s hand
on your way to Laoag City Market.

Stalls of fresh and dried fish. Heaps of mangoes, in greens,
dusty yellows. You reached for but felt an empty grip.

A policeman found the boy minutes later. A shaman,
a monk, a priest, and a poet are still pouring over
his soul.

Apo—

is a rough, very rough, translation of God
help me find the right words to pray.

30.

The west wind drifts through my thin gauze shirt.
Against the hills, a tall building with plank-walled rooms.
I, wishing for my wife and son like clouds far away,
My night is even longer under the bright moon.

With wine at the head of the bed, my spirit always drunk,
Under a pillow, no flowered dreams or sweet.
One piece of quiet lives only in the heart.
I lean on others to lessen my bitter cool.

A building need not be tall; with windows, it will have light.
An island need not be far; here, Angel Island.
Alas, a wood building blocks my journey.

Four walls brushed green, contained by grass tinted green.
Inside, a cacophony of village dialects; night silenced
by pale guards.
To make “luck” happen, the square-holed elder brother.

There are children to disturb the ears, but no speech
to muddle over.
Towards the south, I observe the immigration hospital. The west, an army camp.

This author says, “When a prisoner lives there,
what happiness can it have?”

49.

My petition denied already half a year with no further news.
Who knew that today, I would be deported back
to Tang Mountain?
At mid-ship, I’ll suffer waves, and pearl-like tears will fall.
On a clear night, three times I’ll find the bitterness hard to bear.

57.

Angel’s wood house of three rafters merely shelters the body.
Island foothills contain stories impossible to share.
Wait to spin somersaults on my approval day,
Raze the immigration station without speaking of benevolence!

It’s the difference between
whether you talk to the girl or not
whether you carry the moon home
in the seat of your pants
burning and cool
ready to lay it on your tongue
in the privacy of your room
and let its holy light burn through
your blood
Or whether you walk home
with the moon in your stomach
heavy as a rock
with all the sidewalks pulling you down
and all the well-lit buildings
of a midtown night winking on and off
Saying we know you, you’re the one who
goes home alone and types in the dark
with the small cut of your window
always blocking the light of the moon off

At night, the men climb up to the rooftops
to see if they can see the moon

The sun sets first over the beaches of Brooklyn
then the meadows of Queens

The moon appears
the small clip of a nail
a paring knife
a chalk mark
left to linger in the sky

Always the sun sets first
and like Allah’s clockwork
the moon finds itself in our hands
a bird come to rest

It hangs low over buildings
crosses over street lamps
jumps rope with telephone lines
hears the Aunties’ voices
through the wires
calling each other to ask:

Has anyone seen the moon yet?
Has anyone seen the moon?

January in Michigan means Viva Pit Senor, aluminum trays
heavy with pancit, dinuguan, pinakbet, caldereta, lumpia,

leche flan, bibingka and five Hot-N-Ready pizzas for
the husbands and children. My mother is wearing paint

on her face, a candle on her head. You see, Sinulog is not
just a religious holiday, but a festival, a performance.

If no one will remember our history, then we will reenact
a version every year, even if a January blizzard is coming

through, Michigan-style, in which the trees die standing,
and the roads are as treacherous as the early modern

seas. Still, we sashay into the community center, wrapped
in polyester fibers and fake leather gloves. We slide off

our sodden boots, go barefooted. In this performance
of our history, someone’s white husband plays Magellan.

This husband used to work for GM before the auto
industry crisis. Now he is unemployed and enjoying his

role as a powerful, yet bumbling navigator, captain-general.
The actor’s wife is playing a native Filipina. She has no lines,

only dances, but in reality, she talks fast and uncensored
like a late-night radio DJ. Because I’m a teenager, she teaches

me the Bisaya word for masturbation, and throughout
the rehearsal, I can’t stop saying it: lulo. My dad tells me

to stop, for goodness sake, but why should I, when everyone
is laughing, and the word is perfect. Lulo, I say, lulo.

All the Filipino wives are playing native dancers, and their
husbands are playing conquistadors, because what were

the conquistadors if not small-town men with beer breath
wearing plastic armor, holding a figurine of a brown baby

Jesus while a native woman throws them the keys to their
Buick sedan asking them to grab the paper plates. We’ll need

paper plates, since this rehearsal involves eating as much food
as we’ll eat at the real party so we’ll know if our costumes

still fit. Most of these husbands met their wives on the internet,
but in the 1500s, it was a little different. You got on a boat

first to find spices or gold or coconuts or unconditional
love. Someone’s muscular Fil-Am son plays Lapu-Lapu,

who in real life Filipino history, is known for slaying Magellan
with an iron sword before Magellan could make his way

around the world. Magellan was probably killed by a group
of native folks—not just one Filipino guy—but we like this

version of the story because it is a historical representation
of the conflictedness we feel on the inside. And who doesn’t

love a good one-on-one fight? If Mani Pacquiao lived in Lansing,
he could’ve been our Lapu-Lapu, and our Magellan (Ron)

wouldn’t have stood a chance, the poor guy. An obstetrician
from Baguio plays a smart Enrique of Malacca, Magellan’s slave

and translator (who may have betrayed Magellan’s crew after his
death, but we’re not mentioning that here), and an accountant

from Manila plays Raja Humabon, the king who converted
to Catholicism as an act of diplomacy. I am Princess Amihan,

the king’s wife. I am also the director of this wacky, factually
dubious play, and I tell Magellan that he should stop doing

that thing with his shoulders, and I tell Lapu-Lapu to learn his
godforsaken lines, and I yell at the dancers to stop chattering,

because this is serious, because the performance is tomorrow,
and we’ve got to do this right. And my mother keeps telling me

that I should move my hips when I dance, because I am as stiff
as a Methodist church in the suburbs, and I weep because I

will never dance as beautifully as she does, and I will never
be who she wants me to be: a nurse. No way can I make it

through nursing school, when I am the director of this play.
And tomorrow, everyone will scrape the ice off their windows,

and carry the food in the trunks of their American cars. They
will say their lines. I will say my lines, and I won’t say: lulo, though I

will be tempted to say it, before the lights go down, and the drums
start beating hard like a heart from the boombox speakers,

and before the community center fills with brown faces, laughing
and cheering, because this play is for all of us, it is our reckoning.

It was a Friday, the temperature tepid,
a perfect day for a trim, my hair down
to my waist. My father—with his
penchant for tinkering, his amateurish
hair salon posture—snipped eight inches
off my head easily like tags on newly
bought merchandise. Such cavalier-ness,
such lack of precision. I saw my new
hairdo and cried hard for my lost locks,
my diminished strength. I, a little-girl
Samson. He, my Delilah. I wept for
hours, until he patted me on the shoulders,
said—It’s okay, Inday, it will grow! It will grow! 
When my hair came back, he never
again approached me with a pair of
scissors. He reserved his hair-related
experiments for his sons, who also
found themselves weeping in front
of mirrors after he left them as patchy
and lop-sided as the stray dogs who
chased the Jeeps in Carbon. Again, he
replied—Ah, mga amaw! Don’t cry! It will
grow back! And years later, when I lived
in Germany, when my husband was
deployed, I brought my babies home
to the Philippines. The little one got sick,
had a fever, lost weight so fast no one
knew what to do. My father spit on her
neck, told her—Inday, you will grow—
and soon, she was healthy again, as if this
was some incantation, some heathen
magic he knew. He died shortly after
we left, still young and handsome as César
Ramirez. They gelled his hair, sprinkled
a little cologne behind his ears. They
torched his body, he shrank into ashes.
Years later, when they amputated my
mother’s gangrened legs, he wasn’t
around to say: Don’t worry. They will grow
back. And when Death took my mother,
my brothers, he wasn’t alive to tell the ones
left behind: They will grow, they will all grow,
they will all grow back. And he was right to be
dead and silent. No one who has died has
ever returned, has ever grown back from
the loam. We prayed for resurrections,
but the dead remain as memories that
seemed to shrink in the mind,
like an airplane appearing smaller
the further it gets from the ground.

You are not as tired of diaspora
poetry as I am of the diaspora. Sometimes

I thank God that I was born inside an American
-made tank. Sometimes I weep within

the beast. My uncle works on the railroads
and goes home to his nuclear family loathing

my queerness from afar. He and I tend
our silence, a beautiful child

until it speaks. Another uncle is a guard
with two ex-wives and a secret love

of comic books. Tragedy made him the head
of his family too soon. Don’t weep for your dad

he said, weep for me. “You didn’t know him
like I did.” I have a third uncle, a mechanic

who visits his home in Lebanon every year
& now I must admit English has failed me.

I should say kholo, my mother’s brother.
I should say umja, my father’s brother

so you know which branch of the tree to cut. Or
cherish. My uncles are doused in industry, good sons

of the State. They get on with what needs
getting on. Language is their least favourite

daughter. They use their mouths for breath
and do their best to forget the world

outside. I think they love where they come
from but in truth, I have never heard them

say so, except to mutter they do not want
to pay taxes in two countries come on

one is killing them already &
isn’t that enough?

Our instructor tells us that Korean sentences are ordered as either:

subject + verb, or
subject + object + verb.

There is no verb inflection for tense or number. There are no articles.
Relative pronouns are not used and there is no gender agreement with
pronouns. Passives are not commonly used. Many verbs are not subject
to being passivized.

He makes up, on the spot, a silly anecdote to illustrate the difference
between Korean and English syntax.

Your friend calls you on the phone, he says, and the connection is not
good. You want to tell your friend to bring you an apple. In English, you
would say:

“I want an apple.”

But the phone cuts out before you finish the sentence. So all your friend
hears is “I want,” and she would never know what it was you wanted.

In Korean, you would say:

“I apple want.”

Your friend would hear the important words—you and apple. Your friend
would know something about you and about the apple. Or, in Korean,
you could just say “apple,” and assume that your friend knows it’s about
you and could probably conclude that you want an apple. And then she
would bring it to you.

We all laugh. But I want more.

I want to know: Is the fact that a relationship exists between the subject and
the object of the sentence more important than the nature of that relation-
ship? Or more important than the action that transpires between them?

I want to believe I carry Korea in me, in my blood and bones.

That my body remembers something of my mother, my father, my first home.

That Korean-ness lies dormant, waiting.

That maybe language is one way back.

If I can learn its grammar and alphabet

hold its vocabulary in my mouth

then perhaps I can know something of history—my history.

If I can speak it, then maybe I can know its topography—

the rugged mountains that run down the peninsula like a broken spine,

wild river that bisects its cities.

If I can name its flora and fauna, its national flower,

if I can sing its national anthem,

if I can learn the right words for mother, for longing, for love,

then maybe I can recover some lost thing.

 

I fear this is asking too much of syntax.

There is a belief among Koreans who embrace Won Buddhism that our
destinies are determined by forces we cannot understand. That decisions
have been made about our lives long before we are born. Pre-written.

Before I was born, it was written.

Before I was born, there was the war.

Before I was born, there was one mother and one father.

And I was born, as it was written.

And the rupture, too, was written.

I am writing into the rupture, the absence left there.

In the last days of the trip, they take us to Mount Sorak. We stay in a
resort hotel, play casino games.

It is as if we are the only people there. We wander the carpeted hallways
with our paper cups filled with tokens. We drink cheap soju and laugh
loudly. Spread ourselves across the pink couches in the lounge.

There is a late-night disco in the hotel and so we dance.

There is a private room for karaoke, and we sing American songs until we
can no longer stand.

In those small hours, we talk about what we remember. What we think
we can. Fleeting images.

A bowl of persimmons.

Dogs barking in a fenced yard.

A man in a dark suit, standing at a gate.

Or maybe we have dreamed them.

The way a dream can be a memory.

The way a memory can be a wish.


After a few nomadic years, we settled
into a split-level house nestled in a cul-de-sac
away from bustling boroughs, but never
far from wraiths of sprawling estates & train
tracks that cleaved privilege & affluence
from our constant state of deprivation.

A latchkey kid—I often stole
away to the basement chock full of vinyl
bags of worn clothes & box skyscrapers
reeking mothballs—my mother an expert
magpie of all things already discarded. Built-in
bar next to the boiler, deserted & unused,
became Barbie’s mansion: multi-storied
cross-sections of elaborate chambers rivaling
any store-bought imitations. Unlike classmates
who had entire Mattel playrooms filled
with glittery toys & miniature Pepto pink
Corvettes, my Barbie only owned one other
casual outfit—so I made sure Ken engaged
in easy conversation, half-lying
on a couch made from fabric swatches,
mimicking what I saw on The Young & the Restless.

In the throat of this hidden cave, I inhabited
whiteness without retribution. No longer
ching-chong China girl—I, a ravishing blonde
trophy with her perfect proportions. Pipedream:
I wondered what it would be like to strip away
slit eyes—sick of assimilation; the debilitating
task of tireless reinvention. Then came
the right solution: press curling iron
to sculpt a familiar countenance, black magic
marker graffitied over golden tresses. In horrific
absolution, I beheld plastic melt into a gooey mess.
Oh, the glorious stink of burning rubber!

Without further pomp or ballyhoo, I buried her
in the backyard by a stand of evergreens with
Ken for good measure, a pinecone in lieu of
a headstone to lie in peace—forever.






