It was never safe for us—
always beneath the eye is blood;
and maybe a ferocious tongue
called love;
Spring is here again
                                                                                                                      and so are your teeth, exposed
                                                                                                                      white as bitter membrane,
                                                                                                                      there isn’t enough skin
                                                                                                                      to cover the surface;
But you, blank sentence, naked check, you

                      sliver of space between, you are the most
                      bold of all, busy-necked in your vanishing
                      vigilance, oh please, gather us forth, oh,
                      please, see me running and yell “Hey!”
                      until everyone looks and thinks I’m the thief;
 In this game I play with myself,
                                                                                             I am the meat and you are
                                                                                             the dog, and I am the bitch, and you

                                                                                                                                      are the muzzle;
Oh, spot me like a cherry, please;
                                                                                                                       the delay and review,
                                                                                                                       your octagonal burning,
                                                                                                                       my credentials, oh. Unthinkable,
                                                                                                                       this color, unremarkable
                                                                                                                       dread. I’m tired of sight
                                                                                                                       and mortification;
  This dance old as a dead flowering
                                                                                 root, revealing, in my mind always
                                                                                 red, as the last drops
                                                                                 of evening, then nothing, a hollow
                                                                                 mouth, ripe and rotting.

Orchid bees iridesce as garbage-swarmed flies,
illusory in the light as in the darkness, just rained-
upon soil and the quiet storm, which was here,
all along smooth patterns of falling, brain in love
with this hour of memory, and a car that died
a long time ago, this hour of the heart, expanded
by a saxophone’s inquiry, turned down turn-up,
an exclamation or perfume-gummed taboo, sweet
mystery of living death’s unasked question, still
these flowers, so red and perched, pinned loosely,
as a hummingbird’s emerald effort, even remotely, it
sings, a squall inconsolable, and my love, constellation
of feathers above, relieved in the escaping across
the way, young men cockle their laughter like ducks,
and we all hate the fly, the filthy wish it gave us.

it is hard to feign rigour when
poems are just zoos for feelings???/
my feelings hate poems

they are rigorously faint—
they come into my dreams,
say ‘yikes’ and then leave

my dreams are cranes
looming obstinate
in the pastoral landscapes of poetry

pete wentz came to me in a dream
and he said
i am the godfather of your feelings

i trapped pete wentz
in a pastoral landscape
and called it a poem???

i lifted my feelings with cranes
and they loomed in my dreams
pastorally faint with rigour

there’s something to be said
for ‘yikes’ not as a feeling
but as a poem, old as dreams

i trapped my feelings
in the dream of language
so they speak only in poems

pete wentz came to me again
and he said
poetry didn’t die
it went to live on a farm

?????????????????????
i want to faint into my poems
i want to be rigorous with my feelings

I’m watching this kid with glasses shoot baskets
on the driveway court in my memory.

He actually thinks if he wants it enough
he’ll play someday in the NBA.

The fact that he’s Jewish, five foot eight
and all alone in the suburbs hardly matters.

Every car passing by might house a backseat scout.
Ridiculous? Well, he believes this.

Here there’s no such thing as a dream
too big; only a series of commercial quotes

which serve as the basis for increased hustle and grit:
It’s not the size of the dog in the fight, etc.

And now his aims are shifting
from one out-of-reach league to another:

If I make this shot, he says to a God
with whom he still daily communicates,

if I make this shot, Renee in 8th grade
will feel towards me how I feel towards her.

Don’t you see how little it matters
should the ball find the center of net or not?

It’s the hope that’s important, from this great distance,
mixed with a certainty that everything yet can happen.

Today – older, battered, sheltered
by ten thousand bricks accumulated –

I fight to keep that interior kid-candle flickering.
We all do. We have to. The myth we feed to wake up

and face it again. Even here, making this,
I feel myself back at the free throw line,

faith-full, sure as ever that with this next shot…

Were this place to close, or burn, or fall, in an earthquake, down.
Were it to flood or be bulldozed to make way for the gray &
unmusical slab of an apartment building. Were it to be carried
away in a river unleashed by an unstable climate, or bombed
by the frightened white men who are, despite what they tell us,
the bombers of things in this country, were it to be engulfed
in a tornado or battered by super accurate asteroids—I would

go with it. Were it to be eaten into the earth, I would go with it.
The last breakfast my father ate, he ate here, with me, amongst
the rattling of silverware & plates being loaded by bussers into
bins. Amid the shouting of servers who have served here since
the seventies, the kibitzing of old men with hearing aids nestled
into hairy ears like eggs humming in pigeons’ nests. Amongst
the slicing of pastrami, pearlescent with fat—pastrami that,

as dear Will said when I brought him here, weeps. It weeps,
I know, for us. It weeps for what it does to our hearts, the tender
smotherings of a mother who must protect her fragile children
from the grievous whims of a God who chooses a people by
touching them with a finger of pure density. Yes, my father ate his
last breakfast here, with me & his discontinuing heart. We spoke,
laughed, chewed bagels; onion for him, with lox, cream cheese,

tomato, capers, cucumber. For me, ever the purist, pumpernickel
with sable, cream cheese, & red onion—tomato’s frantic acid
overwhelms the poor lox’s placidity, I remind him, but old habits
die hard—about as hard as he wants that bagel—toasted nearly
black, so bits of char collect with each bite in his mustache. Here
I can speak of him only in the present tense. Here, where we speak
of mothers—his mother, mine—who brought me first to this place

when I was too young to appreciate what it meant, the direct line
it made into a history I am desperate, now, to claim (though so
little record has been kept). My mother took me here & she said
try the Black Pastrami Reuben, try the Mushroom Barley Soup,
the Cheese Blintzes, the Kishka, the Black & White Cookie.
My mother who knows me better than I do, my mother who
is not, like me, familiar with the concept of enough—& now

I bring friends, I bring women I wish to lie with awhile, kissing
their shoulders & eyebrows, whispering How good were those reubens?
I’ve come here alone—to celebrate, to mourn. Brent’s spreads
at Yom Kippur break fasts, funeral services—when my father dies
we fill the kitchen with smoked fish, & even my mother arrives,
& others who are here out of love or obligation or the promise
of free food. Oh, were this palace to disappear, I could write

no elegy. How to sing the way the blintz breaks open like a tablet
with a cloud inside it, the way the cloud fills the mouth & empties
the mind. Were this place to go, how could I stay? But why bother
worrying about it? Still, customers spill from the door in sandals,
suspenders, visors, into the Northridge sun. No nostalgia—heaven
is still here. O slicer slicing meat for sandwiches, o bagels & bustle,
& my father waving me over to join him, there in our usual booth.

I dreamed my brother gave his dog to a friend in New York
who could better care for him. we walked into the woods

behind the wintered swim club where the swan babies
held their bonfires. I was never invited, never ran my hand

through Sara R—’s dark hair or let Amanda A—’s bird tongue
flit in my mouth. instead of the pool, I summered in woods,

following forest paths to nowhere, policing the creek
with other uninvited trees. we knew a thing called a crayfish

dug a mudhole. we knew the creek eels were slippery garbage.
the drop-down promise of land on the other side was why we swung,

both hands trusting thickness of rope, letting our weight make air
as we swam through space. it was never we expected the rope to snap,

never we expected the fish to bite, never we expected our first kiss
so ugly, so much like a wet fat snail, not at all like the spell said.

Urgent and hawkish, 
savage man strokes
skirr from your pen;
determined bold lines 
chase skeletons   
gouge the eye sockets 
of decayed Frida Kahlo  
bursting with flowers,
the Dance of the Dead.
You are the pen and paper    
without pause or breath;  
massive black lines from your ink-sticks  
wield spirals of ornamental corpses,
black and white, peppered with screaming  
wet crimsons, blood red licks, rushing
specious daffodil yellows,
cool gray blues scraped from the sky.
Delphic festival characters  
stream elliptic sangomas
from your cacophonous palette  
faking their roles on the page.
Medieval hares arch lemon hairs,
intentions laid bare, one eviscerated
in clumsy, advancing, pseudo-lyrical lines
flashing guts to hungry plucked eyes,                
hurried, running out of time.
Finely etched skeletons dance 
on ephemeral Styrofoam cups.
Bloody teeth gnaw tattooed sketches,
Max’s graphic prenotions.

I am calling you up from the dead
with my waning merdyke libido
come, come, my scaled tail flaps
up, out of the embers, can you hear me
crash off your mother’s meranti shelf
rise up ashen magpie from the shattered glass
and ascend the northwest wind
drift over the body Atlantic to the jagged 
water-bound mitten, the rock is lit
your horny American merbitch sits here
calling you, a displaced witch
still snatched in grief’s teeth 
sponged over death, memory
and love’s hunger
where ghosts’ romantic utterings 
rumble  over crumbled
dreams of earth’s dumb specters 
stumbling clumsy through 
last summer’s debris
and winter’s failed healings
while still pining for ghosts 
to fuck them to new deaths

i toss humpback salmon from my thumb like silver dollars, listen for the splash of them in the wide mouth of the estuary. wishing. summer evening a blue magic. breeze on wet ankles another sort. soon water is just fish/starlight. the estuary seems boiling with them. the rivers so full of roe they look like fields of poppies. ocean shimmering and whales fed. when i look down under the grey-green surface of the water, there are thousands upon thousands of keys, twirling and bright. 

in 2019 it’s always difficult to wake from the dream—to hear the neighborhood’s falcon shrieking over the baseball field and call it natural instead of screaming. somewhere inside me is a yellow possibility, round and sleeping against the softest flesh. whatever it becomes will never see the same creek i did, instead will watch the salmon hurtled rattling through plastic tubes and spat into the river. the magic of carrying the smolt in a dixie cup as distant a memory as the last night of 1999 when i sat eating sticky rice and cucumber salad also thinking the world was ending.

a dream might be that i'm not lifting the bumblebee onto a leaf to bring it to the grass instead of concrete/a dream that there is no concrete/a dream might be that behind my eyelids is nothing but the turquoise of good pacific water/my face seeing my first sea star/my feet tiptoeing in enormous boots around the moon snail’s eggs that—although shown just the day before on the overhead projector (whose hum and heat i can still feel, and the dust floating/starlight)—i never imagined being so lucky to see

in real life, in front of me, something strange and wonderful which nothing i can ever make might ever know.

i remember all of us before we had breasts. when we’d sit in the summer field and dream of always feeding the goats straight from our hands, of cuts ringed with swamp mud, of lakes lapping at the shore. one night on the trampoline, stilled beneath our growing bodies, i know we made a pact—
or was it in your father’s closet, after reading a ghost story as dusk settled over the barn?
whoever we were, i know mostly all we did was laugh and scrape our knees and hold hotdogs with two whole hands after hours under a sun barely so hot as it is now. i used to be a person who’d climb onto a horse. i used to be a person who’d tether the goat, walk it with you down the road to the park in the rain uncommon for the season. 

i remember all of us in our sexless, mad-libs age, only wanting to curl into car seats with a book and no one watching. to put something so dramatic into a notebook so we’d never need to say it out loud. i remember standing in a park, crafting an email in which i admitted i had no idea how we could continue to be friends, and the ease with which you accepted it on paper. 

there was a time we both ran crayons along loose leaf paper held over gravestones. there was a time we bent our backs to fit trees, sang quietly with each other in your bedroom at your father’s house—

there was the time you watched as they pierced my ears and we went to blockbuster after. ate pizza downstairs watching the movie. when i slept on my back and it wasn’t even hard because we talked all night about anything.

1.    The bride was beautiful. 

2.    The bride was beautiful 
in the way brides are—
intricate updo, professional face.

3.    The first thing my brother,
the groom, said to me was 
that’s an interesting hairdo. 

4.    It was his second wedding
in the same church.

5.    Bourke Floyd once fingered me
under the magnolia tree
during a lock in.

6.    The minister’s son and I
planned our Rock N Roll future
on the Sunday school steps.

7.    Rock n roll dies 
naked and alone on Christmas. 
The organist reminded me of
our handprints on the wall.

8.    You were my only ally 
I shouted at my dad
during the reception
and then I danced.

9.    I had sweet tea and whiskey 
for lunch, thanks to the 
bride’s bad sister.

10.    I didn’t make out with 
the bride’s bad sister.
I didn’t even try.

11.    Your mom isn’t talking to me
my dad said. I said me neither. 

12.    I ripped down posters 
for the camp where I was a molested. 
I once got in trouble for drawing smiles 
on the goldfish crackers.

13.    Everyone at that church is older
than they used to be
except for the minister’s son. 

He hollered WHERE IS THE SNAKE?
He was high. I’d ordered the snake two days earlier.
I’d told him it would take a week
and anyway, he’d wanted an iguana. 

I yelled back THE SNAKE WILL COME ON 
WEDNESDAY! I’d named him Yves. 
He was a High White California King.
Pink mice waited in the freezer.

A mural in a 10th century Ethiopian church
depicts Adam and Eve in a rubbery sort of gloom. 
I tattooed on my inner thigh upon finding
an apple in my own mouth, an offering to petal-pink lips. 

My legs coiled around hers on snow white sheets
and she said, “I’ve never touched a woman before.”
I hissed, “How does it feel?” She invited 
her Adam to join us, as the story goes.

I left them reborn in Eden and ordered
myself the snake. I picked him out online,
almost a designer thing. YVES IS A LEO, LIKE ME! 
I called and he shouted YES, BABE, I KNOW.

Spring was coming to its sap-sticky end when
you were telling me something about how they carve out
tree branches to make room for power lines.

You were moving out of your house and I was thinking up all the ways
I could try to make you sick with missing me.
I was stupid from the humidity, stumbling bleary-eyed
across your cool tile floor, aching for a sip of water.

I wanted to live inside your loud-ass laundry machines.
To be a dust mite, to live inside your mattress, to make you sneeze.
Instead,
you hid me away like the stains on your fitted sheet.
I listened to you tell stories of your old lovers
who read Vonnegut and Forster and danced in bars
and dropped acid with you and traveled the world.

I sat up all night with stomachaches thinking about them,
but it didn’t make me love you any less.
Wring me and hang me out to dry, I swear to god
no matter what you do to me
it won’t make me love you any less.

When summer came, you started sending me voicemails
from the orchard during your lunch breaks
while I was at work in the city.
You were feasting on wet, overripe plum
while I listened; gripping the dirty subway pole,
quaking with the sticky-sweet
nagging sensation of knowing too much.

What to do, now, with all this rotten fruit?
What to do when I no longer excite you?
When you dig your teeth into skin
because you want to taste the sweetness,
but you recoil in disgust
when you discover the pit inside?

I remember last winter when they found out Pluto looked like a mushroom cap.

When the snow melted, I remember roaming the woods,
stepping on mushrooms to make more of them appear.

My father always said it like a warning: “if you kill one, more will grow back,”
like pulling gray hairs out from an aging scalp,
not knowing that his omen was exactly the point.

I can only grow things out of death.
The only seeds I ever committed to the dirt barely even grew—
they withered away to nothing within weeks.

When spring came, I was wilting like a dead sapling in your arms.
maybe I would have even let you see me cry.

But instead we smiled at the mushroom caps—
solar systems spanning the forest.
We ran around with powdered Pluto on the insides of our lips
knowing we could pull the most beautiful things from outer space
and put them in our bodies.
Bruises erupted like emission nebulae on my knees and elbows,
your neck and shoulders.

If I were younger I would be plucking daisy petals for you,
imagining Pluto like a mound of purple clay,
not knowing that space is cold and silent.

But now I know where stars go when they die,
and instead of picking daisies I plant roses under your skin.
I paint you like a canvas, only for the buds to shrivel and collapse
shortly after breaking through the surface of your earth.

at night i sleep next to you, your skin balmy course. like grinded down sweetgum made smooth in the sweat of the mississippi delta summer. you tear and bend at my will. your spine disjoints itself, hangs on antebellum horse glue. smells like a black bear’s wet waxy fur, reeking in the forest. my arms lie over you, my legs span over you. my hands memorize every inch of your antiquated materiality. teach me the epistemology of you. my hands in the muddy earth, mini plows plowing up the fertileness of you. grisly morsels of marrow & bones. your fleshy bits clog my nails. grow boll weevils under my rural skin.

down south we sweat when we cum. we got humidity orgasms. those sticky-moist-corporeal screams. that fucking heat exhaustion. we lie in mosquito nests & watch our skin swell. it goes plump-whoa. longing deep like claws dug in soft-red earth. that dirty-dirty animal thing. bless my heart. you make my body flood like a levee. like a human-made disaster. only your hands are made of callouses & not cash. our nature is a cancer. that end of the world kind of sick. pastoral pit in my stomach. my knees & your back: muddy mammoth mammal prints. happy as a dead pig in sunshine. 

we drag the chili pot duct-taped shut across the rock quarry. the big dog clomp-clomping behind us. tongue like an outstretched fruit roll-up, lap-lapping at his jowls. all our paws hot against aggregate. the siren-edge of the open-pit calling jumpinto my wetness. when we stand still the parasites on our bodies become visible. tiny crawling specks of seed-tick-dust. we strip the clothes heat-stuck to our skin and my gut flips, turns. i smile at you from in-between my legs. brushing away arachnids feels a lot like petting fur. your skin is a softness that moves. 

welcome to your life 
your face changes as you watch
outside the frame
among the distractions
you are right now
a body prone to emotion 
Google Maps 
attraction 
you never wanted airtight logic
now more than blue 
the only constant you’ve known 
you’ve watched from other rooms 
you were an animal 
out circling the thing
at the end of the world 
with no end 

I am not a desirable woman
I am a very real person 
in a glow of messages
I am uncultured as my thoughts
they are so glossy & blank sometimes 
the worst poems contain only one idea
I was told 
I have OCD
just watching myself die
all those times
like Calypso I kept throwing myself
from the rocks
I kept coming back
I’m here now
& thru the window’s grey tinge
I see the bluest fields 


I can’t stop thinking
last week I tuned-in 
I grew closer to god, ethereal  
downwind of some guy’s vape  
day-by-day 
I zone out 
the sound of a river  
trees, their shadows 
asleep on my sofa 
I’m much happier 
underneath my sad vest   
let me show you the new of me 
all this roadside 
fields & fields & fields
& everything arriving  

I render a coin

for something 

I forgot

the sky 

scratching itself 

into decency

when I

wake up 

always rattling 

around

in my skin

a new aesthetic 

I can’t 

quite claim 

to understand 

meaning 

why the birds leave

birthmarks

adhesive

on the ground

people running

around 

their dreams

loudly

it can only 

get better

all the world

coming out 

my phone

I open 

another feeling

parentheses

breathe in 

pagination            

touching 

my screen

intimately

I feed

on good looks

the absolute

chasm

between my legs                   

emptying

all my

prescription bottles       

into 

my pit

I desire 

to burn out 

nature

my existence 

saying I’m not 

ready to go                            

I’m going 

to get 

somewhat better

I mean 

watch me 

high

I’m tagging 

the clouds

there are wild elephants
in the country
wrote Marco Polo

            I once mistook 
            the word blubbery 
            for blueberry

while exploring the kingdom of Basma
now called Sumatra

            then was known for imagining
            bears bluely
            and for getting
            pregnant at sixteen

and numerous unicorns
which are very 
similar actually

            before sixteen my dad 
            often took me fishing 
            and I always thought I felt
            the line go stiff
            then the waves would fold in
            on themselves like origami 
            until nothing but a fin
            was left waving

what is the difference
between want and belief

            the first time a boy told me
            he loved me I was kneeling
            in the shower 
            then it felt like it was raining

I go out to get tattooed

a serpent a bear skull
it doesn’t matter

I wait for the brief prick
of needle to bone

pain doesn’t 
ask you to think about it

a steady hum 
like a swarm it swells 

into heat gathered up
from each sting 

simple and dazzling 
it renders 

me a hollow thing                   
a bright and present halo

the world feels less and less familiar most days
sometimes it is difficult to identify where i truly am
sometimes it is a challenge not to let the ugly parts
infiltrate the joyous & horrific task
of choosing to stay alive
again & again & again

when you figure out what it is you cherish
you ought to protect it with claw and beak and bone
you ought to protect it more than you do yourself
every morning say “i value love”
and pretty soon you will be an unstoppable force

i am learning how to stay alive slowly and with intent
take a lemon off the tree and eat it like an orange
plant your feet in the soil and give yourself to it

unsubscribe from the chaos machine for a minute
and refuse to let the circular speak of tyrants
erode your belief in what is unflinchingly good

when you figure out what it is you cherish
you ought to let it wash over you without fear
this is the worst possible time to be a coward
when there’s so very much at stake

every morning say “i value love”
and pretty soon
you will

i am desperate to be absolved
of this crime i cannot remember
yet have been paying for my whole life
with each apology i have since recanted

closely observe your own disappearance
draw one sharp circle in the centre of your skin
and watch itself project through an infinite tunnel
a familiar image on a disintegration loop

my body is a soft machine
i am always sifting through for evidence
to find some cosmic documentation
amongst this conjectural galaxy i’ve built

it’s a mysterious and decadent town
with a terrible and sexy secret
a grand palatial estate
in the dead centre of the bermuda triangle

it’s an abandoned fairground
where every ferris wheel blazes in glory forever
while still offering the best views imaginable
archival footage of ruined buildings
that maintain a powerful elegance nonetheless

and there’s something to be said
about a paradise paved in hell
but given the choice i’d rather take the crash site
one carefully builds from the ground up

the well-functioning city one meticulously plans
only to submerge leagues below the sea
this place is made for disaster tourism
and business is simply thriving

Sorry for taking
so long to call back 
the first time the phone 
rang i was beneath a 
bridge when you rang 
again the roar of cars and 
cargo overhead made it too 
loud to hear you sense of 
sea partially obscured 
by traffic but felt           
when the phone rang 
a third time i thought i
could be beneath 
you could be water
on the other line if your 
voice weren’t so ironed on 
when i answer i don’t ask
if you still iron your shirts 
every morning i let you
talk coral tone once
hot pink got too hot 
bleached further down 
darkness giving shelter 
to shells mouthing
open and close when
i hang up i’m sweating i
feel the plastic   floating 
toward   everything

I’m assured the last renters buried nothing but their dog back here. 

I’ve begun to accrue CVS points to diversify my portfolio. 

I can promise the doctor there’s literally no chance I’m pregnant,
and yes I am bragging.

The psychic’s big breakthrough was that I have masculine energy
and I think she based that on my pants. She was trying so hard 
I stretched the rest of her guesses into truth. 

I don’t think my Myers-Briggs type is supposed to allow for that kind of pliability. 

This quiz promises the age I’ll meet my husband 
for the name of my favorite Britney hit,
but my horoscope plainly states that
loneliness runs in trenches dug young. 

When my mom calls to tell me she’s getting a hysterectomy,
her exact words are, We’re taking the old girl out back. 

I’ve made a habit of visiting my neighbor’s
telescope. 

For several weeks I read Dear Abby religiously. 

My neighbor yells at the sky.

I ask my Uber driver if he’s tried fennel for his indigestion,
and then actually use the phrase big pharma in earnest. 

He tells me he met his wife in an improv class,
and that if you just get out of your comfort zone 
and try something new, you might be surprised
at what wonderful things you find. 

How many fingers have I nicked pressuring a dull knife. 
They say it takes the sun to make light of the moon. On the eve 
of my birth I had a revelation. I’ve told you this story before. 
The story I tell other people is, tired of being so impressive we left. 
In Moscow we stepped over a dead man, his expensive-looking arm 
extended too far in the cold, reaching as casually as Adam. The boy said
You must be fearless to bear it at all, and led us across the street 
without looking either way. It’s true our families fled here, blamed 
for something tragic. What I liked best about you was your commitment 
to running jokes. Carrie Nation’s: greeting every bartender Good morning, 
destroyer of men’s souls. Good morning, destroyer. It’s been a year 
since you disappeared without me. Without you I feel myself disappearing. 
Before you there was only childhood, squashing fireflies up my arms 
so I could glow in the dark. This fall I’ll embark on my long-awaited 
apology tour. Stop in every city we never saw. In Salzburg, that deacon told us, 
It is a right to beg.I said, Can laymen get layd. Are laymen layzy.
But only after he’d gone. Yes, deacons can have sex. You had to move 
to the Atlantic to grow alone. Sunflowers, of course, are so called 
for the habit of their young to rotate towards the sun. Mature sunflowers gaze east. 
Carrie Nation’s was a more violent sobriety than mine but our home state 
praises the sunflower for being hardy and conspicuous.
I remember the summer before we disappeared, Kansas mornings 
of record-breaking heat, picking nickels up in parking lots, 
and one soft earthquake rippled north from Oklahoma fracking. 
Apologizing for things we did in each other’s dreams, for leaving
the windows cracked through the storm. We nearly died laughing. 

People are always saying Good and you? 
& I say it too     me & other women
with synapses going up like stars

these days it’s red & rusted: my thin-making
work with kettlebells, crumpled knuckles,
watery blood in my menstrual cup.
Check horoscopes, look for signs.
Organize.

I don’t even bother kidding anymore.
Or I do. I kid so long &
so loud that Cassiopeia laughs
—that queening
from above. Talking shit
as a birthright     horizontal violence
from the matriline      &

someone’s pokey breasts in a boyfriend’s
t-shirt  & the silicones we rub
into our faces & the glass ceiling
that was supposed to be a sunburst
through a grey November day

with you crying & me crying
in the inner knowledge that
we could catch a piece of the shatter
& put it on a pendant

for all of us, forever.

I thought we were lucky now, in liberation—
now we believe we can do hard things with our bodies, too
but only

the things that men can do:       run a marathon
or climb a mountain

still, I always knew I could carry temples
in my body, create silk
from my cells.

Take up space, you say, bite back,
   & all the parts of me agree
                        including the fertile fluid
            sloshing from my cervix

 the adamantine muscle of the womb

the gorgeous yellowed pelvic bones
—my ancestors rotting their magic
where I walk

Here come the ones who chose
the second option, advancing

across the sad freeways of America
on their way to not a damn

thing worth carving in stone. Still,
see how they white-knuckle

the steering wheel, the cracked grill
burping through rush-hour traffic

and a slow-tumbling sun
that reddens the windshield

as though pelting it with tomatoes.
They know that tomorrow, too,

they will eat from a microwave.
That life is mostly for pushing

numbers from column to column
so the electricity stays on

and all your children can flee,
and pets who are even more helpless

and closer to death will stay
grateful for the cans

you open with fingers that must
seem to them like magic.

Two thoughts came to mind waiting at the crosswalk:
finally saw another black person today—
she’s like Meryl in The Hours
with her bouquet. She entered those apartments
near our favorite Italian place
(remember our muscular waiter’s gentle voice?).
Her lilies—for bae, I hoped—brightened an afternoon
of women detangling hair.
Is this how you write fiction? It’s not a wish exactly.
Drinking rosé at Gib’s, I imagined you typing
in your dream house near Canada,
the shadows of spruces on a lake. I’d be somewhere else,
who knows where, waiting for your stories
where no choice is barred or above consideration.

You look so much like your mother.
You look so much like her by now

you may be tired of hearing it.
May you never be tired of the inexhaustible metaphor

between you and your mother.
In this season of weddings and peach blossoms,

my third grandparent has died.
Being in the world, loss is first and least and awe.

I’m not wise and rarely take advice. I wish I could
end this with Don’t despair and Our friends conspire to save our lives.

I’m sorry for blood on sidewalk chalk. Sorry
for a future I cannot see. A future with hope.

After I jack off to hardcore gay porn
I always dream a hand, my
mother's, severed from the rest

of her, gripping the red-
handled shears she uses to prune
the bird of paradise down to its stump—

that slow, sun-spotted hand
I love, hovering those stainless steel blades close
to the stalk of my dick—

& this December, visiting home, I find
the Virgin's porcelain hand
(so small it could fit inside an olive's hollow)

resting by the donkey's hoof, a broken
miracle I nearly steal, wanting to make
a necklace I'd never take off,

her tiny cold fingers tapping
my sternum, close to my heart, wherever
I go.

curly like a 
shiba inu's tail
at my own
dog show

drinking perfect water

the water’s instant when still
to stagnant, when mosquito larvae pops
into the toad’s pink throat beneath sky
and supermoon

//

an ember erupts the leaf pile
smoke as if a gun’s barrel as if

//

escape the crack spreading air
stitching o’s in boom

//

my father shot meth in the bathroom
brushed teeth with his left hand
loved me

//

the moment hand becomes fist as if
knuckles might matter as if
knowledge of a wall’s stud as if

//

barn swallows cut the air
drunk with deer blood

//

i’m spinning circles in the graveyard
lost as last fall’s breath kissing oaks   
rolling birch bark tender my mind’s fire
in a dog star cold as a sip of pond water

//

as if dirt was anything but
as if dirt was anything more

//

coyotes in the ribs of coyotes

I want to be remembered like this: taut, defeated
by my own eagerness. A crude emerald whorl.

In green tandem, we twirl, sisters
to some bright, unknown sound.

Through the grove of voices, we tumble light,
feathery. A trail of down in our wake, haphazard,

meaningless. A primal scene, this dance.
We step and twist as if to rearrange

something fundamental, as if we’ll come out of this
somehow better: prettier, more charitable. We dance

like deer shedding antlers against oak, a scorpion
parting itself from now-old skin. Dance ache

and blood, fury and feral. Slough off
every modern notion. Still, there is no end

in which we achieve what we want.

All of it, all of it: for the old clapping trees.
All of it, all of it: for the root labor of love.


I want my Harriet Tubman 20, 
so I can walk my Black ass
into a Southern Mississippi
gas station, buy myself Zapp’s 
voodoo chips, pralines, and a cold coke,
walk straight up to that clerk 
with a camo hat and tell him real 
cool 15 on pump 4 like I don’t see 
the confederate flag 
out front, clanking against
its metal pole. He’s gonna look
at Harriet looking at him, 
like she might just run
out of his cash register. 

I want my Harriet Tubman 20 
so that I can give it to my first baby
when they’re old enough. Imma 
let them run around a toy store 
with Harriet in their hands 
and tell them whatever they want 
that Harriet can buy is their’s 
and it could be a butterfly princess 
doll with purple hair or three decks 
of fancy playing cards or a shiny 
red toy truck or a Chinese checkers 
board with little balls that will roll
all over my good floor. I won’t tell 
my baby to slow up. 

I want my Harriet Tubman 20 
so I can walk to the soul food
spot right out of downtown, 
order me chicken fried steak,
swimming in gravy. Once that food 
good and heavy in the Styrofoam, 
Imma to hand her a 20 with a Black 
woman on it. We gonna hold onto 
Harriet from the opposite sides
of the bill, looking at her creased 
face, spotted bonnet, stiff 
upper lip, realizing for the first time, 
we could be running through 
the printing press, green as ever. 

She is the only black face you get to see
today and she sure is familiar,
hot combed curls up in a black net,
fingers like freshly rolled cigars;
her great grandmother’s
biscuit and gravy recipe the only thing
keeping this cafeteria alive
and a big ole Hey, Baby
when you walk through the door.
Ain’t nothing like when she
calls you baby, when she tells you
that dress real pretty now, and
I like the way you done up that hair,
when she gives you a hug like
you’re a goddaughter or a church sister
and puts a little extra honey
on your cornbread. It tastes like
a homecoming, sounding just like
an auntie from the Georgia-Alabama
line who made mac and cheese and saved
a crispy edge for you and collards
with neck bones, yellow grits,
candied yams so sweet they
cuddle up to you like a
field kitten and your uncle say,
Oooo boy, don’t she know how to cook.

Now you’re in Prospect Park, wearing a halo of insects. Can the sun change its spots? Like how freckles are just skin damage rewritten as poetry. Then you’re a college radio DJ spinning “Boys of Summer” into “I’m Goin’ Down.” Milling through a botanic garden, smiling at every flower. All that yellow yelling hello. 

 

Now you’re remembering a pregnant moment; a spoon from last August with someone who once read a Frank O’Hara poem to you out loud on the phone, while you sat in the dark on a couch that has since been removed from your home. A person you still dream about, maybe. But past seasons are past lives. 

 

Now you’re learning in the museum, coming to terms with how ultramarine means from beyond the sea, the sole song that ever made you cry. Then you’re in the towering golden library, deep in a photo book, realizing you only ever see flamingos immobile. Though an image of something is not the thing itself. 

 

Now you’re climbing the stairs into azure space. Then you’re on a roof in Williamsburg Brooklyn studying the whole tableau of the sunset evolving, admiring the parts where God took a highlighter to the horizon, snapping a shot of her taking a picture of it all; a tall, beautiful bite mark cut into too much cotton candy. 

 

Now the celebrations are laughing their machine-gun stars in the fabric, zinging at you from all angles, one nation under competing fireworks displays. Then you’re sitting on the edge, petting a black and brown math equation. Two rotties; one barking, the other stoic; eighteen thousand Instagram followers. 

 

Now there are children in cages to the south and the cop at the border said he liked your arrowhead T and everything everywhere is flags, and the sky is very patriotic, over-the-top with its three distinct colours, and in the presence of Americans you feel like a stingray’s skeleton, naked, brittle and fanned out. 

 

Now another one goes off to the west, and a stranger hands you weed. This one ends with a dapple effect, drops of light sprinkling into the pond of the night. Then you’re thinking of the one man you’ve ever kissed, somewhere in Manhattan. Maybe watching his own version of the same mechanical explosions.

O search engine: What is a universal basic income? What does 

full communism now mean, and does it fit with my aesthetic? 

I saw a fat puppy on a leash on my way to a social setting. 

Was it a good omen fit between reality's other puzzle pieces? 

O search engine: What is identity? And who am I? The walls 

of my apartment are white as bone. It’s a privilege to live 

minimally, I saw someone say on the time line. Decluttering 

is a luxury. Now here, let me arrange these flowers. Let me rotate 

this vase so the light catches it a certain way for the gram. Every

thing is content. O search engine: What is a gilded cage? All I want 

is a white marble countertop, a cracked teacup interstitched with gold,

a pithy canvas tote full of everything I feel. The sky has been so pale 

and empty lately. Can you imagine anything bleaker than a white 

person? Every one is discontent. If you read enough you realize 

every search engine query is a prayer to a lidless god. Is nuclear 

war exciting? How would you rate peak oil? How many people 

have reviewed a wet bulb temperature of thirty five centigrade? 

Would it be possible to escape the rising sea levels by holding a Sun

day evening picnic on the mountain; a bottle of white, a fresh baguette,

whatever’s left of the baba ganoush? Who will read the poetry we left 

behind? Their black-and-white covers, their line breaks. O search engine:

  [adhan]

A calling, a culling, a billowing
minaret banner, a cigarette starter thrown
out a moving car window to prove a point.

               [standing]

Rapt, trapped, evangelical
about the whole thing
really, hinged
on guilt and hoping
you’ll sign the papers before
the door slams shut.

              [bowing]

In lieu of communion, Father
crosses my forehead.
                                       Irreverence
has somehow escaped the mouth,
and now we’re discussing sincerity.

               [prostration]

All this searching for my heart to be broken.

               [prostration again]

You’ll sleep when you die,
but form is death. The gap
between          every prayer
is sleep. The joke is: no such
thing as sleep.

                           Dead be dead.

               [sitting]

On bare feet, on upturned
buckets, on an ice block
bombing down grassy
terraces, tears blessing
the angles of our return.

In our good clothes, shoulder
to shoulder in the pew,
in a broken down Chrysler
miles and miles from home.

               [salam alaikum]

Back to the work, if you’re lucky,
hands unblemished still with grace.


This body is in an advanced state of decomposition.


That one is moving along       as expected        through the turnstile


                 out the state


                                           fair—


                           elephant ear dusted

                                                                         fingers pushing

                                    through the fence.


                  The university         demands          proof

                  of employment

                                                                     authorization. The smoke


                          fields a kind of compliance.

                                                                                     Identification proves difficult.

Sometimes it’s not the bones that help identify the body but the personal effects.


                               Ask a family over there          what

                               their migrant wore upon departure.



                                                            Students disinfect the remains.


        Sometimes it’s the sneakers             that give

                                                                                                  the body away.

I pledge

[to stop tweeting
about the war, to never leave
until you make me]

indivisible, with liberty

[dripping from my wet mouth, ears, and elbows.
In the mirror: self-satisfaction. What more]

allegiance to the Flag

[can one body take. A lesser God whispers in my ear
and I must make ablution again. You know
how to best get over your old nation? He says, Find another]

nation under [the body of this] God

[by which of course he means to
bestow upon me the virtue] of [metered wisdom]

and justice for all

[those who kneel, stand, bow, and kneel again
to place their forehead on a new country. Like you,
I’ve read some Plato. I’ve prayed]

to the Republic for which it stands

[neatly behind a row of desks, all hands on heart,
rising to start the day coming from the East. I’ve looked,
since before I even arrived, to love]

the [you in] United States of America, and

[would you, please, Your Honor, point me
in the direction of the promised land?]

I dreamed we were in a department store trying to buy you shoes. The first table was filled with offerings that overwhelmed us; the shoes were confusing in their construction, and, even when clearly identifiable as shoes, they seemed utterly and callously indifferent to the reasonable needs of a human foot.  
 
You were drawn to a pair that had once been two mated ducks. “They will stick out in a crowd,” you said, even though they were not particularly remarkable ducks—their feathers neither being bright nor drab enough to be memorable—but when I pointed this out you gave me those eyes that reminded me that none of us should pull on the thread of our own remarkability, and that a drab duck is still a duck. Awake or asleep, I have always been helpless in the face of your beautiful tautologies.
 
But when we checked the price tag, they were two thousand dollars!—and it wasn’t even clear if this was the price for the pair or if it was the cost PER SHOE, not that it mattered because in either instance the duck shoes were well out of our price range. Though, as we walked away we mused that, for the ducks themselves, the cost was both meager and beside the point, as they no doubt would see no return from their own sale.
 
Now awake, I think if I had known it was a dream, I would have bought you the shoes—the cost be damned!—and hopefully derived some meaningful parable from the whole affair about taking what you can from fleeting moments. But, it wouldn’t surprise me to have woken from buying the duck shoes and have been presented with an invoice from some creditor that had found me from the dream world, tacking on the two grand for the shoes to the money I already owed from frequenting brothels in my sleep, even if I never got any further in them than holding hands with my kindergarten teacher and being forced to sit in the waiting room trying to read erotic magazines whose letters swirled to form imposing recipes for uncookable soups.
 
And as for the ducks themselves? I hope they took up refuge in a kinder dream, one that did not force them into being shoes.
 
Or, if they are to be shoes—if there is nothing any of us can do about who and what we are—then let them be shoes. But also let them be well cared for and loved.

I heard two screams from my bedroom. Outside,
my brother had killed his best friend. That day 
the clouds stayed put. The trees swayed under 
gentle winds, but not enough to disturb the birds, 
and the sun shined so brightly on the cars. I remember 
thinking it’s rare that passion and proximity correlate 
so strongly. My brother and I lived so close for so long 
in the house, but the passion we had for each other came 
in waves, cooled to familiarity that remained even if 
it dulled when we both left the house. Each day 
we spent in each other’s presence after that was
a discovery, not quite on edge but never without one. 
We tip-toed up to remembering what we forgot 
we’d always know about the other, calling each other 
the names no one in our adult lives would know, 
but not knowing what to say having used them.
Would you eat a salad if I fixed one? Is that how you eat? 
My brother killed his best friend with a word or two 
I couldn’t hear. He fell so slowly into the street.
When his body finally hit the concrete, it burst into
a tidal wave, the broth of which split in two and rushed
in opposite directions. The asphalt drank my brother’s 
friend through small cracks it made on its surface. 
I stayed outside watching, thinking they would close
when my brother’s friend had gone completely, 
but vines crept through and kept them open. 
They spiraled as high as my knees, bloomed blue 
and red-orange flowers, and I thought, at least 
he got it easier, at least he could go on being all the things 
one can be in this life when they’re no longer a friend 
to my brother. My brother’s words couldn’t kill me. 
Sometimes I wonder if it’s my fault my brother 
doesn’t share words with me before knowing better.
Perhaps there aren’t any. I guess I should be grateful. 

I cast a wide net in Hell for my brother. 
I was both the person who held the net 
and the bait inside it, my arms craning 
back and throwing forward, letting 
the string reel through my hands,
and holding it against the current 
when it landed. The Hell he swam in 
and his swimming and my pouring in 
a kind of nourishment, and that, 
whether good or bad. In the past,
the ambiguity had always done the trick.
I told myself the difference Hell made 
was that this time, make or burn, 
it would be the same to both of us.
I’d hoped to lure my brother in
knowing I wasn’t what he wanted
while knowing I was all I had 
toward that purpose. He wouldn’t 
want Hell more. I wouldn’t have 
to trap him as much as bring him home.
I was always afraid when we were little,
wanting to go where he went but still 
afraid to pursue the violence, being told 
not to follow him. That trained-in anxiety 
never left me in my older age, in Hell. 
I couldn’t be abandoned for never being 
with him. He taught me there’s so much else 
in the world to be with. I don’t think 
he understood. I followed him so closely
back then because the world was one 
I didn’t recognize when I couldn’t see him.

I suppose every Hell is one 
the Earth has already enacted. 
We’re told
little of the Earth 
was unfrozen 
during the Ice Ages,
that the world’s origins 
were molten, 
those swirling flames 
still running deep 
below the surface
and at the core,
that the bacteria 
crowning the round runs 
of the vents
shooting water and sulfur up 
from the sea floor
most resemble 
the organisms that rose 
the world’s 
flesh endowed 
life forms, 
and that the first 
of the world’s green lands 
had a wildness of abundance 
we humans cut back 
over hundreds of years 
to make us comfortable, 
to give us a culture 
we’d come to document 
at least as much 
as we lived. 
There wasn’t a time 
I didn’t have
a brother. By the time 
my eyes opened, 
he was already here, 
but there’s so little 
time between us,
he also can’t remember 
a time before me.
Our origins blur 
into a single birth 
between us
and so between us 
is a world
and its beginning. 
I tell myself
there’s not a world 
without my brother in it. 
I tell myself 
I’d follow him anywhere 
to keep the world 
from ending. 

I am a girl named older. I get in the way
of my own sleeping. Not being average
like that house, full of triangular
objects, where I only know two
animals, a fish and a man
with too much to do. He always tapes
a new mouth to the wall above his desk.
He says this makes him “focused as a musket.”
He always tells the truth
even at night. At work he is embarrassed
coming in with the buckets. I am a girl
named for a girl. In this house we shout things
at the closet ceiling. Not being in the house
I try on sweatpants at the store. The man
at the checkout says to fill up
my bedroom completely with water.
“Everything will be very smooth,” he says.
“You will be able to touch
all of it.” If only I could speak
the way he does, fast
asleep, surrounded by darts.
I want to talk to the animal
and the animal inside it. But I am a girl
named tell you what.
Not being underneath,
named anything, I keep
the things you say things
to, your fish, your shame,
your closets full
of snowmobiles and eyes.


Will you ever be used to me?
I request a telegraph, a hay ride, a softball game.
In the field where we park
and listen to Laurie Anderson,
you tell me you love the post office best.
It is, you explain, not what’s there but what’s left.
I design a conference panel, Communications at the World’s End,
but that dog is only holding a flashlight.
The flashlight is only a string, a line from my gut
demarcating the American Midwest
as cities and things that claim to be cities,
Kum & Go, cows, fewer diners than you’d expect,
more tech, grain silos, automotive plants (closing).
You forgot about everyone, you remind me. Oh yes.

Cara doesn’t read
she only pretends
nobody needs a name 
just a good friend
against the telephone
another container in which
to place liquor and light
I was not a friend
I was going to have a garden
to grow winter noises in
a vowel is a chimney
the meaning goes out of
periscopes of flame shooting up
to the winter sky 
dear Cara I am
at your door
flashing at you
my every image

I tried to write a warning
                            in chaste trees and pumpkin vines:
the worst men of our lives will return 
                to us in more ways than one.


Preordained, how women must watch
                             this reincarnation of cursed stone,
the curdled constellations
                of anger and loneliness you men re-write


and call myths of heroes. Call yourselves heroes.
                             Don’t you ever learn? I am the goddess
of law and order. I am the goddess of food
                plants and cereal grain. Without agriculture
 

your precious bank note civilization
                             collapses into slag. Your precious
small farms. You treat them how you treat your women:
                admonished husks, aberrant gourds. 

I am the guardian of women and girls 
                             in their times of transition,
the points when they’re most vulnerable. Which means
              at all times, which means I cannot protect them.

My name translates: to grow. Did you know 
                              I was chained? From him I birthed 
another daughter along with the child
                 of a horse. You want to say, I did this to myself. 

If I had not lived 
                            in this body. If I had not run. Was it a son?
Even the goddess of vessels becomes a vessel. 
               The summers you created broil your crops

and your cities. You’ll fight long wars over water 
                               that evaporates into smoke. 
Perhaps you have forgotten? Your stars were never 
              undying. The Fates are women, also. 

In the courtyard, 
1867. 
The last heir,

black-haired and naked
before dawn; 
winter 

starlight through the bare 
branches of the banyan 
fucking whistling—

he’s opened his bowels into the sand.

The camera pulls back for a long shot:
Truth, an
intestine.

Or is it Nightmare?
A stray dog
feasting on the fat steaming 

guts half-spilled.
(Emptied,
he chokes down 

his last, but 
incomprehensible, 
words.)

Like an insect.
Open-jawed
narcissus. 

—It’s grainy in black-and-white.
The wet sound, the eating
dog. 

That.

When I found the lump silent 
as a grenade in the shadow
of my heartbeat I knew 
I would choose it. Damnit,
If you think I’ll rest in peace
you’re goddamned afraid of yourself. 
This isn't a war. I knew
I was going 

but not in the way you wanted.
Blow my brains out? Please.
I’m not dying for anyone. Not 
for a critic like Beauty, that petulant 
lover. Least of all, for you. Poet,
my silence is my laughter.
I fed it, talked to it, I let it grow. Night 
and fire eating 

Time as if it were 
the hot red banner 
flying from my veins, 
a black wind ripping a stripe off 
the American flag. No. I wasn’t 
angry. I wasn’t sad.
In spite of everything they said,
I was living my life. I was stealing

each minute 
to dance on
this earth where the ghosts were
always good to me.
Forget it!
I’ll never surrender. Nothing, 
nothing can replace 

the country of painful loves I had. 

here is my chest here is where I remember longing has not visited me in a long time longing who I let inside me longing who I let cut my hair with old scissors longing who feels my feet swell and kisses them longing who knows I have nowhere to be no new dreams I have my hands who flutter loosely by my sides these are my hands that is your face I am holding your face in every dream I only have one photo left of you I keep it near the lilies in their vase who tucks me into our home at night? not our children who hover nearby they have your hair the shape of your neck the way you walk you have walked so far in my dreams I am always trying to catch up I am not angry I never was but I am always yearning to touch you I remember the day with snow the laughing magpie the laughing river your wet white limbs illuminated by the sun I thought at last this is the heavy sleep but it was not it was not sleep it was winter in our home a burst of light beckoned forward the dawn the dawn slipped over the horizon the horizon held still and there you were beneath all that light look I have emptied buckets of myself into the fields outside I have fed forests to our children and watched them grow learn to walk then run the sun on the ground is not cruel it lifts whatever is left wet on the ground towards the sky there is the sun there is the sky what lifts you away from me is not the ache in my chest what settles to make room for you even after you are gone is your memory which curls sweetly inside me and I breathe around its weight I wait for you in the morning I wait for you in the sun in the snow by the river in the fields behind the mountains with the lilies who grow and carry the horizon so here is longing here is my chest here is my heart who knows how to listen who can hear your voice promising I’m here I’m here I’m waiting for you

I threw in an extra fuck because it’s spring

I threw in an extra fuck because the long before is here

I threw in an extra fuck because the riveting scene is delivered

I threw in an extra fuck because this is grueling

I threw in an extra fuck because I have noted the exploits 

I threw in an extra fuck because the shit is burgeoning

I threw in an extra fuck because the shit is rising

I threw in an extra fuck because i don’t know what matters

I threw in an extra fuck because of courage

I threw in an extra fuck because tactics are rising in my throat

I threw in an extra fuck because I’m political

I threw in an extra fuck because why the fuck not?

I threw in an extra fuck because we need a new beginning

I threw in an extra fuck because of discrimination

I threw in an extra fuck because I have seen the luminaries

I threw in an extra fuck because I see you

I threw in an extra fuck because your curtain will soon be torn

I threw in an extra fuck because it isn’t all hope and dreams

I threw in an extra fuck because sometimes language is ugly

I threw in an extra fuck because of my sympathy

I threw in an extra fuck because chance is brilliant

I threw in an extra fuck because victory is near

I threw in an extra fuck because the throat is remarkable

I threw in an extra fuck because it isn’t all about what you say

I threw in an extra fuck because the tyrant only speaks bullshit

Ghosts remove fishhooks from animal bodies
in the desolation outside an empty house.

Somewhere between a fortress & forest
cicadas shed skin & leave exoskeletons

on tree barks. Ghosts gift these bodies
to trees & witness them sing at night 

through their circadian rhythm. An echo
unto the glorious dimension of zero gravity.

A trawl toward the sky where unstitched stars
move in collinear stillness. An unsyllabled inertia.

Ghosts shift weather into windless trees
a house echoing an emptiness unto itself

like ocean folding into ocean until it reaches
a shore. Ghosts holy harbours with fragments

of dust & echoes of circadian song. Another
house through the eucalyptus trees fading

into morning mist. Ghosts holding prayers
our mouths say intact, into a remembrance

of empty houses & asphalt interiors. Ghosts
diving into another ocean, another empty house.

White women are gonna put me and mine
in an early grave too hidden for our families to find. 

When I say I’m tired, I mean bone-deep. I mean, once,
a white woman just like you cried whistle

and a boy never came home. You don’t trust that Blackness lives
outside plantations, or growing red-wide in the street from holes smoked

into our backs. It’s hard not to feel like some part of us is always
on the auction block or divided up and jellied for future

generations. I know safety isn’t real. I have too many ghosts 
on my doorstep. I’m all out of charm. But you knew that. 

You didn’t come all this way for me. Just for the picture. 
Just for the chance to rattle the slick of your spit 

at all your crafted monsters. If a white woman could save the world 
with only the flick of her tongue, she still wouldn’t do it if no one was looking. 

There’s a white man who says he knows

the destructions of our bodies. Monotones

reports compiled from the trials of our ghosts. Calls it

experimental, transcendental, unflinching opening

into the seeds of poplar trees. An effort in undoing.

Good thick rope that doesn’t know

how to loop around the army of a neck.

He excises his name’s gloam, makes myth, 

clinks champagne bottles with the rain of white voices heavy

on our heads. Oh, the joyous safety of never seeing

your blood marbling the streets. Of cramped family

reunions inside obituary. What sweet-sharp relief it must be to leave

home in the morning and know you’ll always come back.

i don't know how to manage time
the same way i manage my 
body

away from men
and their hands and their will and their need

to take me when i'm choosing eggs, when i'm walking
to the bus, when i'm at the gynecologist, when i'm 
on my period, when i come out

when i am crying on the subway, when i am
a glass of wine too deep, when i am at work
and they come to me, into me

as if i was waiting for them all along 
and really, i've just been waiting

for myself. 

i don't want
to be yours. i don't want to go back
to the way i let myself
not be mine 

for most of my life. 
O stranger, my life is not 
yours. Is it even

mine?

The predominant inquisitor of women accused of witchcraft, it is theorized, was a sadist with acousticophilia: a fetishist aroused by the infliction of pain, humiliation and their associated sounds. 

In nature there is something called a scarcity response. This is what drives a wolverine, in winter, to kill more than it can consume. With the first prey pulled down, a trigger is pulled in the brain, and a trigger pulled is a trigger pulled.

Devices of torture invented specifically for use against women were designed to destroy anatomical elements of the body associated with the female: the breast ripper, for example. 

The practice of sexual torture against women can be tracked back to the Romans, who recognized rape as a crime only possible against those of good standing. 

The Scavenger’s Daughter is a metal clamp that compresses the body in a crouched position. The turn of a heavy metal screw folds the chest to the thighs, tighter and tighter, until the clavicles crack and the spine dislocates. Blood rushes from the mouth, the ears, and the eyes. 

Far more popular for women charged with wickedness was the Judas Cradle, a tall, three-legged device topped with a sharpened pyramid of wood, wider at its base than the human body. Strapped into a special harness, women were lowered into position over the pyramid’s point. For purposes of entertainment, or for efficiency’s sake, weights could be bound to the ankles.

Today, we know the mind seeks the structure of narratives. From shadows, we make stories. On a path the light shifts, shudders, snags in the branches then slips into smoke and slinks away on the wind. So, a black dog is sighted, its tongue split, one paw extended, beckoning, and on another winter-gnawed night, a white cat shimmies down a chimney, leaps through the flames and cries from the pink whorl of its anus: Witches’ butter! then vomits a shining spew of seeds on the floor, and even in the scarce safety of daylight, a yellow bird, songful, lights on a snow heavy branch and trills: Treasure! Treasure! Treasure! A bonny blue bonnet and delicate bed!

And a room was never so bright as when a girl in service was burning to death inside it, her greasy cuff catching a spark and sparking-up as she stoked the fire. So, what could wonders be but evil?

While some witch panics seem genuinely inspired by fear and religious fervor, America’s history of inquisition, when dissected, is a story of jealousies and resentments, attacks against those more fortunate and less: the pretty girl with her skirt tied up at her knees to negotiate the mud flooded path, the farmer with the fattest pigs and sturdiest sons, the matted mad women picking corn kernels from the cow pats in the field and feeding them to her child.  

but o, what of the familiarity?
of known hands learning anew?
of a bad outfit thrown off like silk?
of the easy joke of it? our names
re-translated? my gums a
sore muscle? your calves
saplings? our sweat dew?

//

i have dreams about you even when
you don’t spend the night. in them we spell
the hopeless towns we are from on brick
walls with crumbling chalk. in them i yell
your name and a bike-cop grabs it out
of the air and crushes it back to pulp.
in them we do not make each other sad
with how difficult we think we are to love.

//

o fortuitous hips
o clunky laugh
o your hair appearing for days after
o how different my ceiling looks
o each time our legs twitch against sleep
o a missed call / a hollow excuse /
a mouth-shaped bruise

A CAR EXPLODES

ahead of me on the highway
as i'm driving to visit you

& it's not my heat to flinch from
i drive past it like any other accident

even though i can see the flames eating 
the sky in my rearview mirror

even though i saw the passengers scatter 
like memorabilia shattered

i am just grateful to not be the one breaking
i am just grateful i will get to tell you about 

this road-trip             at the end of it
but when i tell you i prayed at the altar 

of disaster that everyone would get 
to go home okay at the end of it

how Moses let the fire sweet-talk him into 
saving everything he loved / you tell me 

the explosion itself sounds impossible
            & i think maybe we do too.

We lie on the floor of your living room.
You push up to your elbow and stretch your legs.

I, on my stomach, breathe deep into hard wood.
Blissed out like teens we are drunk on gin, salt. 

Olive juice still on our gums, we are imps in summer—
You drum out a beat on the floor in front of you.

Like pizza or lip gloss or bursting bubbles in a Coke can, 
Vermont from the floor is a glittering wrapped gift

on a tightrope made of tinsel and singing wind chimes
in my dream.  Or, if made real, like that time Joe poured us

Bordeaux in a basement bar on Lafayette St., or ten AM
on that February Sunday when we stole half a skating rink

to practice standing and gliding for a trip on your birthday.
We are children just home from playing, we are silos on a hill, 

empty of grain and ready for ground burrs—
We are foals in spring as we struggle to our feet.

In our enacted mirror universe, 
we sneak off together, around the corner, 

to Pizzeria Ida. After waving off friends, 
hugging like we're all departing, 

we step out of the Audi we just stepped in.
Leaving our dinner party, we reset

the clock: arrange symmetric matter, 
will our bellies empty, dissolve

neutrons into protons. We wait
while I re-apply red lipstick.

Magnetic fields reconstitute. High energy 
rays excite for the moment. We alone 

are allowed through, to begin again. 
Renewed, revived, we get re-fills of water,

go from outside to in, cool to warm,
plastic plates swap out for ceramic.

The transition is not easy. Astronauts
often feel dizzy from G-force on re-entry, 

their thoughts splayed like loops 
of electric current in a space vector.

We are organic matter, fermions
and bosons, both in reflection and not.

My face flushes next to the blue oven,
but his lights like volcanic embers,

capillaries twisting over each other,
steaming into water-dense andosol.

Some nights I imagine Dad as the lift in a shoe or wing of a plane—
his wisdom packed with imaginary insight:   
all shadows have eyes,he'd say, stoking the embers hoping 
to bring back life andAmber the year Amber 
flew our coop to join a coup; the year mom split
with the televangelist—
Dad, always blaming the breeze saying,they'd never leave us.
Some nights I find him alone, outside— forefinger pressed to the air.
Some nights I find him alone, outside— wound so tight he's ripping. 

On Wilshire our Cadillac is carjacked 
at high noon stranded inside a city that eats Cadillacs & stars 
& traffic is not slow & we are not hot we are melting 
so we search for our brother who is missing & lost 
& not here in this fine 
Beverly Hills median strip of grass the color of expensive glass 
& I think I hear his favorite Sir Mix-A-Lot song sung
from the shitty t-shirt section of a bodega 
on Crenshaw where Michelle & I work the streets 
for more than money b/c (apparently)
we were absent the day God delivered good daddys 
& instead we make money by the minute 
turning men into $  cracking mirrors for luck
though I have not come here to tell you this 
we came for more $ & escape & to find 
Glenn & instead find a botched robbery behind 
Grauman's where we watch this dying guy take his dying 
gasp on Hollywood n Vine we finally found Paul Reuben's star.

I've always wanted to use the word bougainvillea
in a poem but could never locate your garden.
I've always thought my past boyfriends
as wrong & brilliant at the same time—
like a diamond on a knuckle of a severed fist.
I've always thought if anyone finds themselves in one of my poems
most likely they will die in it. 
Once, Uncle Brandy & I traveled backwards down a dirt hill
in an unhinged tilt-a-whirl cage, yet we did not flip.
Sometimes I ponder what Lovell said in my NA meetings—
crack should be called broke because we're all broke.
Sometimes I wish someone else had died instead of you.
Sometimes I feel it snowing in Maryland even 
when I am applying lotion in Florida.
Sometimes I write about you.
Sometimes I write about yard plants instead.
I've often thought if I could meet anyone in the world I'd want to remeet you.

Last ever moments of falling 
asleep with you, last 
ballooning mood & heartbeat 
so I go back—seventeen, 
that backless dress, Axis nightclub, 
industrial fans air-brushing 
my blood into flutter 
beneath skin. I took you 
in my body, let you make me
love it for some time. Past 
garbage cans’ neon halos
we paraded until I wasn’t sure 
I’d once stepped out before 
you. Now we outlast 
each person allowed to enter 
our years-long waltz, each 
ersatz night some lover’s car 
flew where we directed, 
each extravagance imagined in.
It was my birthday for years, 
it was gold spray-painted mirrors, 
the ritual halving of tea straws, 
& innumerable ways to stop
a lockless door. It was adventure 
forever, it was the long fortune 
of your mythos to morph me
into rag doll, moon bird, 
double babuskha’d dealer, 
it was—weren’t we? —a little bit 
of everything before we began
to differ. You hid in the getaway 
car I had to pack, memorized
my new address, beguiled 
the neighbors, came to 
housewarm emptyhanded, 
smirked that affect itself is a gift.
The crowd laughed, what 
did they know, what was I
to do? Oh you co-opted 
my home, sang bad renditions 
of songs I needed sung, 
learned to idle in the alley 
behind my job, spook my customers,
steal my cash, then flat out 
just not show, ‘til two trains &
a twenty-block walk revealed 
I’d missed you again
by a minute. I saw myself 
finally, across a stranger’s backyard,
memory shot, shocked back
into my senses—Tonight, 
the lockbox scraped & last baggie 
emptied deflate that image 
you littered first into my gaze: 
strobe light, eerily polite,
you held out a pearl-handled pen
knife, offered a place beneath 
your coat. Said come, slit the surface, 
loose some threads, I’ll pull you
through the warp & weft of night. 

I am curious what newcomers think of my city,
but it is not really my city anymore. Not since I left
behind the haze of Big Ben jerseys on Forbes.
But I must have something. maybe the only thing
I have is the last flash of sunset over Macy’s
in the Westmoreland Mall in the evening, 
and my father is sitting beside me,
in a parking lot in summer. The lot is empty.
It is 9:30 at night, and wet. Look, this is
what the city allowed me to keep:
damp asphalt, a half-abandoned mall,
and my father, silent, waiting for me
to buckle my seat belt.

I was fifteen when the Latrobe Public High School Debate Team 
named me jailbait. I watched the sun set that night. I watched
last light of a mocking midwinter sun stream through branches
in the parking lot, endless, and all the fumes pouring from
the bus exhaust pipes caught flickers of light. Then it was gone – 

the sun. Giuseppe, my father’s barber, had once told me Midwestern 
sunsets are stark, sad things. Passerotta,there’s nothing like Pennsylvania 
after the sun goes down.And there isn’t. Other places have miracles 
in the night.

It is November and I don’t like it. 
Every tipped over garbage can – there’s 
light windows in my neighbor’s basement 
look! There’s me and Zach Ligus in his 
parent’s basement watching Popeye 
while my parents bury my first dog 
on Zach’s parents’ land because they have 
the sort of land where you can bury dogs 
but you have to do it before the ground 
freezes for the winter. I was in third grade. 
Don’t cry I thought you’ll upset the dog but 
the dog was already scared I saw it. I have 
my own dog now and I’m not sure 
she loves me but I know she loves not 
being alone so maybe that’s enough. 
That’s enough now. 
A single tire on the curb. 
A squirrel with its eyes.

i sit
drip blood
think i am
such a giver
(whether
i want to be
or not)
where’s your effort
your trail of crumbs
leading to
better understanding
safer sex
i love you
you matter
come here
i am spinning out
a busted dryer
cycling on low
puffing hot air
from lungs
waiting to be
filled with song
tell me when to stop
i do not know when
surrender is not
my strong suit
draw a line
in the sand
or anywhere
soft but definite
so i can see
oh this needs to
this needs to end.

You don’t have to do anything
but sit there and I’m salivating
            like I’ve smelled fresh-cut pineapple

Your body lean as sugar cane
and sweeter
                        I’d like to cut you open
                        suck the tropical marrow

until my tongue stings
until my lips shrivel                then put the rest of you

in the fridge draped in cling wrap
            cause I know I’ll want those leftovers

in the middle of the night
when I wake & look all around & settle back to the pillow
& think oh god oh god has this
                        
                        has this all been some
                                   delicious some delicious dream?

First, we push the children into their games and giggles, to insulate them from obscenities circulating in the kitchen  / Then we lose our temper, & act like masters of a new language for unexpected predicaments / But we cook the things we fail to complete for the day / This is how we ignore the moon / This is how we end the day / We do not reminisce / We do not light votive candles in our minds, genuflecting before an Almighty, asking for help & inspiration / We do not coalesce into restful naps & tv shows / The idea is to fortify resolve now, reconstitute the structure of ambition on the edge of our lips / This is how we survive each other's poverties, how we stew possibilities for the future / We never incriminate ourselves for murdering intransitive options  / We just chew & masticate them at the dinner table, to fill the marrows of our fears

The quiet takes back the house, moments after the last word.  My father knows the meaning of a long shut-up, to silence a screaming wife. I’m not even sure what he is, after these episodes.  Perhaps he is non-toxic masculinity himself.  Or simply tired of his adopted country.  

Now each time I feel his silence, I step out into the yard, to be with the flowers.  I am their new gardener.  I visit my parents as often as I can.  I now have a bond with their geraniums on the patio.  I fertilize them with thoughts of the future, if I will have children myself, or if it's too late.  

Geranium red is deep-red like blood: loud, and full of spectacle, like my mother’s voice.  My father spends a cup of coffee with these flowers in the morning, then leaves them alone.  There is enough to fish for his eyes in the backyard, as though he’s going to a new place that’s only his each day.

when nothing smells like you
i let dawn-colored fruit rot in the blue bowl
spray perfume thru the air and try to touch 
myself the way you touched me

too bad we met/never met again/didn't love the same        
when spring arrives in the desert fairy dusters bloom 
scarlett and pink and mercury, jupiter, saturn 
and mars can be seen in the sky

you said spring was vulgar and i never understood 
what you meant/you leaned against the doorframe 
and told me: i've never seen such a beautiful creature
i was so glad the cat didn't walk by

this too: like an apple unaware of its seeds
that could only turn into apples
everything inside you turned to rage
when we lived together i hardly noticed
the rats in the alley but i couldn’t ignore 
the symptoms of your silence/discounting
the spring’s moisture and mine as well 

when you used to stand behind me 
and cup my breasts while i cooked
i knew your smell among all the others
in the room/sometimes you made the bed
sometimes i made pumpkin soup and 
we ate in an unmade bed
when even the desert cooled at night 
you just burned and burned and burned

Every story I tell of you starts this way    
Once, when I was driving by a pumpkin patch in 
Oregon, rain fell and a brownbird flew across 
my windshield     I didn’t know you yet 

The bird started to open up the way a lotus blooms petal by 
petal    One bird became two  and two wings became four 
and then something broke and a small brownbird carrying a 
smaller bird dropped the other    Over the radio, sounds of a 
soaked brown bag filled with bird bones hitting the window

The unbroken brownbird swooped up over my car 
and I swerved off into flooding fields to weep    
Orange orbs rolled into one another    It's hard to say 
which bird could no longer hold on 

In Oregon, before you told me: no me vas a conmover con
tus lágrimas, I was told not to cry, curse or talk to students
about my brownness    Did anyone think it would let go, or 
cops noting it through the windshield would stop stopping it
I never explained how brownness made me late for work 

Enamorarse is falling in love in Spanish except nothing falls 
or drops    Rilke said: sigue adelante, ya que ningún sentimiento 
es definitivo    I can dream a little dream of a little bird saving 
another bird, but I’d already met you when I read Rilke    

Brownbirds blend in with branches, bark and earth because 
brown protects them     You asked me not to shower so the 
scent of my skin became more of itself    
Every time I insert you into a tragedy in the past  I make you 
first one brownbird and then the other   

you won't speak to me 
from far, far away

one of my cousins 
made me eat dirt 

at least we were in 
the mountains not the city 

his sister and i used a stick 
to poke the eyes out of a dead fish 

these two things i forgot 
to tell you 

when chaplin fell 
people laughed 

but that kinda thing 
isn't funny anymore

that lesser bond girl
her name was a play on genuflect


i can be good
lowering myself to the ground
everyone says reverent but they always
mean deference


i try to not long for shame when agitated
they fold my arms back i am a submissive crush
aching on tape, barefoot 
ready to present my form made better


god is the size of an acorn hat
god is a mother, explaining this


there is something indifferent
named divine inside me, you
will make me its shrine
though it’s a nourishment to move 
through obsession
to truce to absolute forgiveness


today i’m on a couch screaming
into my elbow

an indoor dog

i love sinking in a reservoir
a yolk in an egg      nothing could be better
than living as a quark
infinitesimally small

 

i cum hardest outside my body
belly up, showing off
looking down, knowing the audience looks down too

 

the hard edge of visibility is growing a rind
the opposite of venus, nourishing
thinking of my neighbor’s eyes
pressed through a hole
one atom wide

 

i’m capable of being bitten through
gently        the only way i’m comfortable
having the body discussed
one foot in         one between

 

the beautiful women i know all have
a singular face, pulled forward
at the center
in imitation i sleep 
rope tied against stained thighs

I leave behind a lot of empty wine bottles.
You said eat anything in the fridge and I did
right down to the last gherkin.
Unrelated: your turtle is dead.
You failed to mention it and I failed
to notice it in time. I know more about you
than I ever wanted. A note in the cabinet reads
If you want your marriage to succeed,
then you have to learn to forgive.
Things I don't let dogs do:
lick me, lean on me, initiate touch.
I constantly back away from them,
locking them in or out while I eat cereal
or smoke one of your cigars on the patio.
I hold my nose when I pet them,
teaching them that some hearts
betray rottenness and contempt. When my niece
grew tall enough to ride every carnival ride, I said
Congrats, now you're an extra twelve dollars.
It rained yesterday and I let the dogs
run through the mud. It never occurred to me
to clean them before letting them in.
I made more money working the drive-thru
at a burger chain that has since burned down.
Not the whole chain just the one I worked at.
Your neighbor told me that houses
in this part of town get burglarized.
I'll start locking the door when I leave.
Your dogs chewed up a throw pillow.
You may want to empty that vacuum
before using it. I've been staying on top of
your mail. So far, nothing worth keeping.

One of us photographs
flowers. Another is in
a death metal band
from Des Moines. One
has a dating profile—
username PlentyOfFish,
loves hunting. He isn’t
the professional go-kart
racer. The White Pages
say there are nine of us:
one in Beaver Creek,
and a few in California.
Here, with these ways
to contact each of you,
I wonder if a collective
accomplishment could
be undertaken—a barn
raising, or the toppling
of a regime if we were
armed. Maybe scientific
good would come of us
simultaneously living
for years in some space
station, we nine learning
to live without weight.
No doubt, we’d shake
hands our first meeting,
but, in time, would we
touch more than this,
fingers to lips or hands
through hair? Looking
up at the usless earth,
its quiet trophy rooms
and still lifes of lilies,
authorless, and women
and men who married
others in our absence,
we’d be its yawning
deities, a chandelier,
the stars children pay
to give new names to. 

the fact that i love cats
has nothing to do with
the fact that my father

loves cats which does
not make me think about
how he doesn’t love me

i don’t need your cat
to love me but it makes
me feel a little better abt

the fact that you don’t
and it’s fucked up and
i know. when i was a

toddler my mom kept
a book of all the funny
things i would say

one was, when i grow up
i want to marry daddy
another page details

my attempt to take my
head off and wash it
upon being casually told

to in the tub, & my surprise
when my head would not
come off. a child is a sponge

it will dry and harden if left
alone. you want a secure
attachment but i want

to disappear so now what
i have only recently begun
to take baths for the first

time since childhood.
had my first orgasm
five years ago and i

am thirty-one. i’ve been
daydreaming of getting
a cat but not in a real way

because what if i don’t
love it or it doesn’t love
me. i draw myself a bath

in order to see how long
i can sit still. i say, okay
now take your head off

and wash it. it doesn’t
work but i am no longer
surprised. i don’t want

to marry anyone because
what if i don’t love them
or they don’t love me

you want a secure
attachment and i want
to disappear



I believe with perfect faith in the perfect expectation that no matter where I am my iPhone will have access to the internet via Wi-Fi or at least 3G. Though I may not like to admit it aloud I believe with perfect faith that in the world in which we now live this is a perfectly reasonable assumption.

I believe with perfect faith in the perfect anger and frustration I will feel watching Safari attempt to load a website with me watching all the time, watching Waze attempt and fail to bring back driving directions to my destination—or listening as the phone call I’m attempting to make cuts in and out, making the voice of my wife mother friend plumber attempting to find a leak in my HVAC incomprehensible. I believe with perfect faith I will not handle that moment well, and that no one will.

May it be pleasing before Thee, God of infinite and uninterrupted communication, God of fiber optic transcontinental cables linking Israel with the East Coast, which will guide us in moments of interruption and helplessness. Amen.

I could ask you something like, Who if I cried
Out to the angelic Order in heaven
Would hear me—but then I already know
The answer: everyone who’s still got reception
Up there. Me I’ve got three bars all the time—
O’Connors off Flatbush, McMenamin’s here in Philly,
And who am I kidding—it would truly be a crime
If I attempted to claim there was really
A third. But you—you’ve always got an answer
Until the nature of my question comes to ghosts
When I open you there’s always an angelic chance
For me to call anyone on Earth, when what I want most
Is to see there’s no one on the line.

Bitter vacuum of space, limitless black-cold: 
here, five-hundred seeds 
orbit the Moon.
It’s the 1971 Apollo 14 mission, 
and the Forest Service Chief says,
We’ll shuttle up loblolly pine, sycamore,
sweetgum, redwood and Douglas fir. 
He says, Let’s see how greenlife handles the trip.
Back on earth, shock and awe: planted,
the seeds germinate; there’s no discernable
difference in their make-up. So they’re given 
away as gifts by the President, planted
on college campuses, in city centers, 
affixed with plaques to mark their terrible
cosmic journey. But we forget 
that trees grow carefully, with reason, 
and forty-eight years later, 
all that’s left is a master list 
where an asterisk denotes a specimen 
no longer alive.

July yawns. Flashes its grills
at the gray world dissociating below.

Listen! The steady hum of app-builders
building apps.

View from my front steps:

sign marking the bus stop, dangling from the mouth
of the woods like a chewed-up toothpick,

bus eyeing its own shallow breath
as its shell rattles in place,

bus fare, politely forgotten.

My neighbors rise early, make coffee, instruct
their Teslas to ferry them south.

Here, two Vietnamese aunties wheel ramshackle
dynasties up the hills of Japan-

town in rusted shopping carts.

Here, I try—and fail—to catch the greased
monosyllables they spill in their wake.

Summer settles in my skin like
a traffic jam, a new lover.


The first time I opened my eyes during prayer,
the first thing I saw, across the table,
was my brother’s stare, his thin grin,
his thick black eyebrows raised as if to say
what took you so long. Curiosity
is the recognition of ignorance
as a kind of sickness. My brother
broke the agreement he made with my father:
stop skipping church
and you can keep your bedroom door.
We woke Sunday morning to the power drill.

Heaven is a chorus boy. He twirls into the splits. He does not love you. You have some sense your life is working toward him; if you are very good, you might just get him for Christmas. He is a pony with beautiful haunches. He does not love you. If he had a smell, he would smell like blueberry muffins on a Saturday morning. But he has no smell. You do. You smell like an arcade, like burnt popcorn and spilled soda, like metal and ozone and decades-old nicotine. You are windowless yet full of light, every beep and whistle an invitation, every invitation outfitted with a slot for tokens. You are cheap. He is bathed in sunlight, shopping bags in each hand, stomping shirtless down the hallways of the mall with purple-tinted sunglasses and tight white jeans. He stomps right by you. At any moment he may break out in song, fling the bags from his hands and open his arms as if for an embrace. You will never be in that embrace. If you could hold him, you would worry him in your palm like the malachite orb on your dresser. You would peer into his holes and marvel at his glittering imperfections. But he has no holes, he will not admit you. He doesn’t even know what malachite is.

It is late, mid-July
in the valley’s heat
sheathed in grooves.
I dribble a basketball,
don’t look down
at the earth
filming the leather.
I speak to god
for the first time,
accepting
the threshold
of my marrow,
that no one can tell me
about me
about entombing
the shrieks so deep
under the night,
like a lost keepsake,
twining my words
with the strain
of silk strings.
But you are here
near the end of a spiel
listening in the dark
on a webbed lawn chair
and heaven is somewhere
heavy under your soles.
Here is my spirit
turning back
to name the days
we’ll leave behind.

When your father and I found out you were a boy I remembered the time in my early twenties a co-worker at my first restaurant job invited me out for a drink with the crew after our shift. He drove me there in his very clean truck and talked the whole way and I didn't realize it was a date until we were tucked into bar seats, his arm across the back of my stool, how he spoke into my neck. And the burger he promised was really a rib eye and the dive bar wasn't a dive. And the friends we were meeting was really the bartender who knew exactly what bottle of wine to pull for a regular, and who winked at me as I tugged desperately at the sleeves of my sweatshirt, burying my hands inside of them, whispering that's enough thank you at his heavy pour.

u drank ur cold brew
+ i looked at u

in the poem ava wrote, the one
about a room without sinks

my hands were bone-white antlers yawning
their backs across the floor                             

thick viscous ropes of spit, I didn’t
move for days. the fake deer

stood plastic on the edge of the lawn
eyes glassy like root beer candies

they loved me in between the glare of headlights

my dad stormed the mound in Little League
after three pitches brushed
just by his hip

imagine with me
my father, that slow-burn righteousness
catching already in his body, his head
still crowned with thick and cowlicked-all-to-hell
brown-blond hair shining in a low spring sun
when he flipped off his helmet
and threw the bat
and went to fight,
never one to take a bat at a kid who didn’t have one,
some honor still in flying fists and loosened teeth

imagine with me
what all my dad said
about honor, and fairness, doing right
instead of good,
imagine my father strangling the hen who pecked to death
her chicks still slick with newborn caul

and imagine the hilarity
of a bench-clearing brawl
set forth by this boy
with cracked voice and thick knuckles,
my dad always a body
who could set something
into motion

I Take My Partner to a Wedding

and everyone calls us “girls” and “ladies.”
we put hands at the base of one another’s backs,
everyone feels good about themselves
not being homophobic, not aghast
at two people they know might flinch
in this space, this time and event

and we eat the food, watch the vows
steeped in Jesus and coming
together in the eyes of God and all of us,
all of us witness, watching and seeing
the entwinement of two lives

and I will not now take the time
to tell you how wrong and right everyone was
in assessing us, my partner and me,
and I will not now take the time
to teach you about gender, gender expression,
pronouns, or the deep flinch
at every “lady” “girl” and “lesbians”
that we hear about ourselves together
and apart

because I want to remember only
how handsome, how entirely present and enraptured by even this
so normal a profession of love
we were, together

What I spend time thinking about:

why I said, “I beg your pardon?”

when I do not grovel

nor do I seek clemency from you for anything.

What I meant the phrase did not accurately convey:

“Say it again and Dermablend will be your friend.”

I have failed instinct.

No, I failed instinct.

Instinct says, No tasty poison.

Instinct says, An adulterous goblin with an M&M tattoo.

Instinct says, Get the fuck out of this poser parade.

It is instinct that knows what’s best for me

yet I consistently defy

because of pity,

wanting,

but mostly awkwardness,

I think to myself

as I lean over the passenger seat

of the decrepit old stranger man’s mini van

in the dimly lit supermarket parking lot

plunging my arm into the crevice by the driver’s seat

feeling for where he says his keys have fallen.

Because it can be risky

sharing private nicknames for people

who you don’t enjoy in any capacity

I kept my thoughts about Bitchface Becky to myself

 but then Beyoncé did something magical

Fell sorrow’s small intestine ; order a cosmo witcha 
real shoulders out from under chuffed collar . Want 
finally fleed – walk – wake the military domesticc’s 
tight bounce, coin , backup . Still made ; easy lying 
down innit ( cause I made it . ) Prefer this 1 , where 
we burn down innit . I think about that statea me : 
overwhere , deposed , squirrilish , squiggled , squeakin 

on to something else , no doubtedly , detestably . 

America has no regime but social lawlicy . White terror 
opens with plea— a guilty putterng : Pardon , I’m saving 
this seat for a friend . Pardon, could you help me find 
out where I’m coming from ? Pardon , I’ve taken the 
counterhegemonik turn @ 25 & am stressed by the con 
of compliance . Pardon , just got caught up eavesloppin
who ever in this dive decided exactly who I might be  .

Spitting up on what might come of a tailgate, I tell Tony, “What is going on 
is quite vivdly not like I am Elizabeth Bishop in the Harbors of Brazil, on, 

‘I’d have to say, April 25th, because its not too hot & not too cold, all you need 
is a light jacket!’ (In the film version, a speaker’s eyes go holey gathering 
the configuration of light). 

                                                     Our sex goes on like this. Us knowing. No one 
knowing. Me knowing. Them throwing a ball in the place were disaster waits. 
Them throwing a ball. Them cans. Them shouts. Them supporters of a single prayer 
system. Them autodidactic integrates.

                                                                          But that's not the point either, that Tony
& I often bottom out on the stilling of fullmoon fats, that I've made an excellent
drink. 

         Luckily, no one will touch me here, which, aside from being 
where I hang my blackhat, is a sublurbian harbor, fan of dock fees, fond 
of snapchat & essentially overdue for someone who like or look like me to help 
themselves inside me ; makes me hard 
to focus going forward into the folds of Tony and I’s staging of desire. Limited run.

& it is not even yet April! We have not yet met the conditions of cruelty. 

This will be really fun[say Tony, on the night of], so y, Tony, are we swaying 
to jahwaiian-trap under a highway overpass?

                                                                                        In all fairness, we do sound fun. 
Having settled in for the night, the night found itself elsewhere. Prob got worked up 
bout it, too. Prob clouds. Maybe police. Maybe G-dD-d / WordWord. Maybe just 
try make nice. Giv’em stars. Suggest your beauty. Demand to be preserved. (In the film version, 
cut to an empty fishtank filled with pebble-like amber)

                                                                                                   But instead it's a yelling. Noise
complaint. We were heard having a fight while having a blast while partying while mixing 
mixed drinks for a gathering codeless of fire’s concern. & as the lazy governance of joy 
might dictate, I dipped from what other terrors might befalls the partying pedestrians. 
I will not wait to find out next week. 

I’m coolyea !     
Great now ! 

Know how it feels    to be hard 
4 wat jump the circuta pleasure !

                  (It feels bad)

Got the note )KICKWE( [funny 
admit
-tedly] but having suffered paper 
jawd submissionaries of medicine 
without aide & unsuccessfully , I come to
-gether . Close. Successive suture’s been hard
on reality . It does not feel good to burn only empty 
calories . Ageless disappointment ; Baffled by prix 
fixe harm .                                           I am happy 
as I am abandonded 
by song . 

Had bread , salt , and wine ; love’s acute shelter amid ongoing loss . 


Alternativelty , G-d said to Job , “I’ll tell you when you’re older . ” So here’s to the future
panic ! & I’ll call on the energy of several white women , each waiting
for their own managers , daring me do demand the exact price 
sheets of forgiveness . 

                     I meen ,, issa big deal . Party,

in the proper épistémè , but here we’ve settled 
for pardon,                               who asks , 

     How, exactly, have you been holding these 9/10ths?
     How, exactly, have you entertained dis content?

 Shhhkmrp   into the freeze of need , where i occur 
  strobic ,       so sorry 4 any gold        standardsa goodness ,
which don’t like how I’m seeing         non-gmo joy .  Glass
  cold toast the party then drink it a ways into America’s 
   red eyed mourning .

   There is a list of things
  to forget about the beer , the nearbeer , 
 the queer unfurling experience of having had come 
            a - top   climatological     light castng ;      top   
            the Jumbotron’s earILY loud arguments for sugar , 
     for the presence of sugar ,       for what lies shallow 
      of full food certification .

  I’m exhausted by “light , ” then . “Fun , “ too . For all 
 I’ve known , every clinking smile sick on sugar . Like lite , 
 like the head glare , like proximity to low cost caloric value .

 I mean ,           the gub ’ mint will not stop shutting
  up about my problems  & I still need to sober up
   about my problems ,         drive amid 
     my problems ,       & ice down 
      before the whole party 
       goes limp in choppy 
         morning waves .

It’s a child’s color                        or it should be             tasting like early summer 
before it fades to the broom-sweep coat of the dog days.
But now our nightmares are tinted and fulgent and crackling like neon—   .
not popsicle orange                    [not even close]          not the rhymeless drop 
of a candy piece
not the snake bite of citrus off the branch of an actual tree.
It is chemical orange                   warning-vest orange               orange like the sallow 
                            skin of an orange president
sloughing and pocked                 marred             inbred        insalubrious and undeserving.
It’s the natural shade of unearned confidences,
the tone of repetition without development
[which is closer to yellow-brown] 
like the crumbling of dog hair quaffed 
over a dome that cannot bear critique
or the lightest tint of condemnation.

There is distance [now] between the lovers’ actions 
and what motivates those actions,
the result of futile attempts to return to an earlier diffident state.
“Ambiguous loss,” the psychologists call it.
All that had been natural becomes defibrillation [fills with resolution and purpose]
but is in no sense pleasurable. 
Even if his outward displays appear similar, the impulses behind them are not.
He dreams of being murdered in my sleep        or of extinction          I of ragged sails 
              failing              miscarrying        blowing kisses in the wind to my pirate ancestors.
He remembers folding an atlas once in his father’s car,
recalls a poem where the speaker was cartographed like a city map: 
               this part, the Tagus     another, the Braga Bridge       this, the Hancock Tower. 
How tedious and ancient to always see in pieces, 
to be mad in love with the synecdochal and metonymic.
I admit to getting lost in mirrors, turning without fail in the wrong direction
like a shift into second person.
Recall that you are largely rhetorical, anyway,
having evolved to where being used and being useful has no distinction,
like the little reflection in your diary: unfair               unkind             and unmarked. 


adj. 

What you came here to witness
is my body laying sideways,

                asking you between chuckles,
                “Baby, can you pick the dead

skin from my pimples?”

                             This is not a fag’s easy way
                             out—this is pure

gold jewelry: Maria Felix’s Cartier crocs;
the green staring directly at you, asking

for penance—a do
over. You’re here

                              to watch me tan naked,
                              in the salon or out by the pool.

This is not a story about immigration.

This is you remembering how I entered
your body; this is me faking

               a southern accent. Do you desire
               the rugged hands, the boots? The hat

hiding my unibrow?
Am I more palatable now?


Top to Bottom | scan my profile | For Christ’s Sake | Sing Jesus’ Name | I gospel & apostle | Book of Vers | My rural bottom’s up | My crop /top | down along the road | a hym(n) in hymn | this earth-bound angel| prophet /apocalyptic | horse| I ride | through town | tonight thinking of men | I meant to be | To Be | a hand that holds | a deal / another |made with bibles | a multitude | of Fingers |marking place | between | them & their Vers—| this vers | of red script brought | up by you | Bluff & Blush | the metaphor for | Christ | this rock | I crawled out / under | To Be | free— 

Couldn’t feel when you nicked 
behind my ear, but I know 
the moment when you asked me 

if it hurt. Some remake scarlet

letter on the tv. Classic as a book 
unopened on the table, my hair fell 
over the kitchen sink & for once 
no man was hollering rapunzel, 

screaming let down, let— 

Down into the drain. laughing 
Different then, I didn’t flinch. 

***
Down South, most bothered us 
to make a living: we stashed ourselves 

in crowded basements, mosquitos
pooled around our feet, we tucked 

our xanax back in the church van.
 
***
In Louisiana, we learned warm baths 
salve bites as children first, but then

we saw the trucks that came in bursts 
of state-sent chemicals—we knew 

we were the same then: you, me, & 
the mosquitos. Not sure the moral’s

the state uses drugs to kill off “undesirables”
or that the dampest rooms will always buzz 

***
The Loudest if you listen. Listen. Listen—Let 

***
Us swear upon the night 
we buzzed our skulls 
inside the dealer’s kitchen. 

How when the men 
we stayed with slipped us, 
Even then, we dreamed 

of More—

Perched above the slide, Meg says the cardinal’s her Nana coming back. I’m nine or ten. I scoff impossible, I toss up sacrilegious, I promise that’s insane. Too young to know the symbols, the no-menclature of some traffic signs, but I know this: the Baptists don’t believe in second coming unless it’s Jesus. Her Nana’s not Jesus & I sure won’t be a witch, though next summer the heat tried to burn us both alive: I watched the barn swallows circle the porch fan when I couldn’t sleep, the barn swallows became my father as he left again / got “clean” in Georgia, & I watched too many musicals on the sky blue carpeted floor. I prayed & prayed that even though I failed the promise pledge at Camp Bluebird that summer, that even though I lurched forward in the pew a little late, too late, the only one not standing with the Lord of anti-fags & anti-sex in the pre-pubescent congregation, I prayed that maybe then I’d be an Angel voted most likely to be the anti-christ & they were wrong, I prayed if nothing else I’d become a cardinal or a bluebird perching near the heaven I can’t get in anymore & now I’m tired, tired from the image of 

a faggutguttermouth 
the built-in infrastructure 
of the spit or swallow spit, 
the hock one at the passing 
car or swallow slur they sent 

faggutguttermouth
whose tongue leak no one needs 
to see those thighs whose passing
car swerves round us crying 
about strapless dress & we should pass 
like whose-the-fuck-we-look-like, 
man made in thine image, whose                    

face is pooling in the mud 
under a concrete overpass
whose narcis’ puddle trickles 
down into this city’s intricate
constructed drainage system 

faggutguttermouth
whose fist knocks at my bedroom window whose threatening to post my thigh 
high in the air ass on the internet whose threatening to call the cops on the dildo 
in the living room whose fist on the glass is a bluebird seeing a bluebird’s reflection
whose trying hard to talk-smack-follow bluebird mirrored feathers couldn’t 
 

shatter the barrier between our mirrored wings


There’s a song in my figurative head 
that I can’t shake loose. 
When I was a body, 
I did so many things with my hands, 
I can’t count. 
Around here it smells like lightning, 
like plasma. Wind blows ionized particles 
through my figurative hair. 
A ship passed the other day 
with a hundred souls aboard; 
they slept so peacefully, I dared not 
make a sound. When I was a body, 
I rang like a smacked bell. 
Here in hyperspace, I’m a thought 
thrown against a ceiling fan. 
This letter will be stuffed in a clay pot,
sucked through a vacuum tube, 
delivered to your door.

The kids talk about Posh Spice. 
They sing Top 40 hits.                Mother drops me off.  

High volume on, the ballads sung by her 
are loud & ugly                             to my grade school ears. 


I’m afraid:  To be uncool. To own this 
body.   I don’t know yet that being cool 

means being real. That cool is trendy. 
                                                          I’ve already forgotten 

pogs.                                 What’s now has gotten me in trouble. 
What’s now is trading cards—-at home I want

to collect them all. Friends & lovers. Already, 
I’m being called to the principal’s office:

I’m stupid.                                      I’m in time-out.              I’m being asked
by the teacher—-why my father gifts me distractions. 

(So they can confiscate them.) 
Did he slip them through the wire fence at recess,the principal asks me. 

Is that where you learned to brag about                                  what happened to you? 
What happened is a fib. 

Say I watch cable television like they do. 
Say my parents buy me the PlayStation. 

I rent them instead from BlockBuster. 
I rent Dumb & Dumberer.              I watch it with my brother. 
I listen to kids at lunch Rage Against the Machine & 

I want to understand it. 
I want to understand how embarrassment works. 

When mom has to go to work—I’m dropped off 
at the neighbor’s. I see a highschool boy shirtless. 

I imagine myself ten years        ahead in life.                            I walk into my neighbor’s 
bedroom. Noises under sheets. [I’m too sheltered.] 

                                                         [They’re playing outside.] Remember:
A time when I would rather speak English only. 

A time when I must carry language on my back
                                                         & wonder if it’s possible          to get away with lying. 

At the parent-teacher conference—-I see the way
                                                         the teachers look at us. 

My mother’s broken English. 
                                                         My father’s Mexican skin. 

I tell Mom & Dad                         I’m sorry I’m having adult thoughts.            
I’m sorry                                             I’m curious about sex. 

I’m sorry I got a time out. 
I’m sorry to be seeking attention. 

All I want is                             
                                                                                                     to know what I am. 


They tell me, kick his ass Sea Bass. 
They tell me I should kiss the girl named Ariel. 

They tell me, I’m a never-ending story. 
They tell me what I am & I hate it. 

I’m Jack from the Titanic. I’m drawing
                                                         naked portraits of myself. 

I’m getting older.                         Trying things out for myself. 
                                                         I comb my hair like my father. 

I wear suspenders, purple button up & turn on a video recorder. 
                                                          His stacks of CDS. Michael Salgado. 

Los Tigres Del Norte. I hit record
                                                          & nod my head along. I’m becoming this. 

Sometimes, I’m ashamed to be in this family. 
               Because he lied to my mother,

because she taught me
               to hate him. [Half-brother] I scroll back 

to family road trips:
               Galveston, Orlando, 

the rental car in Anaheim—[theme parks]

when did I become the navigator pointing
               our family. Along the highway,

I dreamt a family of brothers. [All of us]
               I rest my head on the window

reading the signs—I count
               billboards of family 

vacations. I wonder if I was meant to be riding 
               in a different backseat. 

Maybe it isn’t strange
               to bicker & beg for Father’s attention. 

[Competition is good.]

When I drive now, 
               I look at the rear-view.

I try. 
               I try not to forget 

I have something left. 

All that whimpers isn’t want.

One spring, I pulled
a reed from an oboe.
I planted it by a pond. 
Instantly, it grew 

dense at the water’s edge. 
The wind told lie after lie—

black cricket like a jewel,
black motion of a goose’s 

vibrating neck. I parted 
the reeds but nothing
was there. I was steeped 
in evening’s almosts—

a symphony in a cup of water.

Morning gets angry and destroys a city
not New York, too obvious, but suppose
it’s on the coast. Suppose we’re the first to go

I picture Goya’s Colossus and my empathy
runs threadbare. Suppose I notice the raw meat
of his back and fall in love. Suppose 

there are too few Armageddon songs
about giants. The Norse, I suppose,
and Nephilim, okay, fine, so suppose

what I want are more movies: Colossus
staring Dwayne “The Rock” Johnson
we’d see it in dim theatres, giant screen

and afterward, step into the parking garage’s
echo and oilslick, a perspective behind concrete
and absence of concrete, brutalists framing

for the aftermath of Morning, or giant
or indifference—our skyline swapped
with fields of dandelion left unattended

Student, it’s true—I prefer women
to lentils, to crossfit classes,
to retirement plan selection, 
leaf-blowers, plastic bags
and roller coasters; it’s also true
I’ll take a female protagonist
over a ham sandwich any day
and that women befriending
robot spiders, sexing up aliens,
and becoming fierce mermaids
congregate on my syllabus. 
So if curating a collection 
of ‘uncomfortable’ texts
is a superpower, I’ll claim it.
Student, do you fear
ground floor apartments
and always deadbolt the door?
Has a man passing you
on the sidewalk asked if he
could eat your pussy? 
I was uncomfortable then
and hope you can see
how reading about women
isn’t quite the same thing. 
If you can’t, I’ve failed
the women I prefer,
their voices curved
by patriarchy to speak
in quiescent registers
when faced with male anger.
Student, every prey animal knows
to survive, requires, sometimes,
to diminish, so yes, when women
spoke firmly in my class
I didn’t tamp their voices.
If it was uncomfortable to see women 
boisterous and emboldened
by—yes, it’s true—feminist texts,
if it made you feel 
I too harshly graded
your mediocre work,
then Student, I am sorry.
I failed you whom I most
wanted to transform, 
if not into a mermaid
or a lover of aliens at least
into someone more capacious—
perhaps we’re both a little wrong.
The discomfort you feel 
not a sign of our failures
but the pang that heralds
a womb-like spaceship, 
an underwater matriarchy,
a nebula unweaving the dark. 

this poem starts on a tuesday in Kansas

a twister settles in. there is a twister dancing 
in the night like a blight on the sky’s eye & 
the people are afraid. someone yells: there is a fire 
in the barn.you think you see your barn on fire. 
your sister runs into your room. she smells rancid 
from the smoke & the fire. she is speaking, you think. 
the fire is burning. the twister slips in. quick,
yells the farmhand. people gather to put the fire out. 
the twister, like by nature that disasters should, 
puts an end to these people: twister, twister flings
them up. limbs smack against your bedroom
window. a severed hand waves in greeting.
the twister touches down upon your house. 
all you see is
     wind. 

a hole opens up in the ground. no one dares go near it.
they call the site condemned. little did they know in the depths
                of the night, boys dance casually around the hole’s iris; praying
in ritual. praying for the sun. for new beginnings. they pray for the rain to fall 
& dance off their fingertips; fall into the nothing. every night these boys pray &
                dance & pray &     
one night, after the boys have exhausted all their prayers; poured themselves  
      into the ground’s black heart: the sky opens up, pours down a rainwater        
            blessing; offerings fall from the sky. the boys raise their hands, dance.
               the hole swells up, bursts. the old men say, be careful what you wish 
                               for. water fills up their lungs. the entire town 
                                         drowns with 
                                                    rainwater.

Goats and cows’ dreams have little pull yet. Cheese
is still cheese, piston driven milkers likely painful. The future
of sirloin strips it of skin, legs, bones, grown without 

the cortex of overcast blanketing cow consciousness. 
Michelin stars will be reserved for those meals sporting limbic
systems, pain, rich diets—enough with the classism already—
the elite restaurant in the country: rusted windmill 

atop stack stone, stag rack looms over dark leather, rills 
of watery blood flood the soil around the abattoir just beyond 
sniffing distance. Even holding the boning knife, I identify 

with meat cow, a future of massage and organic feed,
head on the chopping block after so many years heart healthy,
conscience lighter than droplets perched on the bristles
of melon vine. I look out the kitchen window at the coop.

The chickens are so dumb. They dream of dirt
or of nothing at all, steep nightly in complete darkness. 
A few of them keep cannibalizing their own eggs. The farmer 

Instructs to replace them with golf balls so with each peck
at the dimples the hens learn to stop making shitty choices.
I ask the farmer to consider the nugget of lab grown breast 
in a drive-thru, cleaner, friendlier option. Like with hens, 

progress is mostly about making the best decision the least
amount of work or just plain deceiving the public until it’s done. 
The slaughter is artisanal. Boutique a strangled calf.

When it suits the market, we’ll remove the brain stem
from food, guilt from consumption. We’ll give the cartoon T-bone 
steak on the label eyes with which to wink at us. A playful way
to stop cannibalizing our world. But only when it suits us.

You say you know the reason why Archimedes died
tracing circles in the sand & how
you’ll go out this way, 
a man too in love
with unifying 
theorem
& consequence. 
You say you’d stake your life 
in trying to understand 
why gravity, like me, crushes 
& slips
through your hands, 
when I’m a hundred percent 
certain that we are two
points never to meet,
if you keep 
trying to connect the small & large of you
& me.                   I could tell you why Archimedes denied 
the invading hand
of a Roman solider reaching out to him, 
that one last chance
to surrender
& walk behind
a new empire, as free
prisoner.               I could say why a frail 
thing, like gravity, must be capable
of such cruelty. 
I’m putting it out there, 
for you, 
the human body,   
as a transitory stage 
for what you & I will never see. 
Just billions & billions of caterpillars
or maggots 
or grubs,
thinking we are life’s final & finite 
destiny— thinking it’s enough that we give 
live birth & bury
our dead.              & I could say 
one of our greatest was only digging 
his own grave
because life taught him 
nothing in the end. But my dear
friend, the science of survival is not a science
of discovery. & when we die, we go in
mystery.

Loving you has turned me into a given tree. 
My branches are full of every war horse, hallelujah, allegory. 

When I reach for you, I count my own rings of dust 
& debris. Soon I’ll be a lonely stump, a last comfort 

for a jilted bride, or— if I’m lucky, a resting potential
in which the last of my kind will seek rot as root.

How time lives in fear of you. My origins grow
indifferent to my deaths. & just as nebulous. 

                                             Did I ever mean anything? Say, why 

                                                                                                                   {in the what of you}

                                                        are all my neurons like a plague,
                                                        swarming you, in great numbers, 

&. Vanish. Loving you means I’ll never bear. Witness.

              Yet. Having a taste. Of creation. Gives. Way 

                               to weaknesses.             I know.         


                                                                                           Only the strange radiation of a string quartet

                                                  can escape you

                                                                   & when you’re just about done with me

                                                                                     when there’s just a little left     indefinite         

                                                                                                       & incomplete       when nearly never-ment

                                                                                                                           & so close & not unlike that 

                                                                                                                                           perfectperfect  

                                                                                                                                      {xxxxxxx———}            



                                                                                                    I’ll collapse your veiled

                                                                          {& throbbing}  
            
                                                           battlements                  
                                                                                                      nothing can strike at nothing
                                                                                                      like the vibrato of cello 
                                                                                                      & violin I’ll be
                                                                                                      whispering
                                                                                                      & holding
                                                                                                      you                  {down}
                                                                                                                  in every 
                                                                                                               note my 
                                                                                                        prince 

   
                                                                              if only to tighten & twist                  gulf & pit                  
                                                                              tune my own strings 
                                                                              just to make you my fields                      my fields again 
                                                                              full of quantum
                                                                              wildness                            {lit}
                                                                              with gamma & 
                                                                                            dissonance
                                                                              piercing
                                                                              through
                                                                              why not 
                                                                              wouldn’t we not
                                                                              be a cool bloom
                                                                              the sweetest of sweet 
                                                                              nothings 

One day, soon, there will be no more science fiction. One
day. Everything we imagine. Is real

                                                                                   though not. Everything is

a storm gathering
                in the middle of nowhere, it 
                                just feels like I. Can’t say

                                                                                                                      I don’t. Worry

                       about the state of imagination. 

I crisscross & wrestle my way toward overwhelmed airplane, 

& I worry                           about the states of our imaginations

                                which is to say, I’m trying                    
                                              & striving
                                                           & hugging

invisible turns
                                                                              when I worry

airport security                      who’s turning
               on my laptop & telling me I’m random
                                         -ly selected for additional

                                                       screening,                                which means I worry

you. The same TSA agent who’s asking yet. 
Again. What I was doing in the Middle East

over. A decade ago. You ask as if we. -’ve never met

yet know my whole. History. I want to believe. Everything.
Is real. After all. & is that          the trade-off. The residual.

Cost. For understanding {what we say. Is} human.

History I worry. we remember only. To use what we can 
against each. Other.                             & I worry, greatly, 

what would happen. In an airport if I just didn’t                      wait 

                          anymore. To go off
                                                                                    course

                with the vampire bunny                                         hidden in my carry-on,

                                          yes,                  a most vampiric & munching life

                                                      I’m carrying                             even if he’s mostly tachyons 

                                             with fangs of squarks

                              & smuons                    
                                                                     all of which decay

                              too quickly       
                              in super                        

                - symmetry
                all of which violate 

​your laws of everything 
that’s allowed to be

                 real.                                                                  But you’ll never find him, my TSA. 

Darling. Who’s still holding me. By the arm as if. Worried. 
Who’s the one really                                          on the run.                       & who will approach. 

                                     Agency.

In this small airport on the border
           where you claim. The only flight. Was cancelled 
                        due. To storms. Somewhere, beyond. Control.

Somewhere, a connection I have. To make. 
& I’m tired of waiting for you. To give 

            clearance          to the eye of my immortal

                                                   beloved
                                                                  who waits for no one, my little, crazed & bloodless 
                                                                               fury      with too many sleptons {& too much 

                                                                                heartsick}         churning

                                                                                                                       & burning

                            in the middle of nowhere 

                                           with electrolepus caress, 

                                                        on gravirabbit course,

                             how we defy

                                          everything you once were  

                                                                    in monster-bunny force.

I am split nails, stubs of my fingers. I am a mouthful of dental picks,
the disposable kinds that clog up the ocean and sea turtles wear
like fluorescent necklaces advertising end times. that’s what I do now,
advertise endings. to sophie I say, love is fake, and even I bore myself.

heartbreak is tedious and so I pretend I am either a stone or
some eight limbed animal capable of holding everything or nothing. I am
trying to loosen my body by salutations, until I can twist my limbs into
some new place, slip out of the noose of today like I want the turtles to

shimmy their bodies away from all the heartbreak I’ve accumulated
and flushed down the drain, or dumped into a landmine is more accurate
a description, which is what garbage becomes after long enough. 
leftovers, refuse we’ve refused to deal with, and heartbreak is not a landmine

but a paper cut in the same place for forty years. except the same place is
every bend in your hand. except thumbs are opposable for a reason and
it hurts so much to pick things up: the gray bowl, letters by my bed, your
denim jacket hanging by the door. except I haven’t given it back

because I won’t text you asking for my spare key. marvel at my
fortitude, but I have the exact amount of arms to wear your coat with
the business card for some salon on the east coast probably out of
business by now that is still in the right front pocket

since the morning you gave it to me. except I was cold. except we took
turns blessing our animal bodies and giving each other hickeys in all
the spots people could not see. except you said, here, wear this, and
I never took it off, or is more accurate, I never gave it back.

heartbreak is like when you wore my sweatshirt to work when no
one knew we were fucking and my face was like every salt lamp by your
bed and in the world turned on at the same time. like the broad city
episode where ilana is in the back closet surrounded by a SAD light

and reams of aluminum foil. except it was for love I pinked and
became bioluminescent, some strange sea creature swallowing my
antidepressants and seaming the world with happiness, that old stink.
it is a cliché to say I am breathing underwater. except I mean to say I am

swallowing salt and dodging plastic. I am trying to marvel at how gills
take in sea in order to breathe. except while I write this I want to braid
the hair I cut from my head into a net I can use to scoop all the garbage
from the ocean. except, I want to throw this poem into a bottle and

watch it sink. wait for the whales to
read it and tell me to call my mother. 

The Venus he gave me ate another daddy
longlegs. They were still wiggling when I
watered it this afternoon. It's a cruel world
he texted me last month but it's true for today
again so I texted it to myself by thinking
those letters in that order and why do we
call it eating. They're more like green fists
closing. Okay most fists don't have teeth.
Look what it's gotten me to say out loud
after spaghetti and meatballs—you made
the meatballs to my mom's recipe from
my grandmother's I never met, how's that
for time travel—and two highballs because
of hard days at work. After making love
I fell asleep against you curled in my arms,
our skin stuck together so we peeled apart
when I woke again to sit in the living room
staring at my phone. At two in the afternoon
looking out the windows at a street corner,
a neighbor's house—her black maple—
I can see into her windows so I look away.
Now at one in the morning it's a film scene—
someone's mixing chemicals in a half bath,
a hatchback about to arrive, two men who
can't who shouldn't be trusted. It's a plant.
It evolved in a place difficult to survive.

Feels like this happens every other
day now. And eclipses, we're like
what eclipses. Scrolled past one
live streaming last night. Kept
scrolling. The sound of you
knocking outside trying to get in
only the bump of the robot vacuum
thunking a living room wall.
Woke me from a dream. Worried
you needed me. The fan for noise
all night long. Car breaks just now
through winter closed windows.
I hope no one's hurt out there.
They call it a mash up if you see
a frog croak come from a robin.
No one told me I had to figure out
for myself people walk around not
speaking the things pounding
through their minds. At the airport
food court—I'll never drink coffee
from a hotel room machine. I've
heard too many stories what people
get up to with those. Something just
blocked out the sun. A titanium tube
of people trying to get somewhere. No
idea they were just stronger than the sun.

We ate dinner with our heads down masticated silence Mom slathered hot sauce on everything including Dad’s words and the ones he didn’t say lips spraying consonants vowels dribbling down his chin i before e stuck on whiskers sporting stains in the armpits taco Tuesday and the shells were inverted hunchbacks with rice beans lettuce no meat because my sister bolted with the butcher one phone call later Mom was weeping Dad’s knife splitting the wall next to the cross Jesus’s suffering eyes Susie always was a troublemaker

Hello. This is my body. 
It makes me terrible. 
Someone opens it regularly.
It is opened regularly. 
I am always the same thing: 
what’s missing.

Make a sentence about joy.
Sometimes he is dying but he never dies. 
Let’s say it one more time: 
God. 
I am so thirsty. 
Here are my instruments. 
I can use my own hands
to separate an apple into two halves. 

The base time unit—the second—
a fly beats its wings a thousand times a second.
Ancient. Recent.
Song the past tense of sing. 
O drain the killing fields,
farmer harvesting wedding rings.

Once a month the river floods.
The spring is heavier than the sun.
I was doing chores when the storm clouds formed.
All of a sudden the storm horn sounded.
“No sports for now,” said Dad. “We need to work
Until we are sore.”

Rain, will you read these words for me?
I’m coming. 
I’m coming.

that 
the
branch
falling
from
the
highest
bough
of
the
elm
landing
in
a
puddle
landed
on
its
own
image
when
it
fell

I’m craigslisting again and this time, 
I’m in Portland hanging plants

next to windows, snaking 
vines around the glass, framing the outside

green in green. In Oregon, 
I’ll have hardwoods and pay 

less, which seems precarious
at best. I keep saying precarious

because I just learned what it means.
I said it twice walking back from breakfast 

with a friend, standing on benches to get closer 
to the sun. I said do you feel

today, what the hell? The two of us walked
until we were sunny

in the thrift store jackets section.
They leaned across the rack,

hand sunk in their fleshy cheek,
a St. Patrick’s Day party hat rubber-banded 

under their jaw. I was waving
my arms, eulogizing fleece

and quarter zips while they
smiled unblinking and mouth closed.

Later in their secondhand 
smoke cloud, I caught the sun

pooling in their algae 
green irises. And finally I noticed

them, their eyelashes and their eyebrows
and their bangs and almost their skin 

all this same grapefruity palette,
a quick future I could 

move into—they were summarizing 
a favorite book in the sun.

I don’t want to keep writing about flowers

when I saw many delightful things this week. Like when I woke up on Thursday knowing it was going to be sunny, and it was. When I got to class and opened the blinds. I think the leaves on my one stupid tree I can’t stop writing poems about are finally fucking budding, just in time for the flowers down the block to be falling apart. I guess it’s good for blooms to not come all at once, but it feels cruel. Like the street can’t look all good, it must look part terrible, part good, so that we really think the good parts look good. I guess if I wanted it to look all good, I would move to an island in Maine, or to Cape Cod, or to Oregon, where based on the one time I went there in Springtime, I imagine it is always Springtime with flowers so dense and over-bloomed they’ve fallen on the ground to make room for the new ones on the trees. But I don’t want to keep writing about flowers. Another delightful thing I saw this week? The fattest sandwich I’ve ever only paid $2.99 for. The one man at the deli is the best sandwich-maker, and the other people, god bless them, seem to only be his apprentices. The sandwich is on fat French bread, big, sink-your-teeth-into-it bread, with two different kinds of cheese, swiss and cheddar. I’m not going to get any meat. I like it with mayo on one slice and yellow mustard on the other. I like onions, so I ask for a lot of them, often saying Can I have a few more? like the asshole I am, knowing I’m not paying more for extra onions, but after all I’m not getting any meat. I love watching the diagonal cut, smelling the mustard from here, knowing cheddar cuts swiss just right.

The camera pans—is this still
Mars? Oops. Gloss-

lip. Oops. Long-lashed eyes
gazing between the scraps.

Guttural purr. Oops I.
Did. It. Again. White girl cuts

center-stage, tiny athletic body
in a red catsuit. Bass

pumping. I played with your heart,
got lost in the game. How many times

have you watched a girl get pushed
into an arena? Oh-baby-baby.

Too many times. It’s winter and we are
away from home, watching MTV on cable

that is not our own. The NASA team watches
the alien ritual commence—what must they be

thinking? I’m supposed to be turned on,
even at eight. I know this. Oh-baby-babyy.

Some Cirque du Soleil nonsense is happening
in the background, but maybe

I was turned on, in a practiced way—not
as I would later understand that mundane

fever. Not blood-thrum or cheek-dusk. Not
father-son-and-holy-ghost. On TV, the girl twirls

out of her temple, whips off the white astronaut’s helmet.
They speak as though they know each other—did he

come all this way for her? There’s something
I want you to have. The red planet

burns ceaselessly beneath them. Aw you shouldn’t have.
Lost, the man looks at her and she looks at him

back. Smiling in the red—is this what it means
to be found? Oops I

did it again to your heeaarrrt! The three of us
watched this all unfold like

we watched anything then: taking notes
on style. For my own part, I knew

I wanted to be both that boy and
that girl. I wanted to kiss the edge

of some urbane cosmos, rack up stories
like cold marbles in my pocket, dance

in a sexy space chamber of
my very own. I played with your heart,

got lost in the game. I wanted to break
a beautiful man’s heart and

look fucking great
doing it.

I was standing in line for a movie and a movie played in my head.
I was standing in line for a movie and the movie I was waiting to see strode through the lobby and out the front door.
I was standing in line for a movie and the world tore in two like God’s curtain.
The first time I saw a movie I was frightened I thought I was vanishing into it.
The next time I understood I was emerging and I asked for more movies.
I watched movies that slid through mouths watched movies that existed only for me.
They had all the colors I’d ever seen the colors moved like living things.
I wanted to see God’s movie but no one knew in what order to play the reels.
The projectionist fumbled with them like teenagers fumble with genitals.
When the movie finally played I understood where shadows go when they’re full of people.
One time my life was a movie in the movie I had a daughter.
Whenever she saw a movie she wanted to eat it so it could be a baby inside her.
One time I was so full of the movies nitrate poured from my ears.
One time I was so full of the movies I flickered like light.
I became a movie I rolled through the projector I shuddered in front of millions of eyes.
My audience saw things they never wanted to see.
They hid their faces and would not watch me so I watched them and saw things I never wanted to see.
I wanted to be the director I wanted to make a movie long enough to say everything long enough to play to the end of the world.
I ground my fist into my head until it surrendered a script.
I peeled off my name and entered myself like a stranger.
I fondled the camera until it was ready then tilted it into the light.


Dear Naomi,

Please find enclosed some clippings from the local fishwrapper.  I’ve underlined the juicy parts in blue pencil.  It’s complete kleptocracy down here.  You were right to leave.  I can’t handle the crowds at Mardi Gras anymore; every year, middle-aged Rex takes a debutante queen, as if their union is supposed to restore fertility to the land.  When I think of our all-night conversations on the levee, you standing between the treetops and the moon, the image is so fantastical I might as well paint it on the side of my van.  What’s new?  The homeless man on Carrollton has acquired a golf club.  My lawn is finally about to die; it’s a relief actually.  I wish there was more to tell.  They say Lightnin’ Hopkins could write blues about anything he saw, that Harry Smith ended up just taping random noises.  I wish I was useful like that.  You’re right to keep your letters on the level of trees and rain.  I should’ve started there.  The trees here are empty, our sky the color of an old stone. 

This ocean is completely fucked.
I’m sorry to tell you.
At least today, the waves still 
come in cartoonishly big,
like the foam would turn to fingers,
hurl a small boat (or whatever)
towards the shore, towards us.
If my son was here, I’d tell him
this is the edge of the known world,
instead of a beautiful place to smoke.
My goodwill coat flaps flagrantly in the breeze.
No word for what the clouds are doing right now.
I have loved you the way one would love
a nest of flowers and scars.

I should mention the woman at the bus stop 
across the street with a white trash bag between her legs, 
like she’s hatching an egg.  
The way the sun sets on the office of the hearthrob dentist.  
The sound of my stomach shrinking to a dark seed.
Half the time, I thinkI’m an animal 
made mostly or entirely of teeth.  

*

The bartender won’t meet our eyes since she got pregnant. 
She worries about us now; we belong to her.  
It’s like that fairy in the Nutcracker who lifts up her skirt 
and it turns out there all these children hiding there
all along and she didn’t know.    
That’s us; the children, sitting, waiting for
our mother to open her eyes. 

You need to know
the world used to be softer.
This new color sharpens & blinds.

When it arrived,
people crashed their cars,
stumbled hands over retinas & then
over ledges, guardrails.

Those who survived were the ones
who reached for sunglasses on instinct,
assuming the sun’s strange light despite

being early January, eight p.m,
& winter is the absence of color & light,
is blankness, is universal achromatopsia.

False assumptions nearly never save lives
& yet
& yet

the new color isn’t
a variation on anything we know,
doesn’t reflect or absorb.
It has its own shade, gradient.
It reinvents the wheel.

A group of us are going out there—
we’ll locate it, wild;
we’ll hold it in our hands.

Picking at ingrown
pubes on the porch swing
in the sun on the first
summery day of May 
and the dogs reach up to lick
my cooch. This is not 
the first time today I’ve pushed 
a face away from my pussy. 
Animals don’t care 
about social propriety or man-
made morality. I’m not advocating 
for beastiality. One summer
I went to a stranger’s apartment 
to fuck and his dog 
kept eating my ass.
I was laughing too hard 
to push it away, its tongue
so wet and long. I promise 
I didn’t enjoy it
or cum that night. They say
dogs are so pure 
but I once hugged a man 
and his 75-pound pit 
mounted me, nearly knocking
me over. I thought she was going in 
for a hug or to dance. She humped me 
and moaned drool. And then 
my sorrow. Time and time again
what I trust to be wholesome 
never is: an ear to listen,
an extended hand. 
Always reaching. 
Who’s the pure one now. 
 
Like a baby ripping out 

its own eyeballs, chewing 

off its tongue, like that comic 

of the dog drinking coffee 

at a table and smiling

as the room around him

erupts in flame: This is fine, 

my mind welcomed

the heat, 

the same way how, 

after a long day,

a body welcomes 

a shower that scorches 

the skin red

when I asked her 

how to slice my skin

safely, how sharp 

the knife, or pin 

or blade, the pressure 

to place, how not to faint, 

and weighed, aloud, risk

against desire. I measure 

the humor 

of every situation 

based on its consequence.

So after I answer 

the phone at midnight and deny

them my address, then answer

the knock at dawn, and after 

the officer greets me, 

and after he leaves,

and after the dean calls,

when she reaches out,

and I think to say,

well then, as we all know:

snitches get stitches

I smile instead,

biting my tongue till the iron soothes.

in another day of cleansing shadows 
the tub recedes from the wall
the wall mourns  
its decaying caulk

day of worn skin
day breaks into a long 
sigh, bemoaning 
the drapes of light

the drain swallows the tub
the tub aches for the window

at the window a cactus thrives 
the night wraps its long legs
around the window’s edges

the tub peers over its edge 
the moon lights the tub’s view
until morning rises to meet night

in another tale my tiptoe love 
in another night not a tap leaks

I eat a 3-egg omelet & immediately throw up.
I think I’m getting sick. I take an advil & vomit the advil. 
I feel dizzy & go to lie down but god tells me not to
even bother, that he’s already binged everything on netflix
& he’s bored so good luck. & so I vomit the republican
party, ralph nader’s seatbelt. I vomit a redbox
but all the discs are scratched & I haven’t owned
a dvd player since 2016. I vomit the bible, my high school
copy of 1984, the scarlet letter written in braille.
I am vomiting entire libraries. 
I vomit discretion, magic tricks, a glass ashtray. I take a break
from vomiting & light a bottle rocket.
I pet my dog & my dog vomits a smaller dog.
I pet both dogs. my wife brings me a bowl of soup &
I vomit a spoon. I vomit a poem about the moon.
I vomit a poet & the poet writes a poem about the same moon.
I vomit every cover of toto’s “africa”.
the 3 eggs I vomited earlier begin to hatch.
I put them under a heat lamp that I use for a fireplace
I vomited in the middle of my living room.
I want to breathe campfires, to grow old
with the s’mores already burning through
the living room. the 3 eggs have now hatched
& the chicks are chirping the chorus to toto’s “africa”.
I vomit a headache & curl up next to the heat
lamp, waiting for the s’mores to burn the house down.

Naked, we looked more alike
than different: milk white, spattered

with freckles, two canvases hung
side by side for children to toss

handfuls of paint at. Meat sisters,
They once said; We’re all meat

sisters. Their way of saying human,
kindred. They possess their body

utterly. I possess my body
as one might possess something

unwanted: a debt, an ugly 
giftcoat. I crave the lack of my

thousand siblings, all the absence they’re
able to hold. Thou shalt not

covet, and all that. There is
a great number of terrifying

practices, not the least of which is
the married couple who sit each

Tuesday and ask one another
across their scuffed cedarwood table

Would you like a divorce? Trust,
intimacy: it’s all a bit difficult.

When They begin to compare the width
of our thumbs, I fear an animal fear, the kind

that chooses its mate based on plumage,
intricacy of nest. The root is this:

how can I be certain there is not something
in the stretch of my skin that does not,

when read closely enough, whisper
inadequate? A friend’s lover once gifted

her a plant, which for months she watered
dutifully, only to discover, after leaving it outside to die,

it had been plastic from the onset. There’s room here,
They say, turning over my palms, for something to grow.

They drip slow blue wax on me,
bind my pinkies with the old twine.

I hope my salt lamp is a weeping deity
and not evidence that my house
is sprouting a fever. I wake to find the base
leaky with saline, a puddle of wettened shelf, and send
L a picture of the flood, calling it prophet
with a question mark. She informs me
prophet is the wrong word; a prophet needs language—but what
is this lamp but a mouth: rock hollowed of light
and slobbering. I have pressed my tongue
to this stone in prayer for luminescence, for living
salt not siphoned from my own skin. I live
in Florida and had to turn the heater on today
for the first time since I’ve lived in Florida.
I used to love winter until I fell in love

under a funeral of Christmas lights, childhood’s
ghost flooding from my overripe lips in mist—pleas
to the universe that never came true but propelled
me to Florida where I live untethered
to anything but my own plastic worship
of THE TREES. THE TREES meet me
where I am when I am lonely. I am lonely

and just learning how to say I’m lonely and not mean it
as a placeholder for the other absences
a noun leaves. I’m sitting on the porch
steeped in the ordinary human sadness
of not getting what I hoped for. After your hand on my neck
I felt so barefaced and linen. Now I’m stuck
hoarding words like choirs of expensive ants.
There are people near and far away
who have unspoken agreed to pass through this life
with me / isn’t it enough / why can’t I stop

talking about THE TREES, their haunted glitter
swirling like old pennies in my head. As if a taste of metal
at the back of the mouth means I can be salvaged
at the hands of someone I have yet to meet and if I present my body
as sacrifice I can finally walk away from it. I moved
to Florida to burn, molting magenta blooms, the summers
smothering every want with a wet open palm.
Like a birch switch. Like a kiss. I tell L, I am
almost certain I will die alone
shriveled to the bone and huddled close
to a magnolia TREE. There’s still no way to get at
what I’m trying to get at, nothing to make up for the fact

I want to capture every purple flower
and hold it hostage in my throat. That I once believed monarchs
could live whole lives at my hairline
and showers did not make me sad and I was not afraid
of how much I have grown to love the blowfish,
taxidermied, hollowed into a lamp
hanging over the bar in wait for someone
to notice and name him. This is a partial list of things
I would have once called suffering—wondering
how many utterly broken women are pushing strollers
on the burning streets of small towns and how little
difference between noticing the details of anything
and loving it recklessly. The foolish heart

marching in all its birdsong and burgundy glitter
to stand in front of the firing squad. Everything today
feels bigger than the passing series of clouds
that shaped it. Aware even now that I am choosing
which parts to remember, your words with their tiny
apologetic hooks of hope, the pattern of rain
falling across your skin and my desire
to show you how light never stops moving. If this secret
is a book of dark orchids in the archive
of our inevitable human hearts, it’s nothing
new to say that I scraped my knees raw
on the sand kneeling over your body, that both
the wounds I did and did not ask for are shedding

to reveal new skin. I ask L, Do you think it’s possible
to be horny for poetry? I am so tired of mouth,
trying to translate its meaning which has nothing to do with incisors
cheekflesh or the wily slide of tongue. For every hour lust paces
in its basement prison, there is a lost, feral possum inside of me

surviving very quietly. Everyone has agreed
the audience is tired of hearing about the body, the body, but there was something
opening in mine, heaving unholy as a litany
of cows giving birth in the pasture of night.
A TREE knows: you’ve got to feel every follicle
of these painfields. Says: fold into the flooding. 
I hope someday to say out loud to anyone: you
touched me and touched me and touched me
and I was made better for it.

When he wasn’t looking / I snuck / a spoonful / of strawberry cheesecake / ice cream / between my lips / crushed the bits / of artificial fruit / between my tongue and / He placed a hand / on the small / of my back / He passed / through the wide / open space / between my body and / the back counter / my body shivered / ate too much ice cream / probably / I liked / sweets / minimum wage and he / liked me / I thought / at least enough / to look past / the late clock-ins and / the rambling stories I’d tell / on slow days / Once / when we worked alone / I told him / about mi abuelita / couldn’t fathom how she / just a little older than me / 18 / left her homeland / married a man / almost twice / her age / That’s just / how they did it / back then / he told me / If this were / the old days / I’d sweep you up / right now / I leaned / back against / the cold metal / sink / stared at my bright / smelled the sugar / of gummy bears / as I swept cookie wrappers / under the mixing table / He told me / a story once / about when he was a teenager / had to be / at least 2 decades ago / his parents watched / silent as / a pair of big / tall men / in uniform / dragged him from his home / against his will / in the middle / of the night / In the middle / of one of my shifts / he led me / to the back / insisted we watch / Top Gun / together / wanted to show me / something I’d never / seen before / He licked / his lips / probably / cherry ice cream / I sat / on the edge / of the scratchy / fold-up chair / he set up for me  / smelled like cheap / My wife’s been making me / sleep on the couch / he texted / one morning I had off / I didn’t respond / when he pointed out the customer / with the tongue piercing / There’s only one reason / she’d get / one of those / he winked / I tightened / the string around / my apron / washed my hands / again / green apple soap / put on another pair of gloves / to keep the food / safe

not the other                     way around.
rules for one                     brief moment,
the world is                       subject to our
ture, probably                   a rabbit, and
dad anymore.                   I’m some crea-
my favorite                       hat I am not
to my child.                      When I wear
  them on my head. The pants belong
    with an elastic waistband. I wear
    My favorite hat is a pair of pants

My other favorite
hat is blue. I bought
it in Hawaii two weeks
before basic training.
When I wear my blue
Hawaii hat I think of

younger me walking through
a village on the beach, barefoot,
shirtless, eating octopus for the
first time. My wife says she likes
the way I look when I wear
my blue Hawaii hat.
It must be a magic hat. It
must change me somehow.

Your dick is definitely better than the Eiffel Tower

I don’t want to taste the Eiffel Tower

Google search: can you die from clenching your jaw too tightly?

Misery is a little gray ceramic pig you pick up in gift shop

Misery sits on your windowsill and makes you smile when you wake up every morning

I.

Before my grandmother had a habit of running wild with the rabbits. Before she was tongue-chewing and yellow, with white teeth. Before the bodies lay on the road for months. Before the city was enveloping and dirty and learned how to cover the stains on the concrete. Disaster makes blood choose between itself. Before people sleep on nothing but their skins.

 

II.

lao lao in california
there are avocados,
and the fennel grows
between the cracks
on the sidewalk.
there is no gold
without a wrist. 
when the earth
yawns the shingles
collapse into soup.
most people live
unknowingly or
on fault lines.
i am thirteen
and i have read
the propaganda,
and my mind
is trained to
duck and cover
when half
the sky falls.
lao lao why
do the people
in beijing
season the
dust they eat
so it tastes
more sharp
like xue? is it
true that it’s
thicker when
it flows in
more plenty?
mama never
lets me lock
my door in case
the structure
shift and she
can’t find my
corpse beneath
the rubble.
like what if it’s
the fire in
the days after
that can’t be
quelled? could
you imagine
if our active
shooter drills
didn’t actually
train the direction
of the gun and
his bullets?

 

III.

I, alive, have the clay in the river, the onions, the chilies, the floods, the world, inverted. The mayor is dead. I have a question about survival, but today, I will call you. Tomorrow, when we are underwater, do we release our breaths or keep them locked inside?

In the dark room, the computer screen
            beaming. Close-up

of a woman’s lips. The television loud
            with songs retelling

David Bowie’s life on film, played
            to drown out our flesh.

& moonlight, too, slips in
            to take part in our skin,

our softness, this un
            -elegant exploration, how we reach
           
to press our cocks against each other
            in mutual agreement

that this would only happen once, even
            when light wants: our bodies,

this path we followed: the pores:
            the standing hairs: the salt—

Swans, in orbital silence, garble questions, one after the other.
Your feet try to pace an answer back. You walk how clouds
move, noticeable only in increments, only upon
return. Still, you have rushed your way
to him, the unlit public restroom forty-nine degrees
& dropping, you spread your legs over the piss-slicked tile
for a stranger resting on all fours, car parked
with the engine running, he crouches down for you
to enter, you press your face against the night-dank metal,
you think about the swans, but please, remember: this is falling
to your knees, this is ghost prayer, & you will confess
each shivering sin of your want into his wet, disappearing mouth,
& as though it were contrition, you exit first. You do not look behind you.
The swans much louder the distance home, they were asking what his hands
would be like. There isn’t much to say, you explain, except that there were
fingerprints. As there always are, have been, will be.

I should tell you I used to be in an imaginary band
and each day I’d release numerous imaginary albums
packed with imaginary songs with imaginary lengths
and I’d make an album cover which ordinarily featured

a set of sloping hills with stars and a moon
positioned impossibly close to the sun and birds
always mid-flight and sometimes even shaded
periwinkle with a permanent marker so it bled

through the notecard covering up tracks
one and two. I hid them all in an aluminum box
my grandfather gave me for my birthday, but
that wasn’t for two months and when he placed it

in my hands he said he used it to store his favorite rocks
as a kid, later, letters from friends he met while stationed
in Canada because he never did end up going to Korea
which is something I only understood after he died

of lung cancer in a hospital he had only ever been to
maybe once before and that was when they thought it was
his throat, and at the time I was ten, double digits
finally after all those years of waiting, and I didn’t know

the definition of the word diagnosis but when I heard it
out loud my father took a long pause, gripped his hands
together like trying to hold on to something that wouldn’t
stay there. I want to play you a few more songs.

I mistook a plastic bag
on the side of the desert 
highway for a hawk—
thought it first alive 
and gnawing its beak 
into poor flesh, thought 
it first an omen
for some end, 
realized it then 
an omen 
for another—
its wing
of consumption
hovering its prey, 
reading HOME
GOODS or DEPOT and
whipping at eighty-five,
realized intake 
as I listened 
to a podcast recapping 
The Bachelorette 
and watched the bag 
in the rearview float up
and into the back
of a pick-up, become 
another’s concern
and I still worry 
for the items it once 
carried because 
in another 
poem, the desert highway
and the bird are 
metaphors for reality 
television that haunt 
the progress
of two lovers who
fight in an apartment 
somewhere
in southern New Mexico
about the right 
reasons of their
co-habitation, about
distance cramming
their style but how
they create it, how 
we make all 
the things we mourn
like the bag and the bird,
how I made the entire
thing up to say this,
about love 
and how we fall 
into it, out of it,
like plastic
bags from 
speeding trucks. 

see Indiana limestone
carve through night

glance in the mirror
double-check proportions

Honest with his shirt off
realities of skin

flesh barely contains bones
feel closer to him

perfect precise little details
correct bulges in the thigh

eighteen days in jail
after wrecking my new car

The dovetailing of

puritanical rigidity
and occult excellence

in pink bungalows
at the Beverly Hills Hotel.

In my dream I’m fucking
Jennifer Garner and
she’s the one who wanted me, she says
wow your eyes in this light
have specks of gold and there’s
green and I can see you and
you're beautiful.

She lives across the street, us
ignoring the adage
‘don’t get involved with your neighbors’
instead I leave a key under the wicker mat,
she comes in late and smoky eyed.

In my dream I’m begging
Jennifer Garner to
take me seriously, to date me,
she’s a little champagne drunk
it’s a little after midnight, she says
you don’t know what serious means,
I shouldn’t have come over.

My lawn is so lush,
the St. Augustine thriving under sprinklers
just like my gardener promised it would
and I cry standing at the bay windows,
looking across the freshly mowed expanse.

In my dream I’m kissing
Jennifer Garner and
she’s sleeping on the sand at the Cape,
wakes with a smile, she says
let’s go out for dinner
I love oysters and I want a martini,
later, I’ll want you in the cold surf.

On vacation she is withholding,
won’t tell me why she is angry then
suddenly not but I watch longingly as
she steps into a black cocktail dress, hold my breath
as she helps with my collar, it never sits flat,
her fingers are generous.

In my dream I’m chasing
Jennifer Garner to
the water’s edge in the absolute dark,
she has slipped off the dress,
she is sexy, swanning out into waves,
I can’t see her and call out, she says
it’s fine babe, come deeper
you know how to swim.

When Ms. Griffin was fired, my mother said 
it was because she was too gay, too flamboyant 
for our small charter school. I mourned her 
ombre dreadlocks and her laugh that swept me up 

like broken glass. Years later, it was me that was 
too much. When I walked past doors, they slammed. 
I clutched Cori’s hand even tighter, kissed her blue 
in stairwells and bathroom stalls, memorized the moons 

embedded in her cheek. You saw me bare, like Ms. Griffin 
did: tiny, quiet and filled with oceans, with waves 
I was always crashing underneath. When I snuck 
to your office to escape my blood mother’s voice 

in my ear, you sent me home with a bowl of light 
disguised as a basketball—an orb in which
the words no one would love me if I was gay didn’t belong
to my mouth. Even when I was more boy than girl. 

Even when I was the dirty child with freckled 
hands curled up on the bathroom floor. You pulled 
me back from the bridge and into the garden, made 
the sun cast its eyes over the flowers 
budding behind my teeth.

Cut it out, will you? This too-clever stratagem cuts no ice with me. Whereupon her lover cut across the stone field, balancing an embarrassment of melons. It gives the impression of asymmetry—a cut-and-paste view of reality. A hermit arranging bindweed in a cut-glass vase. Hence, outside their apartment, he will cut the engine, the lights, and darkly wait. Cut a hexagon from a piece of orange construction paper. Cut to the moment your records shattered like crows’ wings under her window. I cut my teeth on these simulated missions. And still she remembers the hairline cut above the eyebrow, remembers gathering her dress to sop the blood. Won’t this, too, fall to the cutting room floor? Just cut to the point already—the way her cat’s tail wraps around your neck. The saxophonist unconscious on the bathroom tile, forearms cut to shreds. Her too-tanned body cuts through my memory even now, like sunlight. Like plum blossom tea cut with arsenic. Do not use if printed seal under cap is torn, cut, or missing. Then he will cut off the sprigs with pruning knives, or whatever. Cue reed section. Cut along dotted line. Now you must go—take the shortcut without us, mijo. A little wooden bowl of cut-up self-portraits on a pillow. Still cuts my heart out of my chest.

Nights shipwrecked / in nameless wanting

The city a floating glass 
garden / to be lost in

Banished from the blinked-out streets / we put 
our dollar-store faith / in the claw machine

wager our best luck / on a dinosaur with a cotton 
heart / as if for once / we both want the same thing: to touch
extinction / to see if it’s loss / if it’s kind 

This brand new / desire: refashioning 
childhood / from a less intimate ruin

If we could, we’d live forever / in arcade fluorescence / we’d live 
forever in worship / of a neon god

Out in the familiar cold / we lift 
up our faces / for the moon to tiptoe on

Somewhere the war has begun / we don’t 
hear about it / though we feel the eloquence 
of sulfur in our lungs

How lovely it is / you say / to have 
a bed to forget yourself in / in a city 
that doesn’t love you

Key moans in the door lock / and we’re back 
at ground zero

Against the slow / pollen of pre-dawn
we unbutton our skin / to reveal the youngest 
muscles in our bodies 

Between our naked limbs / an almost-blue immediacy 
unfurls its petals

Morning smells like horseradish,
dogshit. The squat toilet in my uncle’s house:
too cramped to hold

a breathing thing. My cousin, barely older
than three, calls me “sister, sister,” as she teeters
between the threshold of tiles and toilet to scrape

her teeth, even though I do not have
any sisters. Breakfast is hard-boiled
eggs, a bowl of porridge I cannot stomach

but stomach anyway. Afterward, my uncle takes us
for a walk, and as 妹妹
collects mosquito bites, I want

to stay in China forever, to have a sister,
a real sister, one who won’t ever let me forget
my name. I change my mind

too quickly. The shower is not hot
enough. Two lies and a truth still make
a lie. I do not think of heaven like I used to.

Mlle X, a fifteen-year-old girl, spent several months, during the winter of 1883, undergoing hydrotherapy at Longchamps

                                                                                                     her mother has no history
            her father                       convulsive 

                                                                  she is       
prone to
              develop                                      abrupt and irregular 
                                                                                                        tics                                              


                                                                                                              symptoms  disappeared                                                                            


they returned              
                           convulsive
                                         spasms                                                            
                                                                     shoulders        arms                                           
                                                                                                face      indistinct guttural 
                                                                                                                  sounds                     
                                                                                  common                                             
                                                                                                                            idiot
                                                                                                                                     output                       
                                                                                 obscene in the extreme



            disgusting expressions
                            prevent      being understood



she abandons herself to an unparalleled outpouring of
                                                                                                          noisy barks                    
   
              bizarre postures 
                                                                                                           a cardboard likeness
   devouring any object presented to 
                                                                               it                                                              
                                                                                    this spectacle
                         in the manner                                                                                     of the Gargantua.

Let us go to the story of our patient: 
                                                                                                            a normal development,        
                                                                                                                                                      never 
committed 
                                           any excesses,                         married with children.

                                        
He is being observed,
                                                                         reduced to 
           a muscle contraction,
                                                       an uh uh,    
                                                                            a gnashing of teeth

                                                                           I shall let 
                                                                                              face            
                                                                                                    you.
                                
                                                                                                             See the phenomena,
         what the tic is like,                           
                how awful                               the disease                     
                                                                                                             may be.

                              One may think                                                             that is not enough.
                                                                                                                            A full examination
                                                                              may find 
                         
                                                                                            flashes of lightning,
                  the larger neuropathic family,
                                                                                                            something more
                                to study and examine,                    
                                                                                                                           a special form
                                                                                                                                              of psychic insanity.     

But it would take 
                too long to describe                                             the phenomena               
                                                                                                                                                      he suffers,
                        
                                                                                                                the deep analogy
                                                                                                                                                            between
                                                                                                                                                          them.

Exchanging one anya-nyelv, mother-tongue, for another is like 
nibbling salted peanuts at the sticky bar top,
unplanned but eventual for a bilingual migrant. 

The other mother-
nyelv tongue is abandoned 
like leftovers in the fridge, at first only 
elhanyagolva, overlooked, then discarded. 
My semi-conscious weaving of this altering web of otthon, home, 
was already faltering and becoming less secure 
fractured structure slowly        being               evacuated.

Now with my temporary return a feeling of foreignness 
megcsíklandozza tingles my neck. I am placeless, feeling home neither there
nor here—in webs that had exiled teremtett bölcsődalom my cradle song. 

Occasionally, I toy with now messzi szavak distant words.
Belevésve a fogaimat sinking my teeth into their zamatos hús fruit meat,
letting the sounds and syllables legurulni roll down my chin,
and lecsöpögni drip onto my stomach:
               Holdfény leple alatt meztelenül vetjük magunkat a világ 
               hullámaiba,
veiled moonlight shades our naked forms as we 
hurl in new world waves
              de ahogy a hajnal pirkadata hasítja dombok 
              talpát a percnyi romantika megszakad, abba marad… but as dawn 
breaks foothills the momentary romance is disturbed, deterred…

This friss új íz fresh new taste gives me paper wings
but like Icarus I come tumbling down
shot through with heat, insecurity and xenophobic bile.

Hesitancy slaps my mouth 
for thinking that I, who left, had a right to speak—
akinek hangszálai duruzsolhatnak… 
I tread back to egy otthon a home ahol where my 
words are unhidden, unchained …

I begin a new embroidery, 
I unweave my mother’s dress, picking floss by flow, 
unraveling time.

Then I gather the gold strings and embed
them within the blueish hues. 
A nyelvem is birthed anew
stitching blues and gold through the air. 
I feel guilty, but I also feel              free. 

Is red        love                          with a knack
for breaking code            first memories:
sure, first                     memories of home
include a                        pick-pocket
or two,                    a stolen newspaper
route                           coupon drawers and
ketchup                             packets: but that’s survival, baby
she sed                   like slick,
neapolitan                  ice sticks in summer
like                          cool rockets                red
white and                  blue   there is no antidote for
mixed                 blood     there is no domicile
for                      the invasive species     why
the fuck                          would I garden        sed mama 
in a mood               looking like John Wayne as 
best you                      can after last night’s 
over-the-                      fence with the white 
neighbors                  about pool
parties                             & sensor lights (again), heard
a word                          stick like sweat, all pink-mouth 
rounded O                     shot out like dandelions
sprouting                 in the yard, like they
were there                    the whole time  saw
mama                    furl inside like a thorn, sliding
the door on                  things you don’t mention
again, like               don’t worry we’ll steal their fucking
nectarines               I mean the good ones, trời ơi con,
she sed                           it doesn’t mean anything


You’re the realdeal smokehouse unicorn.
You’re a dry rubbed medium-rare specimen. 
You butcher, you host, you love, you taste. 
You tableside throwdown, you locally sourced
can of whoopass, you USDA Certified lover, 
you fiery red Camaro, you hole in the wall.  
You’re a guy’s Guy, a chef’s chef, a mogul’s mogul
and a ladies’ man. Pop culture’s Jalapeno popper.
You have an intellect that’s smoked low and slow. 
May you rise up on the wings of a Buffalo. 
Get out there and do it, you magnificent bleached 
bastard. Do it for Flavortown. Do it for the dead.
Do it for Hunter. Do it for the people 
who can’t stop laughing at you. 

Okay so I had to YouTube how to start it but 
back in my day, there were a lot more steps. 
See? Didn’t I sound just like a dad there? 
Just like walking into that store today and saying, 
I am here to buy this lawn mower. Yes. The red one.  
And now I’m sold, like a lawn mower—
Suburbs. Slippers. A reusable shopping bag 
full of other reusable shopping bags. 
I’ve tasted the Kool-Aid, I am a believer 
in the sanctity of coming home to a nice lawn,
of having a pair of white Nikes stained green,
of sweeping clippings off a sidewalk I can call 
“mine.” Now that I mention it, right now
a glass of Kool-Aid sounds pretty good. 

When my mother built me
again, she did not wait for sobs

to pass. She left clasps undone
then wept in her bedroom.

I tried to reach for the gown
but my fingers mumbled back hair

into metal teeth. I cursed quietly
waiting for friction to set the cloth 

ablaze. When she came back 
she carried no redness in her eyes.

I bent to kneel at her feet
studying what I might become.

The glint of silver polish or 
blood pooling beneath a toenail. 

Glasslike, I consider my mother 
a god of fragile things; quiet; bone 

grinding into bone; my wasted 
howl pouring up into the moon. 

When she felt me wince, she relaxed
her hands, detangling the flames

with reverence. I was a child unborn
to be born again—un-monstered

& beautiful, washed in her saltless light.

You don’t mean nasty. You mean today
a fresh ejected 50. cal casing,
hot brass thick round as a lipstick shuttle,
coerced new blisters from your neck, and earlier 
leaves stirred in wind you couldn’t feel 
as you watched a camel through a scope
bend down dying. You mean the chirps, 
whistles, and wind drawn trilling 
from the roof top vents of the abandoned 
Red Cross warehouse—in its empty compound
next to yours—were indistinguishable 
from song thrush nesting in the concertina.

At the end of OEF thirteen, we visited Qala-i-Jangi.
That prison-fortress near Mazar-i-Sharif.

There was only one guard. He was happy 
to lead us through the afternoon hay grass 

still sifting bomb rubble. We took pictures 
with him next to the memorial for the only casualty 

whose name we knew. I thought there were others:
shots of the guard at the entrance to the bunker 

where the rioting prisoners were drowned; 
with the purple loosestrife gathered

trembling against the walls; the walls
crumbling like aqueducts; the basement cells 

cool and dark and quiet. I only found a few 
of us—soldiers in civilian clothes, at the Blue Mosque, 

pistols tucked behind our backs; of the tribal rugs 
we bought afterwards in the bazaar.
 
the man who touches you also touches
the other women of the city, this special
man who you chose to be your first man
even after you’ve met so many men who
wanted to know you as a woman even
after you travelled around France and
studied their translations or history even
after you took me into your house when
I brought myself there and you had wine
and cheese ready for any occasion even
after you bought your own car and parked
on the wrong side of the street on purpose
even after you thought you might be with
a child from a man who touched you and
the other women of the city even when
you said if it’s too late for you then it’s too
late for me after I quoted my own mother
even after the quiet air of your kitchen
reminded us of being in a mother’s womb
even after you gave up on all people for
the sake of your own soul except this man
who dares to know you as a woman on
the outside and thinking that all women
merge together on the inside like a soup
no less and you stare into my eyes while
cooking and you say I just don’t know
what people want I just want to give up
on knowing anything at all

1.
Teach your children well, rebellion is constant though, sweatpants will always be comfortable when no one is around and you’d like to watch a movie in bed with popcorn and your lover and it will be snowing and you will want to go skiing in the powder with a friend who will watch you and then you will watch him and he will give you some tips and you won’t say anything. 

2.
Brown leaves decay in the April swamp. Trout are dumped into rivers out of trucks. It is warm and sunny out, let us go try to catch one of those trout and maybe next week we will go see a ball game. Snow may be in the forecast between now and then, but we’ll ignore the weatherman, he’s wrong most the time anyway. The brim of my hat keeps the sun out of my eyes, but won't let me see to where I need to without some struggle. Nice to meet you. I will shake your hand now. Later maybe we will have drinks. 

3.
The traffic is far, far away in the other room my wife turns the page of her book. Come down to the stream where the Magnolia is beginning to lose its petals but is still fragrant. In a robe Han-Shan sits on granite playing a wooden flute, this and that, a melody sometimes present, most times not, Tu-Fu is crouching, nudging a poem down the river with a twig of birch, jug of wine by his side. 

4.
How'd you get that dough so fluffy? It was the egg, the one that came out of the chicken last week. I fed it sweet grain, but it's not the egg that makes the dough sweet it's the sugar ground from green cane that came from the islands where Bob Marley sang in a shantytown under the sun before Club-Med moved in and before I was born in 1980. I listen to him on top of mountains when its twenty degrees and snowing, where sixteen-year-olds wear Rasta colors while skiing. 

5.
Should more names be dropped, with techniques intellectualized? Correct images placed next to one another the way so and so and so and so and so and so replenish starved lungs with oxygen jukeboxes. Do it like this and do it like that. Break line with
the sidewalk with
cracks where 
they never 
been 
before. 

6.
Look at me, look at me, tell me what I look like - a comet being born in the pond in the woods – rising, dripping with the murk which it came from, before taking off through the galaxy – a blur, attracting and expounding continually. So much beauty gone to waste in favor of emotional homeostasis, lovely lovely eyes, lovely lovely mind, lovely, lovely the closest we will get will be this financial transaction. The wife is calling, the wife is calling, as she has been for centuries. 

8.
The world is too much with toasters and hand grenades, I-Phones and Plutonium, and two for one steak dinners. I joined Planet Fitness so I could lose weight on the elliptical watching twelve T.V.'S at once, trying to figure out what to believe. I believe, I believe…all is a spectacle and I am always part of it, I never feel lonely, I even have a couple of giraffes as friends, along with the seven Hyenas that try to eat them. There is no confusion. I only have to do. 

9.
The grass is green, but you say its red. Who’s to know? He said, she said, they said everything, moving to some music, taking nothing at face value like a gangsta, the smile from my boss and the frown from my wife, there ain’t no difference, I’ll take a sunny day or a rainy one, a hot day or a cold one. All these stars dripping with wax holding me in place, someday they will all be melted completely. 

10.
All writing is garbage…All those who have points of reference in their minds…are pigs…                    

11.
Follow these directions and you will find your way to a grandmother who is stirring five gallons of red sauce and there are always bursting sausages waiting for you when you come home after a day of playing soccer in Mike’s back yard where his mother keeps an ice-filled pitcher of Purplesorousrex Kool-Aid on the brick steps spotted with lichen and moss, this is pure sugar and we are drinking it and scoring goals, the crowd is yelling and some of them are singing a patriotic song.

12.
On the rooftops, pigeons give birth to condors and now there are plenty of them and they eat people who are dressed in thousand-dollar suits. Save the ozone, burn clean coal, wear Nike Airs from the nineteen-eighties, be a sneakerhead, a snake worshiper, a worshiper of ants, a worshiper of macaroni and cheese, eat low-fat everything, convince your doctor you are invincible, live your life accordingly.

13.
Break a turtle’s neck, not so it will kill him, but so that he can't tuck his head in anymore and is forced to face everything: his riga-mortised cousin washing up on an oily beach, the seagull chewing gum, the Christmas tree burning, and the goldfish swimming in a bowl.  

14.
The magician can make the bunny come out of his hat when he wants to. He doesn’t have to cast any spell he just places his hand quietly into his hat and out comes a fluffy white bunny almost smiling. The bunny knows it is his job to come out of the hat and he is kept fat with carrots and baked beans.            

15.
I've been the Basil plant screaming for the sunshine, the tomato plant with blight, the winter squash that never grew, I had tea with Buddha and Jesus, they got along just fine. Jesus offered Buddha a piece of fish and he enjoyed the flesh. Buddha asked Jesus to meditate with him and Jesus did and was satisfied. He told Buddha how he thought of his father and Buddha said he thought of his own father too.

16.
There is nothing left, only these old pennies in a green plastic cup that want to be spent on something worthwhile, a birthday card or a Christmas present. 

18.
We are the robots painting pictures of flowers while staring at the refrigerator, contemplating euphoria thinking of death, watching the garden grow, a bell tolls, there is no such thing as freedom sustained.

every movie ever has big hard cocks. ass. tits. sorry, I meant porn. sometimes when I travel I listen to the radio. the songs make me think of you and I think of the shapes your mouth makes and I accelerate. you have a body and you are a person and you wear your vagina like a hat. your penis like a belt. they match but they never touch. the hat goes on the hat rack. the belt coils up and hides somewhere. the hat rack is your bosom. your bedroom drawers are all tight, red and revealing. this is how I imagine it. I’m sorry. I was trying to write you a letter. please, let me try again.

dear lover,

I want to fuck you but the world tells me how but also I want to fuck the world. will you go on a trip with me?

I dreamt of a white bear last night,

like the ones in the rainforests

of Alaska. Landlocked, we dreamt

of whispering to them, shaking off

one country for another,

wildness and snow-swell

and the cold jaws of Canada.

Instead, we drove east,

straight into Wyoming,

brandy-soaked and wind-drunk,

forgot cardinal directions. This was unwise.

You didn’t like the way I tempted

the high water, the rush of maybe

you’ll drown me, the way I liked

to tease. Liked to sleep in the tall grass.

Carved maps into your body

and mine. Called for the bears, come, come,

lost somewhere in Yellowstone.

I let you geyser through me.

It’s true. These were gorgeous mistakes.

I want to make them again

& again & again. 

I taste the rest of my life

on your teeth. My body was always

better at knowing than me. I was thinking

of how we left it -

all over the floor, spit & blood

on knuckles, jewel-toned toes,

femurs split; (my body) promise.

Angel boy, archipelago eyes, people like us

always have something to get over.

But we don’t gotta talk about it.

 

One night we drove through Arkansas.

The air sat heavy on the rim

of late June. I dreamt about a train

that night, pummeling through an empty mine.

I think there was some mystery to it,

something to solve. The phone

was ringing. My dress was dirty.

You were there too,

with your cloud of needles,

rope-ties for hands. You were blue-scaled,

hissing, copperheaded.

But we don’t gotta talk about it.

 

I woke with sheets twisted

around my throat

like my body was trying

to make a noose out of sleep. That was when

you said you couldn’t trust me

with it

(my body)

anymore. My favorite pain

is when you make me vanish

all at once, even before

I can take my tights off. Gouge out my ink

all over the floor.

But we don’t gotta talk about it.

I’m wondering if you can still feel despite the nerve damage I'm wondering

how to cast a shadow puppet of a ghost if a ghost can have a shadow

I'm wondering why my teeth don't fit inside my mouth

why your knuckles fit perfect beneath my cheekbone I'm wondering

how to silence the rain how to catch a bullet between my fingers

how to forget about your fingers I'm wondering about the bruise

around the moon if the spring sky blues & aches for one more lip

of cold light I'm wondering how to stop the bleeding I'm wondering

what you could have done, didn't.

1997
I was hiding behind a chair
Cutting off all my hair
My father asked me
If I was a retard
I replied honestly
I didn’t know
Childhood is
A population of no’s
In a field of infinite indifference
A ham and cheese sandwich
In the void
The same theoretical mass that these days
Contains thoughts about love
When you fancy yourself in it
Which is the perfect metaphor
For trying to do anything
At all
Everything is pure
When kept inside the mind
No one really even owns anything anymore
A few t-shirts and an outdated iphone
Don’t even bother
Wondering what happens when you die
The fanfare will be typical
An estate won’t exist
Questionably neither will you
The nice thing about time 
Is that nothing has happened yet
Or it has all already happened
At the same time
Consider that
While in line at the grocery store
Look at your bananas
Oatmeal wine lentils 
At the bottom of the basket
Look at  
The can of sardines
That somehow 
Looks back
The fickle nature of certainty 
Makes apathy shiny and desirable
Which is probably why
We have agreed we think our house
Is disintegrating around us
Everything is dusty
For no other reasonable reason
It isn’t
Anyone else’s business
What anyone else does 
When they are alone
The living room is set on silent
While dust accumulates
It has all already been dusty
It has all already been said
Yet everyone is still talking
Quiet, please
I should be speed walking alone
Down Killingsworth st. and admiring
Clothing and sidewalks
There is so much beauty in garbage
Simply by virtue of it
Being in the wrong place
Anyways,
Writers are obsessive liars
Who are honest about it
Bowls of soup have told fewer
Lies than most people
Yet everyone is in conversation
With other people
Rather than eating soup
Riddle me that, or
At the very least
Listen to whatever record is playing in the living room
Or make up a secret handshake
With someone you fancy yourself to love
Find a new kind
Of conversation
And next time you’re at the coast
Order a bowl of chowder
Slip the little packet
Of hexagonal crackers
Into your jacket pocket 
No, you’re obviously not going to eat them later
It’s just nice to have a little crunchy sound
Here and there
To startle you when
Feeling dramatically apathetic
Alone on a park bench or in an elevator
Oops crinkle crinkle
It’s nice
To laugh on accident
If that doesn’t make sense 
Then nothing does
I’m going to go cut off
The rest of my hair now
Or at least shake it around
In front of a mirror
I’m a poet
I can do whatever I want
Like last September
When I drove through the Palm Desert
Just to sit in Elvis’ bathtub
And laugh
Filling my head
With someone else’s memories
Call it a vacation
Or one half of a romance
A multicolored black hole
A z-dimensional open and shut
It doesn’t matter if the limits meet
It doesn’t matter who you were
Sweep all future declarations 
Under the rug
Call then Before
And now After
Even though we all know
Only losers think in binaries 
It is Wednesday afternoon and
I feel powerful
My phone lit up to tell me the weather
Which seems unusual, seeing as
Mostly cloudy is not urgent news
So now I simply 
Rig my fantasy baseball team
And place imaginary bets on imaginary ponies
Horrifying future biographers

this is the second to last stop on the line / i was supposed to get off / where was i going / i might have to turn around / it turns out being clever is actually useless but wordplay does make people laugh / do people like me not because i’m pretty but because i’m funny /  i forgot to pay my electric bill / the euphorbia is dying out back / the euphoria was never going to last / if this is literal then what does figurative look like / does my figure look ready for hands to shape it / it’s okay if it doesn’t / do i think it isn’t okay because i have to be constantly reminded that it is / do people like me not because i’m funny but because i’m pretty / this isn’t mania this is something else / this is last year / before my mouth fell permanently open / i didn’t ask to be here / here is simply being alive / maybe this green juice will make me complete / i will make some money by selling pictures of my feet / the big black dog of my dreams is wagging its tail in the doorway

the child inside of me
has become comfortable
with the heat of the months
as they melt down
like hot wax then build one
on top of the other
into a mountain
in silence

has started to forget
the sound
of i’ll pray for you
as it rolls off of
grandmothers’ tongues
translating to
until you
come to your senses
or
cold wars are best waged
by those who learn to forget
they’re fighting them

if i
devein my tongue
removing from it
every last grain of sand
borrowed
from the rivers
that bore it
if i scrub the last
of summer’s acridity
its heat and oil
from beneath
my fingernails
from my hair and from
the bottoms of my feet
then maybe from now on
the melting of the months
will feel more like
a renaissance.

naked as death
begging on the highway

I calibrate the instrument
of my breastplate to lead me
back to you

I never once saw a dog chase a bone
but I never knew a dog that wasn’t
so sick it couldn’t get up

I never knew someone as lonely as me
           then I was born

whenever I leave on a trip
I sit down
with my ghost and say

I’m going out
you stay here

by this time tomorrow I intend to be standing
on a tall rock holding hands
with Lydia Mendoza
but until then
I’ll settle

for this dream behind the wheel
where I’m walking to the top
of the burial mound in South Charleston
West Virginia
across from Suzi’s
Drive In under a moon
close and calm
as a nurse’s hand
toward my grandfather

last thing he ever said to me was
you’re gonna make me cry
and I did

their graves were made out of sheet metal

while the answer was in front of them the whole time

just hang on a little longer it gets

easier

from here

I promise

I often confuse the dead horses
for trees. I say things like termites

care about the weather, or dark stars
will always find their way to empty

rooms. Anyway, the dead horses are real,             
and the trees are real. Tonight a herd

of cattle is headed back toward the town
and now the river is real. The Mesopotamia

is real and the people in the town are real.
And when I saw pictures of the bighorn

sheep, I wanted them to be real so I searched
for the hands that drew them. And anyway,

the narwhal fighting off another narwhal
in order to catch its own breath is real,

and sometimes when I am in Vermont,
I go into the woods to hide from the holiness

of conclusion, and sometimes it is so real
I don’t want to come out. Anyway, listen to me

nature is real. And when seal pups kiss, it is real
just like the time we got a hotel room halfway

in between where you sleep and where I sleep
just to kiss. That was real. And yes, I often confuse

kissing with love, but when we kissed, it was real,
the same way love when it is love is real. And

to describe the language of love is to describe
the language of bees and that is to be real

and to buy something in order to remember
the describing and the kissing and the bees

is to be real. And anyway, on my way home,
I paid seventeen dollars for a piece of petrified

wood somewhere in between the kissing
and the describing and Holbrook, Arizona

and it felt so real that I called my mom just to talk
about the levels of brightness when two fighting

narwhals kiss. And anyway, I, too, want to be real.
Like spring, like swamps and like seaweed, I want

to see a whale from a beach town in California
or Rhode Island and to know that it’s real.

Because when you touched me for the first time
I knew my body was real. The Mesopotamia

was there and the Tigris and the Euphrates
and for hours the bees crawled into the craters

of me as if my body had never been clawed into.
And because when I sent you the poem about

the dying whale, you wrote back, why couldn’t you
have the whale getting saved by a narwhal or something?

Anyway, that was the saddest part.

We are toward somewhere in the first sentence. There is June & us or us or June because that’s what’s left of it. I walk like a walk with a walk on the table. The walk is finding thirty dollars on the floor & taking it. The table is stopping your heart if you love someone right now. The rest takes your life again.

I want to kiss no one I’ve ever wanted to kiss. The second sentence is the suitcases on every floor of my heart are packed. We never talk about swimming pools living up to water. We talk about how water can’t breathe & how water is most of the prison inside an animal & how water gives a fuck about what you or I do. I know, I know, I know, I know, I know—I still believe in water.

I am an air conditioner with two sweating cans, legs crossed, Mad Men paused, texting, saying something I do not wish to say, in the solitude I need—that needs me—so I can think & feel & say everything I have to think & feel & say to no one unless I choose to. I am an air conditioner before countries. I am an air conditioner before centuries. I am an air conditioner from right to left. I am an air conditioner from north to south, from east to west. I am an air conditioner with the hope of always being an air conditioner because, goddamn: don’t you always want to do what you do best?

Your neck tattoo spoke to me but I needed a
translator. Needed a nail gun, a barn wall to
respond to  your forward  advances.  After a
night together,  I woke to find  that your neck
tattoo had  passed on to my lower back. You
said,  Thank  god  for  that.   I said nonsense
only I could understand.

I keep dead snakes in my pockets in case anyone bothers me on my way to work. Chicago's buses grunt like goblins asking for a light, for change, for a knife in the face. There's a saying:

"Hand it over, asshole, everything in your pockets."

I smile each time, welcome the way to where we both are going. I reach into my pockets and remove not one or two but all four of my dead snakes. I throw them onto the man that holds the knife to my face.

It takes the average person 19 seconds after having a dead snake thrown on them before they realize that the snake is, in fact, dead.

19 seconds on a public bus is an eternity. I'm holding the knife by the time the thief understands I'm the kind of guy who keeps dead snakes in his pockets.
"Pick them up for me," I tell them each time, pointing his knife at his face. "Pick up my snakes. I need them for the next time someone tries to steal from me.”

The few times that this has happened, the men have always paced away, shaken and afraid. Unsure. One apologized. None of the thieves have found out that I don't have a single dime to my name. I'm nothing to steal. It's just me and my four dead snakes. They get me everything I need.

If you sneeze, I won't say bless you. I won't. I'll hand you a tissue and go back to filling in this crossword puzzle with words that don't fit, don't exist.

last night i had a dream         
            that my teeth fell
out all in a row.
                       i woke with them still
                                                          firmly in place,
                                              but the loss was real.

i.

i wasn’t one to go off the path. stars became lanterns, hanging from the willows, limp branches flailing in the dark. i wasn’t one to crave. not then.

ii.

he lit into me. the candle in the lantern, star in the dark. he wrapped me ‘round his finger and i felt his pull the way we all felt things then, with quick rabbit beats and flushed cheeks and shaking hands. that’s the way it felt in wild youth, the feel of immortality pulsing beneath tongue. there was nothing but curved teeth and spit flying, each struggle a quickening, a death-dance immortal.

iii.

they say there are wolves in these woods. bright eyes and yellowed teeth. they say, men are wolves, always stalking, waiting under the light of the crescent moon. i told them i’d know a wolf if i saw one. i didn’t.

late at night i think about you, and i can't stop, but i can't talk
to you because you are bad news i am desperate
to hear, and i am a bad girl who needs to sleep and not think
about your tongue in time with mine, your hands snaking
past lines, already blurred. i've been fucking
up for months now, but the way you touch
me with your eyes makes it all seem worth it, just
for a second. in the dark, i reach for you and find
only myself. but then, i have hands, too.

All hail Michigan Dogman. All
slobber and standing seven feet
tall, Michigan Dogman sounds

howls like he’s missing a muffler
yet we’re never quite sure if it was
him or the highway. Keep quiet 

you whisper at me. I want to hear
the Dogman sing. And I want to 
believe in a world, in a Michigan

where the Dogman’s low bellow
cuts like a last-ditch dagger through
the cloth of the night as it falls. 

But this evening again the joke’s
on us. Sitting here on the porch
I notice you’ve developed a rapid pant 

even before I turn to look and 
behold the dangle of a lolling tongue
out of your open maw. And I mean

behold: all seven feet of you shines
a silver not so often seen in this
peninsula. In all the excitement

I scramble and get stuck by a splinter
in the pad of my paw. It hurts like 
my mother always did each day dad 

didn’t come back or maybe more
like the harsh nights when he did.
I cry out in pain. There it is again you say.

At the theatre I saw a man pretend 
to float around just by timing his jumps right

between the parts of the strobe light where
the dark gets its chance to flash

for once. He made it all the way across
the stage which stunned me senseless until

I saw him out of breath on the other side. 
Of course the jig was up: if you’re going

to fly you have to act like nothing’s happened
after the fact—this is the first rule.

The second one you find out in the air
is something I’ve been prone to believe.

Around here, the strike of lightning 
hits more like a splash, like a flat hand

slaps the face of the lake palm open,
like give me all the far-off light

you’ve got but bring some red swell 
and sting while you’re at it. Bring no rain. 

the babies are most dangerous because
            they have not learned how to control their venom
                        the way we make the same decisions over and over and over again
                                    situation-ships scale down transformations of selves

my anxiety has a number of naked selves in it
            the accumulations of conversations that i’ve excluded
                        and have been excluded from are the poetics of negation
                                    when women are stressed, especially during wartime, their production
                        of cortisone decreases and they are more likely to give birth to girls
            what is the correlation between tree density and population density per square mile

my anxiety renovates wombs, there’s a clarity in the cold
            that you cannot access while bathing in sunlight
                        text messages are the fragments of communication engineered
                                    by modern society to control the arrangement of our physical bodies
                        the loss of hearing, mechanical cranes, to be deaf,
            but not deft-less, what are the biscuits and gravy of poetry

my anxiety is fixated on the different implications of what it means
            to sit next to someone rather than to sit across from them
                        my anxiety renovates wombs, one fact at a time, the quiet world of phosphenes,
                                    the nebulous galaxies you see when you rub your eyes
                        not sunset green, but sinatra blue, not sunset green but sinatra blue
            the dictionary’s synonyms for coincidence: accident, luck, and/or fate
how to locate a meditative space between the pages

my anxiety is a yard sale of dead people’s stuff, the price of being poor is ironic
            the ability to render nothingness into the state of fullness
                        paper cities and invisible weights on smooth clavicles
                                    there is no such thing as a non-habit-forming sleep aid
                        there’s no such thing as a non-habit-forming sleep aid
            well, good morning midnight



tall stranger man
you have sung a lot of songs 
you fall in love often
and maybe
you lose some things along the way
but everything is all right
and none of this matters anymore 
really nothing matters 
no really
well some things do
your mother calls you 
she has something to tell you
when you die you don’t really die
because nothing can really die
because part of you lives on forever in everyone
and the part that lives on is called the soul 
this is not something you haven’t heard of
you already know about this
but she tells you anyways
she tells you while she is in the bathroom with your father at the jewish community center and you hear peeing sounds and she is dying and you are laughing and it is all so strange and maybe you want to cry
you tell me this story in a bar later
in the back of the bar where it is dark 
and the music is so loud and no one can hear us anymore
i watched my grandmother die in a bed
i asked her if she was scared and she laughed the loudest laugh i had ever heard
i don’t know much about death or dying except that we all do it
we are even doing it right now
watch
but
i have also loved people 
i have also lost some things
i am always worried about losing a tampon inside my body and going into anaphylactic shock and dying ever since i read about how that could happen to me in YM magazine when i was thirteen
so now whenever i am on my period i am constantly checking and making sure i have removed all tampons from my vagina before inserting another one 
but 
let me tell you
let me tell you 
i have been calling your name
i have been calling your name 
for so goddamn long
over and over 
i am your man 
you are my stranger and i am your man
i am calling your name
i am here to tell you 
everything is okay


i touched your arm
you kissed my head
what time of day do you like to poop? you asked
the time of day that you leave, i said

the dogs fucked all night long
we ordered chinese food
there were noodles
covered in soy sauce
are you turned on?
you took my food away
maybe you wanted to save some
for later
i always thought that was a weird move
do you remember this
this was back when you disappeared
often
here we are
hey, where are you going now

Curse the sun, you lonely king 

of ash, of husks & of ruin. Howl 
at the encroaching flood 

as your tongue chokes on thorns. 

Greying host. Poison nectar. 
Perfumed blood will flow 

from your withered hands. 

The pillars of flame that licked 
at your aching body are buried 

in the dirt, the iron which held you 

to the earth is broken into shards 
of bright silver light. 

No drought is endless. No horizon

is dark for all time. Walk freely 
through crimson waters, and leave 

hope in the furrowed arms of night.

a god with no gun 

            who howls from his graveyard 

                                                with a shaking voice 

                        that makes all your old nightmares 

obsolete.                      There’s a cruel wind 

                        & bombs falling from earth to sky. 

The bodies of children washed ashore. 

                        A prophet reaches out 

                                    his knife to the congregation 

            & they claw at their eyes in worship. 

Cain tears out his mother’s throat 

                                                with his teeth. 

                        The sun dies, 

            a broken colossus. A kingdom of sour blood 

                                    & venom swirling in the sky. 

Somewhere above the mountains, 

                        a trumpet plays, 

            sounding like a museum of ghosts. 

the massive angels 
beaming with light. 
Shrieking restlessness. 

 

The ancient pull 
of the sea. A celestial 
cacophony

 

of Armageddon 
needles forward, 
awash in savage grace. 

 

If we are anything, 
we are black dogs 
barking, crawling 

blindly towards 
our own extinction. 
A kamikaze 

cadence, gnawing 
at the dust 
in God's hands. 

The broken god of man 

towers above us in a filthy 
            heaven.            hands down 

monuments to splinters, 
            to ruins. a heavy crown 

of desire. robes black as 

           a child’s dreams buried 
                        in the earth. 

            & kneeling in light, we sing 
for the flowers & the sadness, 

            for the forgotten & the heavy 

of heart. for the sorrow that stirs 
            in us the half-belief that prayer 

is not only the anticipation 
            of mourning to come. oh, 

what joy! what stillness! 

           what blessed comfort 
                      there is in the sky! 

we weep from the pain of living 
            but glisten with light. we survive. 

has the world ever been so brave?

It was how you danced 

                        that struck me. A flicker 
of sunlight through leaves, 

                        as if your body was pulled 
between the lighthouse 

                        & the stones. Withered, 
wearied, you scorched 

                        the earth. Sparks to embers, 
to fires, & you burned 

                        with fever as I sketched
your portrait in the dark 

                        with a heavy key. I pulled 
god down from the sky 

                        & you shook with indifference. 
The script torn in half. 

                        The sun gone vacant. 
We buried our fathers 

                        joys & fell into the water. 
Like a dirge, or a release.

I have torn up the boy whose baseball
You are signing again.
He was beautiful,
As you are, Brooks Robinson,
As you lean your name back, a lefty’s autograph,
Your glove hand, the one that flops
To the dirt behind the bag,
The greatest feeling a human body could know,
The heft of ball in web.

I circled him for years and grew to love the game,
As the boy caromed a tennis ball off brick steps,
So for a moment, he could fly, too,
Snatch it before it rolled into the rhododendrons-
His Orioles cap bent in the dirt-
And sling it back against his small house,
As the full summer trees gasped like a rising crowd.

But when I found him dead
And beaked at the bones,
His glove was holding this baseball,
Bloodied, deeper than the orange of his brim.
So beautiful, Brooks.
I wanted you to know.

It's their first practice in good spring weather,
not only not raining, not cold, but full of light,
the mountains in the background against soft
steel-blue clouds against a pale blue sky,
the trees various fuzzy, feathery greens,
well maybe that's a product of my eyesight, but
there they are "accidentally" tossing the ball
over the fence so they have to leap over the fence
to get it back, spring-propelled goofballs,
before the coaches call them in to practice
actually hitting the ball, which would be helpful
in a game.  There's Blair, without catcher’s gear
standing well to the side of the kid at bat,
and the kid at bat is missing and swinging, swinging
and missing, and then Blair stands in front of him,
right arm raised to stop the pitcher while he tells the kid
something, and then Blair moves back, the coach
pitches, and the kid hits the ball--and he keeps hitting it,
not every time but most times, and occasionally a foul ball,
but then he's allowed to run after the next one, which is so
good, the other kids yell, "Go to second, Anthony!" and Anthony
goes to second, and "Go to third!" which he tries, but by then
the coach has the ball back and thrown it to third, so he's out,
but nobody minds because this is just practice.
And if you're wondering about my own goofball,
Noah is on the sidelines being warned about a pop fly
and he's ducking and covering and it misses him by miles.

Blessed be the millwrights on the open hearth that awaited him; the nurses and elevator operators; secretaries; plumbers; electricians; the Napolitano and Abruzzese women hunched in sweat shops; merchants; butchers; barbers; pipe fitters; sheet metal workers; tailors; chefs; poets; dancers; singers; painters; the sausage maker; Italians and Jews; Poles; Blacks and Germans; Slovaks; those along the rivers and precipices; the usher; barmen; stone cutters; bricklayers; baker; salt crew; dock workers; ditch-dogs; rummies; cops and firemen; the women who sliced chipped ham and scooped cole slaw at Isaly’s in East Liberty; Rose Maggio at Fashion Hosiery on Highland Avenue; the waitresses at Gammon’s; Rose at Tootie’s; Francene Renzo at Sears and Roebuck candy counter; Rita Sweeney at the Suicide King; Harry Eldridge, the greasy red rag in his pocket, the little box that said Harry on his shirt, my dad, a Camel between his lips, leaning out the Rambler’s window, the words Couple of dollars of Good Gulf, Harry, smoking out of his mouth; Cigar Sam and Union meetings at the Braddock Local; Joe the milkman; Pete’s and his ice cream truck; the Go-Go girls at House of Capri across the street from our duplex; the hobos; the beat and broke and pissed; carpenters; cooks; janitors; street-sweepers, bookies; stiffs; pimps; morticians;  junkies; priests; prostitutes; vets with no legs and tin cups on Penn Avenue leaning against Kresge’s window; blind guys you gave a penny and they gave you a pencil; garbage men, who jumped off skidding trucks in dead winter, spread their tarps on the grass, and emptied 55 gallon barrels of filth into them, hoisted the bundles, then trudged righteously into the morning; Mrs. Tommarello, who handed me any cookie I pointed to in Stagno’s Bakery; Blessed be Sister Carita, the only nun who loved me, dear, beautiful girl strangling in her wimple, who led the class daily in prayer that the Pirates defeat the Yankees, that Kennedy defeat Nixon; the crows lining the telephone wires, calling out as he crossed the plate.

I go to the plate and imagine Picasso painting a circle. I aim for that circle. I don’t forgive. I don’t regret. When they throw off-speed pitches, I consider it a sign of respect. I don’t like taking walks, but, hell, it happens. I never show up the opponent because it sends the message you’ve never been there before. I donate 5% of my salary to underprivileged kids because I didn’t get the chance to play organized ball until junior high. In the winter, I cry. The solitude. In the summer, I dine. On hot dogs. And fast balls. 

I learned how to throw from my older brother. He was a sharpshooter in the Army. He treated me like garbage, but I learned how to throw the hell out of a baseball. On my days off, I listen to Thelonious Monk and go over game film. My favorite album is Straight, No Chaser. I eat In-N-Out once a week when I’m on the West Coast. You can’t fear batters. No matter the situation. Always expect the best results. If something goes wrong, adapt. An inch given is a mile lost. When the bases are loaded, I’m at my best. Luckily, for the opposition, the bases are rarely loaded.

I’m something of a magician. Nothing gets past me. Often, in the middle of the night, I wake up and dive for a ball. Growing up, I worked on my defense 75% of the time; 25% on offense. My favorite book is A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man. I’ve never read it, but I really like the title. Playing shortstop is an art form, they say. They say some very wise things. The rest of the position players wish they could be me. I know it. I’ve started to get just as comfortable at the plate as with the glove. It’s over for the rest of the league.

I’ve got nerves of steel. Nothing bothers me. I could’ve been a firefighter or a surgeon. If a ball somehow miraculously gets passed me, I turn into a mountain lion and pounce on it. My parents wish I would switch to first base. So does my wife. I know it’s what’s best for me, but the team really needs me here. Eventually, perhaps. They also say I’ll make a good skipper one day. I have such a good view of the game from this squatted position. I’m glad they took away the sliding into the catcher. I really am. But, honestly, I hate to admit it, I kind of miss it, you know. The action.

I’m ready, I know that much. I’ve had to earn everything I have. I’ve never taken my car to the mechanic. I learned how to work on cars from my father and grandfather. When my name is called, I turn into Batman. Or Robin. Superman, even. The point is I wear a cape. I have my rituals like the rest of them. I don’t wear gloves. I spit into my hands. I rub them together. The baseball bat feels like a sword, or if I’m going to bunt, a paint brush. I swing like my livelihood depends on it. It often does. It’s gotten me this far, though, my swing. Can’t complain. In my free time, I play chess and do crossword puzzles. But enough chitchat, they’re calling me up to bat! Gotta go!

The spring we didn’t make love,
I started following baseball—

radio on the kitchen table,
me in that old night dress,

the ball dropping into a glove,
always two down, bottom

of the ninth, a small glass
of something, smoke through

the screen while the people
who slept in my house slept

in my house. Tinker to Evers
to Chance. To Chance from Tinker

and Evers. If ever there were
a chance for us. If ever

to tinker. If chance. Dust rising
from a just tapped plate.

If I couldn’t have you,
I’d take the Cubs. 

The losses and the wins. 
The wins and the losses.

I was at the ballpark watching the Winston-Salem
Warthogs lose to Kinston in a Single A struggle. The
beer was cold, the hot dogs a dollar. They announced
Wally the Warthog was behind the home dugout
selling T-shirts—five bucks, all sizes. I joined the
crowd and bought an XL. Wally was having a ball as
he yelled, flipped the bird to the umpires, and collected
five dollar bills by the handful. I got closer and asked
him if this was better than his day job. His glass eyes
gleamed, his jaw seemed to move as he answered,
you'll never know.

1. What company made the gum drops called Fancy Nancies after the famous Beantown slugger duo?  

2. In what stadium is there a Naked Ladies Day?

3. Why was Bud Ponce let go twice by the Mayflies?

4. What does it mean when a pitcher kneels beside the mound and pretends to eat dirt?

5. Why is a batted ball like Louis XVI? 

6. What was Mink Adler’s second wife’s name before the studio changed it to Vivian Spray?

7. What baseball rule contains the word “zygote”?

8. Name the “Seven Wives” who brought the Polymers to their knees in 1931.  

9. What pitcher dazzled opposing batters by singing opera between pitches?

10. Where is Septic Field?

11. Name the modern team which began its life as the Boiler Gents.

12. The fans around you are holding combs below their noses and clutching their genitals. Which stadium are you in?

For extra credit: 

13. Recite the Ballplayer’s Prayer.

A ball is fouled off and up into the sky down the right field line
And everyone in section ten is standing
Arms raised towards a blue sky
Arms raised towards a cold sun
And everyone in section ten is standing
Arms raised
Waiting

First Field 

At the top of the hill from my house 
was a baseball field we called First Field. 
We played there all the time. No adults 
allowed. I learned how to organize groups. 
I called up my friends and set up games. 
Everyone was welcome. No one was cut 
in this league. Right field was split in half 
by a hill. If the ball went down the hill, 
you were out. Once we gathered up tools 
and tried to dig up the grassy bumps. 
We dug from first base to half way 
across the infield before we lost our energy. 
It stayed that way. One day someone asked, 
Why didn't we start from third base? 

 

My First Home Run 

I still have a scar on my left knee from when 
I made a great catch in center field and landed 
on a piece of glass. Then there was the time 
my friend clocked me in the skull with a bat 
while trying to stop six inches from my head. 
A large pile of rocks was out in left field--
our Fenway Park wall. Hit a fly ball in there, 
it's a home run, a ground ball's a double. 
The thing I remember the most about my 
first home run was how I saw the ball 
make contact with the bat. When Ted Williams 
talked about just such an incident, I said, 
Yeah, I know all about that. I did the same thing. 

 

Second Field 

Second Field was used by the town for 
recreation. My Dad played in a softball 
league there. Left field was a long home 
run over a twenty-foot cliff. There was 
just enough dirt at an angle so that you 
could run down. My dream was to make 
a back-to-the-plate-one-handed grab 
to rob someone of a home run while I 
jumped off the cliff and miraculously 
survived landing in the dirt below. 

 

A Visit with my Dad 

When my dad was dying from old age 
and Parkinson's disease, we visited Second 
Field to see what the town had done to it. 
Kids were now playing baseball here 
on computers in packed apartments. 
A little grass remained near the cliff. 
I asked my father to tell some stories 
about his days playing here. When he 
did not respond, I turned to look at him 
and saw that he was crying. I turned 
my head back, stared straight ahead, 
and joined him. 

I suppose there’s something to be said 
for the fact that I can read a box score 
as if second nature and not nature itself,

discordant data of men, their improbable, 
certain physics I practically worship, use
to fill an empty life. The knee highs

and chalked lines, throats and bats slick 
with sweat, they’re just part of it,
but few in this game care for the record 

of unrecordable things—fresh paint 
on the grandstands, its epoxied burn; leather 
meeting leather, the implication of arms 

in arc, a hand in pain. I’ve heard it called 
the Long Dark, this approach of season’s end—
familiar, expected, and yet each time not fully 

known, as when, on my walks through 
other fields, I know and do not know the strain 
of wheat grown there. It might be hard 

red spring or soft red winter. A duck snort 
plops over the second baseman’s head 
and the powers that be decide it’s an error, judge 

he could have pulled off some tumble of a leap.
The right fielder could’ve run in faster, too, 
but E4 glares on the jumbotron, crackles out 

from the PA. Just once I wish grief could be like this, 
the ease and break of a game left in the halves
between fathers and sons, songs and their silences, 

but grief has no off-season. Instead it writes 
itself large on insurance billboards, in windows,
third floor cancer wards. Smaller, too. 

Something in the pocket. The empty seat 
next to mine. I keep turning to see that thin frown, 
your gentle disapproval over the souvenir beer 

warming in your grip. Your absence is 
as inscrutable as the inscrutable alphabet of wheat—
the smallness of barely-begun grains, the path 

the wind makes for itself—and yet I keep trying 
to read it, to know it as it must be known: 
like this game, which, in the deep frost of late

fall, winter’s awful sludge-work, will be 
as if it never was. You feel that way to me
most of the time, as if you never were, 

though not with baseball, the game most haunted
by its ghosts. Maybe it’s the familiar rhythm: 
out of nothing the pitcher’s spark, his coiled body, 

grip on the ball strong, warm, until
all at once he looks up and decides it’s time.
His body lets go. His hand falls.

Evan, in a cheap hotel room.
                          Evan, rolling joints of shake he copped in Richmond.
              Evan, ordering a pizza while I suck his cock.
Evan, watching Telemundo, 2AM. I’m ready now—let’s go again.
       Evan, fucking me twice in the shower.
                                                           Once on the floor. 
               Once in the chair by the bed.
                                                                       Twice in the bed.
Evan, tying me up with a black dress sock.
                          Evan, jerking me off.
              Evan, whispering I want to be your whore into my ear
        as I laugh and squint to see him through the blindfold.

                                                   Evan, getting dressed each time it’s over.
Evan, who’s ashamed to let me see the places I have kissed him.
       Evan, telling me about his women.
Evan, 19, skinny, white as pearl. Ordinary. Evan, my obsession,
       ashtray full and foul, but no reason to leave just yet.

                                 Evan, nobody expecting him, tonight.
                 Evan, nowhere else to go. 
                             Evan, someone that I love is going to die.
Evan, I don’t want to be alone, tonight.

Evan taking me in bed, again, but from behind this time, while the sky
      sheds the night like an ugly dress.
Evan tugging on his jeans.
Evan, pulling a black t-shirt down over his head.
             Evan stealing the last of my smokes to tuck behind his ear.
                           Evan, a cell phone he won’t answer, stuffed in his back pocket.
Evan, leaning down to kiss my forehead.
                         Evan, gone.
Evan, empty pizza boxes. TV snow. Evan, the nightstand
                   with the bible still inside.

you never see any black skateboarders
my girlfriend’s father says
at the dinner table

already mushy spaghetti turns mushier in my mouth
what a sin
to overcook pasta

mashed, no whipped, potatoes
it seems
is the only thing these people can cook

“You’re not from around here”
A woman said, upon walking into a bar in Wichita
Where I ate kettle corn and got drunk

The woman worked at Colemans
Making things like lamps and tents
Things like – everything else

We cried and embraced
Gin slipping down the edges of martini glasses
Rings upon rings

“We used to nail our windows closed!”
The woman shouts over catchy jukebox tunes
Old cigar smoke leaking from the wallpaper

We are fifteen and have no idea
what our bodies can do. We play guitar
in the garage, we are becoming
new animals. We remove shirts,
pull our hats low over our eyes,
Sharpie the mark of the beast
onto one another’s flesh.
We are young lions bellowing
into a sleeping neighborhood
hoping for someone to shout back
in anger / love / we don’t know the difference.
We are tomcats on the prowl,
we need an adult to buy us beer.
His name is Slash and his guitar
sounds like the devil’s name howled
backwards at midnight on MTV,
sounds like a lover’s voice
whispering our own reckless names.
Our chests grow slick with sweat.
His name is Slash and he is everything.

In the dark before sleep,
my palms are heavy with dirt.
The earth is warm and orange
and suddenly I am dreaming of

marigolds, again?
They nod to me, again and
again and again.

get a tattoo of a horse
because you feel good about yourself
read a book about a woman
making love to a bear
like literally a bear
because you love yourself
tie your hair in braids
tight ones
hide drugs in your braids
because you love little secrets
having them
forgetting them
forgetting everyones name

hey man!

post a new photo
to whatever,
who cares,
hope your crush sees it
or likes it
says to their friend
what do you think of this guy
and their friend says
he’s old
and they say I know,
hot right?
and giggle
because grey hairs are hot

make my hair grey
make my body grey
god,
hey god can you hear me?
turn my body grey
goddamn it


I’m watching a video on youtube
where Stevie Nicks warms her voice singing

where is the reason
don’t blame it on me
blame it on my
wild heart

and it’s joyful
like a casual joy
a firecracker popping
in the great grey bouquet
of existence

and I’m sitting with you
and we’re drinking red wine
caramel sage
you say

I just can’t take
another bad date
sex out of context
dudes with bad political views
it’s all too much
here, feel my heart

you put my hand on
your chest now
the beat like
ba-boom
it’s okay
if you want it to be
ba-boom
we can be Stevie Nicks
you know

death is having its tarot read
and guess which card
crosses him:
death

the wheel of fortune
is above you
it's coming home early
from its trip
the wheel of fortune
was backpacking through europe
it's gliding across
the atlantic
right now hanging
from the mouth
of the great beast
death greets the great beast
at the airport
holding a sign
that reads
“the great beast”
death is just as awake
in the day
as it is in the night
death is insomniatic
popping pills
trying to find the killer
in that show
True Detective
death and Woody Harrelson
make a good
if not predictably antagonistic
team

do you laugh at death?

death is in all of the stories you tell
already dead
a future of aging
and wonder ahead
somewhere inside of you
microscopic like a
sourdough loaf
rising, becoming
fluffy and warm
a young woman’s voice
will cry
with a cry
in a voice
with a sound
and a youth
that you’ve never heard
and death is a word asleep
against the tomb of the word
a grand canyon of hurt
changing colour
at whim
a psychotropic smoke
of the centre of an
aging nuclear sun

leather and lotion
death is a lit candle
in a glass box
on the floor
of the ocean

if you want honey
swallow bees

i wouldn't sweep the kitchen

for just anyone

it takes a morning

where she whispers

i remember

how you lost

the stuffed bear

and all the stories you wrote

in your head

by the train

where your father worked

and i can bring them back

if our war galloped into a prism
what would come out the other end

the animals don’t know why we hate each other
they just want their bones on time 

we scatter like light on the porch
like that quiet winter night

where you danced like flowers
swinging alone like a rifle after a rabbit stops

Astronauts grow more and more dependent
on hot sauce the longer they’re in space.

In cyberspace I buy a blouse you’d like
with a pattern of succulents neon-blooming
in boob and crooked phallus ceramics.

I’ve never believed my feelings
existed as much as yours.

On my birthday I pull a card and sigh.
Poor sword! Stuck in lavender sand
up to its gilded hilt. I have to walk away. 

In the deep, dark sea, corals are alive
because they never live alone.
They create sunshine for each other.

This pale pink scab
rash may or may not
be shingles,
stress and sad
induced pustules
scribbling across
my upper arm.
Whatever you want
to call the harm,
there’s nothing
to be done now,
the doctor says.
I press for more
details. I guess just
rest and self-awareness?
The antiviral window
has closed. To be safe
avoid being around
babies, children,
and adults who never
scratched themselves
as children. You are
a danger to some people
but not to others.

Don’t you think the front of the Moon and River Café in Schenectady
grins out at the cracked streets because life’s just that damn funny
and the evening breeze smells like the rust kicked up by passing trains?
Knock knock, who’s there, my feet hurt. Did you see the deodorant
and dental floss lined up next to the gluten-free muffins? How much
for a ham sandwich? “We get a lot of train people in here,” the owner
told us. We’re train people now. Can you ever forgive me for my pinky-
hitching falseness? Look, the hippies have come rolling in to play Beatles
songs with their rattling guitars and drink night coffee, their voices are full
of tambourines. Do you remember how the houses near the river are stacked
on top of their bricks like cats stuck on fence posts? And what about that
river chuckling past, all debris and fishlessness – what a gas. Knock knock,
who’s there, coffee, coffee who? Pinned to the walls are articles and ads, signs
and sayings, probably somewhere here there’s a good joke. We were kids once.
Isn’t that hilarious? Now we’re train people and we try not to skip too much
through the dark to the hotel. A block away, a woman is yelling at a man
full-throated in the street. They’re probably dating. They’ll probably go home
and laugh until they curl in on themselves like pillbugs. You’re the closest
I’ll ever come to having a sister so maybe you’ll get this one: Knock knock,
who’s there, I don’t know, I don’t know who? Yes, yes. That exactly.

From the window I can see the clouds crumbled
like birthday cake across the earth and it’s funny
but at this altitude I can finally breathe again.
How long has it been?

I’m too polite to tell you your apartment
reeks of pot, despair, but you know how
my stomach has ached for weeks now, no matter
how tenderly you fed me slices of champagne mangoes

and peeled the nubby skins off lychee only
to pass the chilled flesh into my sticky fingers.
It seems like they should have tasted better
than I remember. When my plane took off

the air over Philly was orange with smog and cloud
strapped over with grey and we rose up like a whale
through the snagged beams of sunlight toward
some atmospheric surface, everything smooth and surging

until the breach, and the leveling, and the stillness.
I’d never tell you but lately I’ve been thinking of drowning,
of diving into the cool press of water, the sunlight
sparkling overhead but all around only pouring

subdued past me to fade, all the sounds welling up
through my body like whale song – no more sharp edges,
just a taste of leaves and sleep. Now that I’m near my destination
and the clouds have swollen to canyons around the plane’s descent,

and lightning flashes its teeth too quick to be seen,
I’m a little scared. See, I couldn’t fix the words to tell you—
quick fishes, gone in a blink – but I left me behind
to go away with you, friend, I left me on the ground

in Indiana of all places and now I’m coming back to me
and it seems my path in life will be always like a whale’s,
that I will submerge so deep so long, you’ll think I’m gone
and that’s when I’ll surface, blow hard, inhale.


That can’t be me in this photograph…

Who would believe the landscape,
the boundary of the print’s white border?

Fingertips and a smudge and a smudge—
we might as well have erased the reflection,

the memory card.

How long will we last?

All I want for my birthday is one of those cameras that needs a 3.5” floppy disk for storage,
that or a rock into the streetlight.

We could see the stars.

How did they get in here?

This is the same table, I could
swear, at Michael’s Uptown Café,
where, I’m sure, I saw him last,
that wisp of a love I’d mistaken
for a hurricane, who looked slightly
like the young fraternity man
at the next table, beautiful,
his eggs runny and his attention
not on his companions but
his phone, the ambient jazz
surely as unrecognizable to him
as it is to me. It’s fine.
I’ve got cornmeal pancakes, coffee,
apple-smoked bacon, more coffee,
and, just across the room, playing
busboy, Juniper Perón, adorable
out of drag, bubbling like he’d
forgotten how to walk without heels,
perhaps hung-over. Who isn’t.
It’s the Sunday after a show.
She’d been magnificent, a strutting,
corsetted Lana in red…and what
an expensive feeling this is,
deciding to whom I’d rather give
the world, if ever I should have it.

“you can’t set a poem at midnight in the rain” but they’re also be unable to help feeling gravity most when walking outside at midnight in the rain because most days we feel the rain is the only reminder we have that we’re anchored to the world that everything is coming down on us that without tons and tons of rocket fuel and a rocket to strap ourselves into we are stuck grounded fucking screwed when things start getting real and no one will ever know how much time we have and no one knows how much rain it would take to clean everything off and no one knows even when the rain will start yes they say they do but they’re lying

Okay I still can’t chill out about Adam Rippon,
gold and fully beautiful and beautifully speaking

truth to power and fiercely himself and thank god!
In high school I would’ve died to see him twirl

on the ice, recorded it on VHS to rewind and replay
like I did the TV special of Footloose, sneaking down

to the basement for the locker room scene
over and again, would've, dear lord,

wallpapered my room with his ESPN cover.
I’m so into young queers having role models on the news

but still I see myself watching in shame, transfixed
knowing my father’s disapproval upstairs, not

realizing for years that, yes, things actually
get better, and if this is queer futurity, this

rapid reimagining of what the past could’ve been
and should once again be, thank you, thank you, Adam!

The future is tethered to your glittering present.
In my daydreams I see nothing but your sashaying,

so full of longing, this gilded emoji I call a heart!
In my bloodstream I feel nothing but your glee.

Here, the introduction of the body into the poem,
of the ice into the body, of the skater… I promised myself

I wouldn’t turn this into a sex poem, never mind, oh,
the million things I could think to do with you,

never mind the reason being nothing I predict in poems
ever seems to materialize. There is hope and then

there is the future, the sculpted athlete’s body and
then there is the future. Adam, a projection:

2042 and rainbow flag after rainbow flag waving in
the stands and no one knows which is for whom.

America’s hosting and you’ve lit the opening torch.
There’s beautiful snow striking the beautiful light,

oh light, bright as your bleached smile, a crown.

David, some people have bad tattoos.
Below the ankle. Round of the cheek.

Something about permanence. The body must
be reckoned with. Sharp shoulders.

At 18—
I told you this—
I got my first tattoo. Snake with skull.
Villian from my favorite childhood book.

Scars, David, are small reminders.
Like the wrist is for the arm & hand.

I want to be something I’m not sure I will become.

There is a way to write the future.
Scent of uncombed hair, that lavender.

Stars are aligning, David.
In the distance, fog & the belly of a mountain.

Moments before I arrived here, to you,
I was sleeping. On my back. Face to the
ceiling of my crooked apartment. Your eyes

have this thing. I’m not sure what it is. It looks
like you may be wearing eyeliner. Here I go again,
falling in love with anyone I meet. It’s curious.

I played this game earlier this week.
It was called “imaginary bf” & I’m quite good at it.

First, you think of the name of a pretend boyfriend. It has
to be a good name. A name you want to look at when
light is creeping across his face. Moon. Or Sun. Or glow of a camera.

Then, you make up scenarios where it would hard to love
him. But in the end, you decide to love him.

This conversation is always to a friend.
After this, you must imagine his greeting.
His usual one. For you.

When that feeling right
above the pelvis hits.

He meets your friends.
What does he say?
All good things.
All the right things.

You dream up two kids.
Papa. Baba. Dad. Paws.
All the names they’ll call
to you when you’re no
doubt sleeping.

He dies before you do.
& you mourn him.
You think of heaven
for the first time
in 35 years.

All the Meg Johnsons
would like to kill me,
and I, Meg Johnson,
would like to kill them.

Another Meg Johnson
can wear your dead body
draped over them
like a fur stole, but
it's not illegal because
you're both named
Meg Johnson.

Feminist Meg Johnson
and alt-right Meg Johnson
cancel each other out, so
why even Meg Johnson
anymore?

When one Meg Johnson
claims the work of another
Meg Johnson as their own,
this is classified as living
body murder.

What is the meaning of life?
you cry out before getting
distracted by a purse. How many
cheeseburgers will it take
to resurrect you?

You will never eat enough
cheeseburgers, and that's
the end of this poem.

I’m in conversation with Helen Dudley about “Reed-Song” 
her poem published in Poetry, 1915. I wish you were alive! 
There are no more crescent moons or light, pining poets. 
I am coming to you, Helen. I pass twelve white pines 
daily fantasizing about you, Helen, as the pines blacken
by a liquid-free river. It can’t wind. But those last pines,
those blackened trees, and the sob of that tragic loon?
You didn’t write: “the last loon/ will not shake feathers/ 
from the invasive reeds/ to sing again.” But my Helen,
the loon lapsed and “the day is no more” is totally true! 
I am coming, Helen! I want to listen to your Reed-Song!
This morning the quizzical barista asked: “who is Elvis?” 
Elvis is a sob in the breeze that Helen’s cry is no more

We motored over black corn stalks 
and beakless chickens in a pontoon 
boat in Duplin County. You know, 
she said, the sexist movie trope—
the male hero finds his girlfriend 
in the fridge? She got quiet. Cows 
mooed on a porch. She said it is so
time to take the vote from all men. 
She said lagoons of pig shit is sick 
like stuffing a woman in the fridge. 
Anaerobic bacteria turn the lagoons 
like Pepto-Bismol. Did I too eat pig? 
The mist is piss and aerosolized shit.
Nitrogen from the pig shit in the air 
binds to hemoglobin and the blood 
cells can’t carry oxygen. That’s why 
the face of her baby looks all blue. 
Ahab in a boat spears a pig carcass 
in his flooded front yard and hooks 
her by a hock and winches her aloft. 
She is gassed with a decaying farrow, 
and with a hot cracking piglets splash 
like red stones. An elephantine snout 
of humorous pink curiosity revolves.

You said: the moon is the moon 
but I forget it’s hanging there, 
as I forget the moon in me.

Sometimes I freeze on a blue 
sky day, because a big rock 
is hanging in the damn sky?

Do you remember the mobster
Cymon? He orbited to crescent 
soul with a glance at Iphigenia. 

Say the word moon with your 
moon lips: now please god say 
my name. How does a rock float?

All day Iphigenia 
so far from the man I came to see.
Haven’t we tired of famous men? Shouldn’t I 
have my shoulders back, chin straight—I was given graces
that distract from the tissues in my heels, this dress whose last
lost a button at the hip. Always I’m slightly out of fashion.
The orchestra moves itself like a school, each note
diamond scale. A fish turned this way—then that
I am part and whole water & music breathes 
in me in proper nouns, names herself

names things I pretend I do not know
my mother, the best road home
that you do not love me
that one kind look cannot gut breast-to-throat
my silver heart, will not reach inside my mouth to hook—

take or give me a soul.

At the bar, your voice revolves as the wave that hums
my bone, untouched string instrument 
beside the first chair.

Your palm, look—what you have
exactly what you want.

17.
 

He who left home built the biggest steel bridge over the long river

The bridge was a success for millions of people
But he who built it died on it

His mother back in the village became blind from crying
                                     Why did you leave the mountain? 

                                     Why did you die for a bridge?



18.

He whose feet crossed the bridge was Architect Pei
He designed a museum in Paris 
to store all the goodies stolen from his mother land
                                     Why did you build the museum?    
 

Visitors walked in from the street and ended underground
That palace was lined with paintings, portraits, statues, all displaced articles
Dug up from Chinese emperors’ tombs and buried again:

                                   Planters with floral cycle of longevity

                                   Time Telling Plant from the West

                                   Spring Morning in Han Palace

In one painting, the traveler plants ink flowers on silk 

            The turtle on the paper mud wakes up once in a while
            Then falls into an eternal sleep

Everything we eat used to be alive, or still is
the guy on NPR says. He says that carrots are still living
when you bite into them, that they have the wherewithal
to release a chemical signal warning the other carrots
of your descending mouth so that they may try
to burrow their roots into the root-proof, soilless crisper
of your fridge. You can’t help but feel a little cannibalistic
when you hear it, even as you virtuously chomp down
on your super-dead steak, the other thing you’re eating
for dinner. 
                   (This isn’t a poem about being a vegan, by the by; 
it’s a poem about consciousnesses, the different types of them, or
what counts as one). 
                                     Your beautiful steak, with the velvet-soft
fur on the end of its nose and its wet wet eyes watching
watching watching. A cow is a type of consciousness, too, 
that we know nothing about. Inside her: a wordless, slow
place made of smells. Or—her interior—a wordless blood place
made of meat. But each of us is, basically, that same kind
of thing, no matter what nomenclature. Human beings,
we stress, desperate to differentiate ourselves. The cow
is being too, until she’s not. Standing in a field at sunrise,
she takes a shit without even realizing it. She thinks,
the grass is wet the sun is brown like a spot on my baby
I am hungry woman soft I am grass field mother clover.

The clover thinks a zap of chemicals over to some other
clover—watch out for that fucking cow. 
                                                                        The blades of grass, 
too numerous to even consider—the grass the grass the grass

The internet is shit.
The time is wrong. 
No one lets me eat
what I want. Here 
is a roach trying to swim 
upside down. Here 
is a garden full of trees
and no grass. I have forgotten 
how to verse so I am filling
the house with the neighbouring
mosque. I am showing the men
the photos where 
we were all very small. Here 
we are sitting around
a folding table 
in party hats. Here 
is my brother turning eight, 
wearing the same sweater 
I'll wear when I turn 
stuffy and stale. Here 
is me clutching a fist 
full of tissues, smiling with a lack 
of breath. Here 
is my father slouching 
with a grimace, basking  
in his failure to smile well.                                                    My mother 
here, here, here, here, here, 
here, here, here, here, here,
here, here, here, here, here,
here, here, here, here, here,
I guess everywhere, 
pulling curtains between me 
and the fun, guiding the knife
in my fingers over the sponge, 
blowing my candles, wishing
my wishes, kissing my forehead 
and leaving behind in its middle 
a red hot smudge.

I am a full grown 
in mourning. Feed me 
Citrus—Lemon, Orange,
Foreign Pink Fruit.
Hydrate my lisp
with shiraz, throw my limbs
in the air towards the sun.
Chant Cheer. Chant Good.
Thank You for liking 
my short black dress
here at the club
where I have decided
to start a business 
of selling sweet talk
for a buck. I have much
like a visa to my name,
three mandarins, 
and this short black dress
which everyone seems to love.
Yesterday at the hospital
of my dreams, I ended
up eating one of my hands.
And with the pinky left,
I wiped my many single 
tears from the corner 
of my many single eyes. 
I love my drama. The mirrors see it. 
The walls see it. The Boys see it. 
Well, sorry Boys. I am too asian 
for upfront affection. 
I am only here at this club 
to pick a fight.
Punch Punch Cry Cry 
Ouch Ouch Bye Bye.
Time to clean the house.
Time to take out the trash.
Time to call Mother for the day. 
Dinner is Breakfast. Lunch is dead.
I am trying to become 
what the walls 
have always wanted 
to fled. 

I opened the window so I could hear people.
But all I heard was the wind rushing,
fine garment of nothingness, like tulle.
You sent me a handout listing various
cognitive distortions, including 
personalization and emotional reasoning,
and let me tell you, it was a scream. 
I believe in the dream of human
perfectability, howevermuch
a vista, like mecca, out of reach.
In the meantime I have mastered
the art of appreciating objects  
such as marble, which remains
cool even in sweltering heat,
even if objects are nothing more
than the decision of atoms 
to remain united in the face
of travesty, poverty, war.
In the meantime I have picked
up several musical instruments
then gently laid them down.
Can you imagine being lucky
enough to devote your life
to French pastries,
working tirelessly to form
stiff peaks of meringue?
There are omens to show you
you are dying.  The world 
is too much with us, first 
as footnote, then as song. 

Who will make me a mere body again?
The trick is to hollow yourself out
until nothing is left but form.
Come over to my anthropod 
and we’ll make passionate love 
atop a toy carousel, 
with lacquered horses
going round and round.
It’s propitious weather 
to become a human turnstile.
The salt water laps
at the wind-beaten prow.
The bromide of evening thins,
wears out.  We’re left hanging 
onto banisters, our voices
a mere scratch on the turntable.
Charlatan comforts:  this room, this chair.
What I meant when I said 
one blossom desires the air.

Sunday at the bar it's dead I'm
the only person there until an
old fat guy comes in

sits down and orders a Coke
says he's from Chicago just
passing through

seeing if he can find college
guys to sell him their
underwear

I say "oh yeah? how much do
you pay for them?"
he says "50 dollars usually

and 100 dollars
if they piss or come on them"

it's dead at the bar so I say
"sure but I'm not in college
and I'm not wearing underwear

I'm wearing a jockstrap"
he says "that's okay could you piss
on it a little?"

I say "I don't have to piss
but give me 5 minutes"
I go into the back area of the bar

by the walk-in cooler
and remove my boots then jeans
and jockstrap then put back on my

jeans then boots and walk over to
the sink where there is a bottle of
Trader Joe's hand lotion

I press down on the pump squirting
a quarter-sized amount of lotion
into the palm of my hand

I go to the women's bathroom
because it has a lock
one of those rudimentary locks

where a hook attached to the door
goes in a hoop attached to the frame
I masturbate to my reserve

of go-to images and situations
and am able to come quite fast
which surprises me

I forgot I could come so fast
because when masturbating for pleasure
I tend to prolong and savor it

when in this case I am providing a service
I feel proud that I have that kind of control
to come under pressure and expectation

and to deliver a product promptly
I step out of the bathroom smiling
and hand the old fat guy the jockstrap

"here you go"
he lifts the jockstrap
presses it into his face and inhales deeply

through his nose and exhales
through his mouth saying "oh yeah
could you show me your dick?"

I say "I really can't at the bar I'm working"
he says "can I feel your dick through your jeans?
I'll give you 50 more dollars"

I say "okay sure" and for a minute
he feels my dick through my jeans
with his hand squeezing it

while holding the underwear to his face
I get anxious and bored and say "okay
I have to get back to work"

he hands me 150 dollars and says "thank you"
I say "sure"
after a while he finishes his Coke and leaves

later about 30 minutes until the end of my shift
the old fat guy walks back in
sits down and orders a Coke

I prepare the bar
for the next person to work
I clock out and as I'm leaving say

"bye" to the old fat guy
and he says quietly
"are you interested

in earning any more money?"
I say "no"
he says nervously as if to avert

making a scene "okay no problem
no problem"

Dream that you are asleep 
beneath a mosquito net 
next to your mother
who is always singing. 
Forget that you are sixty. 
Time flies when you’re 
surviving with meals to eat, 
people to talk to, insulin 
injections to your belly. 
Wake up with Mama
on the back of your throat 
like the bone of a fish, caught. 
Forget that she is long gone. 
It’s been almost twenty years. 
Longer since she lost her legs.
Remember? Memory travels 
through several time zones, 
rises up in the air for hours. It is 
the checked bag you thought 
would never arrive, but was, 
all along, waiting for you  
on the carousel, one you didn’t
recognize. Decide which bag 
to carry on. Decide what 
becomes anniversaries, 
what to long for, what lyrics 
to sing, when to keep sleeping 
and when to wake up.

The God of the Wild yanks his lover's chin hair, 
clasps her knee, his godhood fully aroused. Lip 
curled in pleasure, he's a foreigner to yearning, 
alien to provinces of actuality. What do our bodies 
know but the wilder side of everything damned. 
Remember D.C. that winter, you and I strangers 
sharing a cab ride on the last night in town. Soon, 
the incognito awning of the Renaissance Hotel 
offered itself, and the lone flickering street lamp 
was Del Rio weeping "Llorando" in Club Silencio. 
That night all of America suffered to touch— 
everything was laid bare by the moon, that insomniac 
pounding on the walls of the dark, its wanton tongue 
caught between teeth, lolling, like a wild onion.

the toe of a scarecrow’s

boot curls up

when i reach out my

tongue to taste

the bark on a

tree i always make

spaghetti wrong my stomach’s

hurt since i was

three under

that trampoline

a snowflake lives

on my fleece

and so does a lamb

If I put on my socks from

seventh grade

if I told you I was made

of strawberry filling would you

still fuck me if

I told you that I prayed

the truck would squish

me into the tunnel wall

would you keep me in your prayers

if i clutch my build-

a -bear

a hand on each

side of my underwear

will you keep me in your prayers?

I was born in a smokestack of desire roundness + softness +
all things etherealmademoral / insolence made underground
so they curtain over the deepest smoldering wounds
the ones that really curdle.
                                                                      / like all three hips have been dislocated
there’s a specific way a broken woman walks /
out of leaping                              / of god’s lowest willows, after drowning
and drowning / in the haggardness
I’d imagine you’d never stop coughing / but beautiful, listless.

This Is An Example Of My Issue w/ The Liberal Orthodoxy:

oh babe this is radical.  
only you me evil & god have been human

on a day where no tailgate could
rally me / & the aggression that
follows
                  and hefts itself into an
acidic jacuzzi in your skull / a fear
a trauma / a way to see the world

sometimes there’s no need for continuance.
sometimes one brush with god is enough
                                                  / in plain light
& malleable me-animal headinknees
as keys fallclink

           [thick paste in my mouth]

Did you keep your socks on >

what

Did you keep your socks on >                                   

                        -

                        -

                        -

do you have to write this down

I. Blue capsule, yellow tablet                                                       Fluoxetine 40 mg once daily  
                                                                                                           Clonazepam 0.5 mg as needed

there’s a neighbor            who takes his smoke breaks               
around the same time         as me               and others
i assume       like me/they speak down to her and call it
realness, like:        with a name like southern comfort
what could go wrong >  

i’m nervous around things man-made; for that reason
i’m nervous around myself            sometimes, I think
                                /icouldbetheone/           to move on
past the man-scars, but they’re deep              & jagged
& reopeningconstant/ly like a sweetness       you chase

           // under the train tracks //

where you’ve never seen teeth sobeautiful / precious
porcelainporn             or something similarly degrading
like Black Friday shopping

 

II. Whitehealth (morning dose)                                                      Quetiapine 100 mg  

/you’d think sweetness is something i always look for
 but it burns my hands like lye
/you can train her now          but she won’t last two
 weeks and that can be annoying         this word is

a symbol of my creativity               
oh this word makes me feel horny

 she’s more flexible than she looks you know
[I know]

& my dread flies
from my chest hair          to you,
to me,   when the time calls for it

we sons of Appalachia
we can unspool a woman 2 or 3 times in a row

Sliced peach cool

under fresh yoghurt,

steaming creamy coffee,

the slow, dark wake of an October morning.


Difficult to pull myself

away from comfort and

the waves of you but if I don’t

I forgo what keeps me whole.


How to be oneself yet blend?

Our differences,

rocks strewn along the path

unavoidable sometimes,

damaging.

the martyr no longer I walk beyond the cradle the peach tree the alphabet

a horizon infused revolution imagine the light the door in the mountain

stitches of time abandoned expanded across water the feathers a cloak

the radiance like love visualizing language surrendering the maps into

light through windows & oaks—disintegration becomes a rope a metamorphoses

a song a labyrinth a stammer a bumblebee a hand a flower a wand a chaos a hollow

a lemon a microscope a myth a candle a bottle a translation a cocoon a luminaria

organize the checks extend the horizon  the drawings become the paintings

the music unfolds to the sea  a rabbit runs in the field  the oak tree is steady

Frida Kahlo inspires  life remains an enigma

The height of fall.  The streets are buried in leaves.  Morning is rising.  Red-tinged shadows extend over the green, crunchy carpets.  The air took on its own pinkish shade too.  Wind curls and breaks on today’s shadow.  In every shadow lives an unlucky piece, a small feather of misfortune.  I look around inside the mirror and spy sunken eyes.  Little lights dance around the border and I spray fresh scents on dead air. 

 

Blinded.

 

Dazzled.

 

Hide and seek on a dead end street.

 

Shuffling around by touch as I peer through the blinds.

 

Risk.

 

My enemy pours out and I watch,

without sadness or hate,

not merely a person, but very much alive.

How great must a shock be to determine X number of years? We go to therapists to answer such questions. To be told: shock of nth degree yields so many years. Powers on which to lean.

* * *

Mirrors actualize our contours. As do other people’s bodies. Touch my shoulder, I feel it. The crevasse between my thighs, I feel it. The soft and cartilage of my ear. But when such tools lie beyond reach, when I recline, say, in Ovarium’s sensory deprivation tank, for eighty bucks, on my birthday, how might I know my endings? As I write this, my pen exceeds me.

* * *

I warp my face when your gaze turns on me. I crook my chin so that flesh folds and my lip twists, exposing a thread of teeth. One eye squints, the other bugs out. I’m not trying to look ghoulish. Only: when you look at me, I see myself through your eyes, and I can’t map onto my body when half my mind stands outside.

These days I keep putting my clothes on backwards or inside-out. First it was a pair of riding pants. Only after I’d gone to class and cycled around did I realize the thigh-pads were inverted, the hip pocket at my rear. A couple of days later my sports bra didn’t feel as secure as it usually did, jogging up the mountain. Once home, I looked down to see the breast cups exposed. As I write this, the seams of my socks stare at me disapprovingly.

* * *

These days I keep putting my thoughts on backwards or inside-out. First it was the dream about the baby. I dreamt I had given birth and the next day, awake at a thrift store, I gravitated to the baby section and was unfolding the dearest bitty cardigan, when I took consciousness. Days later I was jogging up the mountain when I saw the man I loved, but could no longer be with, jogging toward me. When I realized it wasn’t him, I wondered whether he too had thought I was me.

* * *

These days I keep putting my body on backwards or inside-out. I walk around and catch people wondering how my heart stays sutured to my chest, my intestines to my stomach, my eyes to my sockets, when they should all come out tumbling.

To the god of thresholds: for is it not
tradition to call upon a deity

with a voice crackling like the lull
of aged leaves, of a petal shifted

by wind. To the goddess with many
faces: that of mouths on all sides,

of broken teeth: for is each being
not a fate unbounded, un-

plucked, not earthly possession: nectar
rushing between stones, un-

stripping of trees gnarled bare,
wrought skeleton. To the god of love

and the goddess of fury, for
are they not bound

by the same body: what
have you taken

that can not be made
whole again?


A city darkening,
uncentered. We skid

to the shoulder, cars
kinetic under frost

beams. This is where
you tell me

you found love letters
in my bedroom

and you do not want me
like this. To our right: a heron

balanced on the barricade,
slumped so dull

I mistake it for a shadow.
Our left: a river that never

stops unfolding.
It has no mouth,

no current, no water.
Just stones.

the moon is black

or green i go

a little nuts

flaying flowers

from the brocade

i cord the stems

& swallow the steak

tenderloin baby

rope-snug

marm-sung

i blew my mind

so cute she undid

an esophagus

i knew a gusset

could show me

an empty chair

in an empty room

in an empty suite

in the salt-light crush

an envy court

where the point lines

behaved glue-trapped

guest-proof down.

my fence & I stay put

until i fist the apparition

greet my ghosts

grow my studs

& zirconia thumb

jewels & raw my knuckles

i gape through

chain-link diamonds

chomp the silver

stripped fruit

fat figs dark dates

shall i iron the juice

use sugar

ready i'm ready

to polish these wrists

punch out the window

pull down my generation's

sun we caught peace

wanted muck

drop the night

we'll thrash

trash cups, calendars

ring me up

pick me out

count me off

done

down

doctors told me

when i looked

in the mirror

thursday

saturday & the monitor

neons health

on siren streets

an ambulance barks

down

my pet has begun

to doubt me

1

Although it’s the last day of September and the talons of winter have taken hold and although between the two of you you’ve lost sixty-five pounds in the last two months, chemotherapy and fear and your simultaneous fall down the stairs sucking the fat from your bones, the skin hanging from your wrists like the gold bracelets you once wore, you still wait out on your front porch for me to arrive, press a kiss to my cheek and usher me indoors, afraid the cold will catch me. Inside I find my photograph next to those of all your children and grandchildren, locate myself within the folds of this family. The same lace bedsheet from fifty years ago hangs over the couch where you now sit holding my hand in both of yours before moving away to hold his, to rub the stained knee of his pants and cup your palm around his hairless scalp. And although you are two I’ve always seen you as one, so intertwined are your pasts your possibilities your needs you needed him to drive the minivan in a country where you never learned how, he needed you to speak where English never crossed the border from brain to tongue, together your mouth lips fingers legs becoming one whole one necessary pulsing being that I came to rely on, that I still do, in two bodies one story. I see you understand this now as one half of you drifts away, wasting into sickness you cannot control, how you grasp his arm, touch his cheek, squeeze his fingers even as you pick away at your own, as if trying to hold on to what is left, to remind him or perhaps you that nothing is broken       or at least beyond repair yet.

 

2

Sitting beneath the tapestry of the last supper that you crocheted with once-nimble fingers I realize that this is the first time I’ve come here without something on the table, golden slabs of baklava, grapes de-stemmed and once, sliced open and de-seeded, every dish you made an offering of your continued choice to pull me into the fabric of your family, every bite I took an acceptance of your love. Though I’m aware of this I feel ashamed at the rumbling in my gut because I see now how his mouth hangs open like a dusty window, teeth black, rotted and      gone, lips grey and rubbled instead of food you eat poison, a slurry of pills four times daily, chemicals directed into your veins like venom that we hope will attack the right parts before the wrong ones, tongue thick with sores and nerves dulled to blunt so that every bite feels like bonedust every meal the last supper even water becomes acid. With effort you open your lips and choke on words, I-don’t-understand-why—she puts a hand on yours, says no, no, don’t speak, rest, it’s okay its okay, turns to me completes the thought says I don’t understand why the food sticks to his mouth? He can’t eat, he can’t eat, then tears spilling over your fingers to mine, why won’t he eat? Don’t cry, he says. I try. You take his hand. I know, you say, but you have to, have to eat.

 

3

You tell me yesterday he tried to leave the house alone, dragged his walker to the edge of the backyard before you caught him, screaming how can you go without me? A question whose answer holds no justice. He cries, I was just going to nofrills, he wanted to buy a bag of cherries for 2.99 a pound, not to eat just to hold an offering as he walked around the block untethered by the new ropes of sickness unaffected by the blood thinners that would make a fall like last time fatal this time outside the grasp of illness it is a basic human right to move. Just as you moved across the ocean to push vacuums across office carpets rags across someone else’s dishes to push me on a swing to sing kounia bella to count my veins to remind me I am still alive when it’s time for you to leave and I won’t let you go to tell me you hope that one day I will become a cardiologist and if I could go back I would maybe not for everyone’s hearts but just yours, I’d learn exactly what it needs to keep beating and I’d repeat it over and over just as you did for me every night I couldn’t sleep, and I think I know the remedy it’s the sound of his heart, steady and forever, or maybe his teeth, mashing broccoli and plums, drinking your soup and calling it survival, and I remember when you brought me a bowl of cut peaches and I knocked it over rather than eat another bite if I could go back and sweep every slice back into the bowl pass my hand over the juice sticky and thick from the dust bring the hand to my lips and lick it clean I would, holding your hand the entire time, letting you feed me from your fingers to show you that for you I will always, we will always eat.

The radio is on a pledge drive

and living in America

is starting to feel like staying 

in the bad hotel.


Nothing to hear but selling

or silence. I’m thinking of the night

you were embarrassed to talk to the clerk.

 

But I’d seen a roach and went myself.

 

And soon we were back

on the highway, dark and free

of all bad things that chase us.

I’ve never tasted anything.

Stood all my life at an edge waiting to speak,

holding myself back from speaking.

 

In a peaked cap, I’ve flipped burgers

watching the mothers take their seats

along the pale dinette of prayer,

pitying them for how they pitied themselves

beneath monstrous, clouded ceilings.

You have to look at humans as lost

and as a thing worth saving.

 

Walking to my bus along 31st street I passed

The church of St. Francis, eloquent

between two blocky towers

and felt myself pulled into a sweep of prayer,

steeped in the feeling of forgiveness.

I keep writing about orgasms as crying & then I think about that.
I spent too much money on baby pink earrings & ginger
because the men in my life believe me & still starch their collars
every day. I don’t know if I want to find my German namesake
or just fill in the landscape around her with purple flowers.
I am holding this sadness in the jam jar in my ribs & I want
to layer it with taffeta & margarine instead of talking about it.
I am not burning bridges so much as I am jangling across them
in chunky suede heels & fairy wings to the bemusement
of my girlhood self. I used to know when to tap on the screw-on lid
with a knife & wait for the echo & pull or at least to go get doughnuts
with my dad & avoid disclaimers for awhile. Maple frosted,
vanilla cream filled, blueberry cake, crullers & my dad’s
wilting eyes: two swans looming on the surface of the blue.

I heard “Ouija” is just the combination of the French & German
words for “yes”. In the library at midnight, my classmates
mythologize consent & I drink cabernet until my insides glow
with sulfates. Two years later, I am at the pond & a child screams
The swans are running! & I see the eyelashes of their wings batting
the water. People here always gossip about how vicious the swans
actually are. The wind laughs through the swans’ feathers.
We levitate & nobody uses the right language to explain it.


I lie about knowing how to do makeup just so I can see Devin do hers. This is how I count blessings. The dollop, rapture, cheekbone opalescence, a pair of borrowed chunky heels, a witchy song to breathe through our gills, nipples visible through eyelet, floating & floating. I love the ritual in it. The old-man-will-surely-turn-around- in-his-seat-and-shush-us fanfare. Every tree in P-Town green enough is a soap opera. We gin hiccup & ankle bone funerals. We laugh because we are too full of sun & swedish fish to lament. We trade lipsticks & dimples alchemize.

I came to touch the edge of the coast. To peer into the blue & beg the burdens be taken from my hands. But here, at the end of the world, Devin & I brush the sand from our feet & I think about the girls I have loved for less. Nina & the tarot card tattoo & the pink flower pins because she noticed how I did my hair. [      ] with the green marbles for eyes like an owl & how she would pick oreos from her teeth. [       ] & [        ] & [     ] & everyone who I held hands with because I did not know what it meant & this was the only way I knew how to say it. I am afraid of the want that orbits these bones. I am afraid I will never know the difference between asphalt & what holds the sparkle of daylight. It is August. I think if I stand in the sun long enough, my freckles will start to come out. 

I don’t know what to say to J., so
            I just say, It’s a new year. Frost everywhere.

The branches go on holding
            the cold while I and everyone I know

blink into our hangovers. After the countdown
            we toasted without really saying

what to, but it felt true. Just lifting
           our glasses towards each other in the strewn

light, that clumsy ringing, or ringing
            in at least. Like that was all

it took, a slight clink into fullness.
            S. and I didn’t dance all night,

and I was glad. My dress too short anyway
            to raise my arms or shimmy much. Once

I drove through fields, and like always
            they widened in the wind broke into gold waves

or green. And I thought for sure any day now I’d happen
            upon my own new self somewhere

out there. Once after three beers I wasn’t afraid
            on an airplane. Once I said to an almost

love, You are my very best friend. Or
            I would have, or should. Sometimes it’s enough

to just stand near the dance floor and watch
            curls loosen. Other times I tried to look

like I was looking for someone above their pretty heads.
            Silly me, I keep thinking. R. held my wrist,

drunk and told me I looked beautiful
            I think I can’t quite remember. But B. and I

poured each other more
            champagne, and when I spilled all over

my hands, we just laughed like she knew me
            so well, and I thought it

again. It’s so cold today I can hear
            everything, and everything is being very quiet

now. My headache is worse than expected, but
            I always get carried away like this in crowds and new

clothes, and when someone I didn’t know offered
            me a smoke I took it because

outside was thin and still and slightly tinted orange
            by streetlight and fog. Silly me.

But it’s a new year now, and the sky is so clear
            it might really mean it this time. I mean

I know I said this before, but there is frost
            everywhere. I’ve never seen anything so careful.

We argue about whether we should be more frightened

of ghosts grounded, or ghosts
who take to the sky,        

whether we're convinced hauntings even exist. We argue
over the proper name for a spirit. How to greet them      

if they appear. We argue over the weight, texture, 
and taste of them were they to wash over us,

pass through us, or enter us
and form words in our mouths,   

our flesh a shell slipped over the haze
of them, our spirit dissolved in turn.

I tried to lose myself once, said Colin. Left the farm

drove until I ended up in Worms at a bar
called Nightcrawlers. I asked the bartender
how many people lived there. He looked me over
for a while. Well, that all depends, he told me.
What’s your drink? I told him a Bud was fine.
He poured it for me, watched me take a sip,
then replaced a 36 on a chalkboard behind the bar
with 37. Looks like 37, he said.

I didn’t move from that bar for six days,
just slept in a booth, and washed up
in a bathroom in back. He called me by my drink.
Sometimes the bar was crowded, and sometimes
I was alone. Sunday, the bartender called me
up to the bar and said, can’t stay here tonight.
We’re closed on Mondays. He seemed sad
to have to say it. At midnight, he shut the door,
and for the first time in almost a week, I stood outside.
I looked through the window on the door,
and saw the bartender reach up with a damp rag
to remove the 7 from the chalkboard and replace it
with a 6. I’d never felt more rejected.

So I drove again, down dirt roads, through tunnels
of corn, and eventually found myself back at the farm.
No one had even wondered where I’d been.
Looking doesn't help. Things get lost.
People, though, tend to find themselves out here.

Today I bought blue yarn and brand-new silver nails and sketched
the shape of a star on a piece of wood. Hammered the head of the nails 

making points of the star so my daughter, at four, could weave
navy yarn back and forth while I watched her weave

navy yarn back and forth. Her doughy fingers pinched deep blue yarn.
Together we looped the string around one nail and pulled it toward the next.

I got it, she says. She loops the yarn. It gets caught on the head of the nail.
I slip the yarn below the head. You can make the outline of the star first.

I thought clockwise or maybe counterclockwise.
She weaves the ink-colored string forward and back, right.

She hooks the yarn around different nails
than I imagined, turning my star into her pentagon,

seeing things I don’t.

The difference between how actors laugh in blooper reels

vs. how they laugh as characters? Baudrillard says: it is TV

that renders true. Let the fake laugh stand in for the real.

I got so high I thought I went insane, for a split second

is only interesting if you smoke pot or are insane.

What feeling that looks like. Miguel mocks me, saying:

you sound like you should be on a television show, meaning

my real life is so believable it should be art.

My ex was so good in bed I was embarrassed

how loud I was and how lazy: I convinced myself

he liked it and got him to agree. Now I masturbate

and think of our intimacy, how dirty.

When I meet a couple, I always imagine them

stuck together like insects, struggling

to get inside and outside the body. It’s true,

I want sex. But I never leave the house for it.

My ex covered my mouth like Serrano’s

A History of Sex. It felt like he could break

my neck. I didn’t know, what was I 

supposed to do? A boy, pretending a man

lay in bed with me. Pray. God won’t let you be

gay. Mom pulled me against her body.

In Man to Man: a History of Gay Photography

the models get more naked, more gay.

Page 77: Roger is perfect—sailor-shirtless,

then sailor-naked, only a hat to cover him.

Mapplethorpe hung a dick from the open fly

of a three-piece suit. Hujar captured a man

leaning back with his erection. Hervé Guibert

photographed fingers pressed—slightly blurred—

against a chest. I needed little more than that.

James Bidgood lit men into sparkle. Alex Aleixo

collaged a tatted god behind Liz Taylor. Duane

Michals cropped a torso with a treasure trail.

My grandfather was a preacher and prayed

over me. My mom’s breasts were warm as clothes

from the dryer. Warhol rendered men with primary

colors. When I had sex with my ex, I watched

planes cross inside the frame the skylight made.

Here I am! I’m folding / and folding / 
the laundry, in the dark. Spraying rose mist
into my face. / Unblockable smell of just-
caught fish hanging from lines trailing  / out
the open window. Soft red music  / plays 
from outside! Trees have their own dreams /
all about recursion. / I dreamed I was a tree
with the ability to look inside / myself. I saw
a hollow, dark. / My only recurring dream is
of having inconsistent / magic powers /
which I don’t know how to turn / on or off.
I’ve teleported and I don’t know where I am.
/ I’m scanning Google Earth for any shadow
trace. / Like combing a head for lice. 
But / the lice is God, and is gone, too.

I am afraid of Jacob,
the way I was afraid of light turned on
     in the dark—what monsters would reveal?
the way I was afraid of sand
     of putting my hands in the brown sand until I
     could no longer see them
the way I was afraid of cats
the way I was afraid of my little brother
     one day learning that he would die
     and breaking down from the thought of it
the way I was afraid of my thoughts
     in different permutations of wanting cobwebs
     not to break when I walked through them
     but to hold, hold, Hold!
the way I knew that beyond
     the Earth’s atmosphere was Visible Space,
     full of stars—then invisible space, Dark Space,
     full of nothing, and hundreds of times wider—
     then Outer Space, full of (other worlds and)
     ghosts and God


i love it when the ocean
pulls at me,
takes me
wherever she wants to go

i’m a child, waving
my arms and legs
around in the stuff i’m made from

the doctor who prescribes
my contact lenses
warns that if seawater
gets in my eyes
it can breed
a flesh-eating microbe
that quickly leads to blindness

i still haven’t bought goggles
i try to keep my head above
the surface, spitting out
drops that fall into my mouth

it’s harder to swim when you worry

you can’t feel how hard
the ocean works
your muscles
until you pull yourself
up out of the waves

stumbling on rough sand,
grown human again, weighted
with worry and coated in salt

In the pocket of my mother’s old coat, I found a sobriety chip: Serenity Prayer on the back, 24 HOURS on the front. “I must have gotten a lot of those,” she laughed when I told her on the phone. She’d lent me the coat to wear for the colder winter up here. I rubbed my fingers across gold letters I knew by heart.

When I was a kid, I read a story where a witch had made a bottomless hole. The hole lured everything into its depths and still hungered. My mother told me addicts treat everything like a drug—the reason she forgets meals while she’s writing; how my father  in his youth could play guitar for nine straight hours; why the need for human approval can eat me.

In photographs of them together, my parents shine. They once threw Christmas bulbs at each other; they still made a beautiful couple. Instead of picturing myself the product of two bottomless holes, the child of water and a grease fire, I try to see this heirloom as something else: a relentless stream of prayer, an unfaltering refrain, a mountain of medallions for continuing to try.

you will have many agreeable surprises
they said, the moment I placed
my name where their fingers had
been, or right after
instructing me to take off
my shirt & pants & put on
a pair of briefs that weren’t
mine    I didn’t know who
these belonged to, or who
had worn them before I put
my legs between each opening
they advised me to stay

out of the sun
you’ll get too brown, you’ll look too
what’s the word    brown I bit
my lip    he shook his gut &
removed a camera from a kind
of holster & laughed    I wondered
what my first surprise would be or if I’d be
dead before the first shot, the way
I’d always imagine myself later
clenching on command, arrested in the act
of motion, or mimicking
an emotion I didn’t know
a thing about (they gave directions)

arranged for the camera only to be
disassembled after the photographs
were taken, my temporary gaze
produced photographs that are
copies without originals

hearing our first words as though they were
whispered in my ear
I stayed out of the sun all summer
thinking about my next surprise
& when it’d come    I came up
fast, they said I was some sort
of natural, at least when I was being
recorded   I worked the day & the night
worked me through & through
three deadlines, half a dozen proofs, staring
again, dead-eyed with the news
room of others merging
into a screen we’d been
assigned upon employment    place
an article here, remove an unnecessary
interjection there, pretend to have
pleasure in the manipulation
of image & text, set to
scale & strict measurement   (the difference
between reading & seeing
is not always evident) & so was I
sometimes forgetting
where I was or what time
of day, whether to be
an object or its author
what more to make
of the experience, words
& skin & sensation
in every touch & breath & scent like
God & the toothbrush

good teeth are the making of the stomach
& beautiful teeth are the making of a
charming smile

what my agent would often
write to me, before he signed
his emails before
we had access to each other’s
migrant exchanges
all summer long as I stayed
out of the sun    tried my best
to look like anyone
else but a halfie, child
of two immigrants, son
& the holy spirit beside me
always when I prayed in bed
face-down & bent shut
my eyes & turned
the light switch off
to stay still, feeling
my heartbeat like repeating
dashes of a morse code
I myself could not explain

he may or may not
wear socks, he has always been known
as a daring dresser
they were fond of
saying, as I would walk
in late from a fitting, the request
to take polaroids for a go-
see later that afternoon    everywhere
telephones rang & everyone
seemed to speak at the same time
as though they were the chorus
in rehearsal I would try to
write down spare details, moments that I could
fashion into something else
when I had the time, or when the time
was right, when I was older, when I could
understand what it was I was doing or what it was
that was being done
to me    not much to it
-erations, the way a frame
can crack just by putting
weight on one foot, pressing
hard & raising one’s leg

these liberties will be looked upon no longer
as crimes, but as itches

& another memo when I think
to refresh my display

would you please also send a clear photo of your head
which you can alter freely, at will or willingly
disposed to give up your rights to like
-ness? instead of representing my likeness, I
took steps toward excising my face
from the portrait, replacing it with

        please note, visitors
        may enter & leave
        the theater at any time

(it revealed the desire to renounce
individual authority in his work
undermining the sanctity
of authorship)    imagine

to be looked at from
the other side of the screen
with one thumb close to
almost an hour

touched by the hand
of God, new order
blaring in the back
of the bar   I paid
attention, took my own
hand out from my jeans
pocket, put my thumb
around it, felt how it felt to
feel it almost as if
I were inside it & on
the outside

against such official efforts to fix
identity, he insisted on the right
to construct, subvert, or other
-wise destabilize it, already
experimenting with what it meant
to flatten dimensions, a response
to the flattening of transport
in a culture constantly dis
-placed     some people

take photos of artwork I make
artwork meant for photography
something that can be rendered or
repeated differently during each
take    see also: a zoomed-in
screenshot to further fragment the whole &
highlight another assemblage
what can & cannot
be consumed through touch is only
a question I find useful today & yesterday

as audiences were awed by the new
technology of film, the location of real
magic shifted from the magician’s stage
to the frame of the camera

after the Internet’s insistence
to be everywhere & all at once came
our sincere desire
to disappear

At the sex party in the Hamptons
No one is having sex

Stranger things have happened
Than a Winona Ryder comeback

People often ask
Why I write so often

About the ephemeral
& I ask what else

Really is there?  Time
It takes to burn

A body & blow
It up   The rituals

Of show & tell
People still talk

About emails, the same
Story repeats a week

Later & the public
Thinks it’s news

I know that life is
Short & art is long

I know I’ll never live to see it
Makes me grow impatient

I sometimes say
I will never show this side

To anyone    & then I take
Myself apart

Living off of
Photographs    So desperate to

Become it    Pulled back
As though out

Side the set
This fire beating

On my back
This lack of rainwater

This hunger we
Call life

Somewhere a woman is eating the apples
Of Chernobyl

I’m 31 & still
I know nothing

About attraction
How people can come so close

To crying, the tear
In the fold of my jeans

All the books
I surround myself with

All the strangers
I wish I knew I wish knew

Me   Waiting for my ride
Can make me want

To write or like living
Just to write about it    I remember

A rooftop in Bushwick
Placing your head

On the head of my lap
I didn’t know what else

I would ever be but here
A person learning

About you & your
Body temperature in relative

Silence    The smell
Of fried garlic, onions, something floral

A white wine from a place
In France I can’t pronounce

I often want to watch everything
I’ve ever done as though it were

Filmed, & I’d see it
Differently each time

I sit to watch
Moments where

I’ve looked at my
Reflection & seen a GIF

Something half-frozen
Between the pose of permanence

& the shudder of being
Formed in flesh

I used to stutter as a child
The unbearable vastness

Of this city
Through train windows

Your face behind a door
I want to forget

Nothing not even
The absence of music

The way your eyes kept me
From moving

I want to live like this forever
I never could get it out 

the most impressive thing about the low backed sectional sofa
abandoned on the corner down the street from the little league fields
wasn’t that it would’ve been a better representative
for the fifth district on the city council than kim cook,
each just proposal quietly referred to committee,
but that it held on to its cardboard sign
for months as it was pulled apart
dragged around and tetris-stacked
letting anyone nearby know
it was free

the logistical negotiations of
whose bedside light should stay on
until when and in what sequence
with other winding down activities
now irrelevant

under pressure to rest for long enough
it’s not crippling like it can be

feeling out and around my body
relaxing my lower back takes
several minutes of focused attention
more willing it to go slack
than stretching to entice it
my attention is called
over the dulling effects of the brown noise
piped through the bookshelf speakers
drowning the living room
and futon mattress
on the floor
to my finger

I can’t tell if what I notice is
the feeling of the wound
or the presence of the bandage covering it

Son, some advice: you don’t know 
what a hangover is, but when you learn, 
a McDonalds #4 breakfast will help. 
Never eat at Subway. 
You’re allowed to take breadsticks
& salad and/or cheddar bay biscuits 
to go. While I’m on the subject
of breadsticks, ask for extra 
when you order at Fazoli’s
because the basket person might
come around too late or
not at all. Always ask for sauce
at Taco Bell, even if you don’t
want it, because they give you
a ton and it’s good on tomorrow’s
eggs. Finally, if you see 
the Krispy Kreme sign 
lit up, you must go. 
I don’t know how to make 
magic but I know where 
you can go to find it. 

people say I move like my mother     they say my sisters
& I have the same eyes          only way to tell we are sisters
they ask are you close?          I say they’re my best friends
they ask what is your grandmother like?        I say she is kind of Italian like
throws knives in the yard during thunderstorms        but doesn’t make pasta Italian          
they ask do you miss home?              I say I do
I miss my family          I say I am
home               I say I miss
everywhere     that no longer exists

& I wonder what my father is  doing in this moment
if he is looking at birds in the yard      if he is using his senior discount at Kohl’s
to buy more cargo shorts my mother hates   if he is sitting with my mother            
& the cat          if they are touching
if they are touching the cat     if they laugh   
if when they laugh it’s at the TV         or something the other one said

when I return the couch remembers
my shape        when I return

everything I say sounds like driving away

when I return
the rooms look sideways
when I return

I wear my mothers clothes
& people say               “you move like she does”

“i always feel like ppl r staring at us,”
u say when we get into ur car after going out 4 dinner
& i can feel the space between my eyebrows look kind of confused
even though i kno what u r saying & i feel that way, too

i wish i could press my face into ur face until our faces become
the same face and ppl would stare at us bc we are conjoined
with each other and they have never seen a human
-oid creature w eight limbs before

i wish u could carry me on ur shoulder like a human purse
and reach into me 2 grab something u need or maybe just want
and i would give it 2 u like I was made of Italian leather and ppl would stare
at us bc they have never seen a human purse before

but mostly i wish we could walk down the street holding hands and smiling
into each other’s necks at restaurants and ppl would stare at us
not bc we have eight limbs or bc i am a human purse or bc our skin is different colors
but bc they have never seen two ppl care for each other like we do before.

Do 4.1% and 103,000 Mean Anything to You? Are you 18-45? You could join our hepatitis vaccine study. *Donations will be accepted at the door* courtesy of Artificial Eye.

See what’s new: Bat brain research, young inventors, questioning forensic science.

FANTASTIC MR FOXES – 5 APPS TO HELP YOU FOCUS – ESCAPEWITHMOM

Not a simple one-airline deal here, but more of a combination. The cheeky straight – four ways. Cuddle with a masterpiece. The beauty disrupter.

You earned Gold! Score! 48.16 smiles until your free yogurt! 20% off super meaningful gifts.

** Offer not valid on all swim styles; The Win items; third-party branded merchandise; Mercantile Broken-in T-shirts; babies’ Made-for-Play online shop items; men's suiting.

Stress Less. Write Now. Prevent the fomo, you slipin’ slidin' chums.

I’d like to join your network. I advise you to watch this video. Don’t watch this video. Whatever you do, don’t watch it. The obligatory video that I’m sure you’ll (a) enjoy (b) never look at (c) react with disdain and horror. Pick two, get one free.

Notice of Privacy Policy Update. Please Click PAYROLL to enable us to update your Payroll as all staff and members are getting payroll update now. Click on: Payroll-Update to open Administration account to Manually update account/Payroll.

Is this message not displaying correctly?

I. The Decision

I will live every day like I am in love.

 

II. The Memory

Encountering wakefulness at dawn, I do not know the silver sides of trains. I think there is skin with me and a wing outside. They smell like where I am.

 

III. The First Space

The slow stacking of weight or the flinging down of a toe while the torso is already ahead. There are always new body parts to hit on sides of doors. I like to put my legs into pants in front of an open window, then stick my head out to see who’s around.

 

IV. The Second Space

Paper cups are slight and whispery like a lot of librarians. Every morning I buy a librarian of coffee from a beautiful Iranian woman whose nickname is Auzzi. I did not know her nickname before I was happy. 

 

V. The Third Space

According to a 1985 Associated Press release, legislator Mae Schmidle proposed a bill that would prohibit the throwing of uncooked rice during Connecticut weddings. The proposal was for the birds, whose stomachs were supposedly exploding due to ingestion of the rice. “It sounds crazy,” a past president of the Connecticut Audubon Society is quoted as saying. Though the bursting bird theory has been largely discarded, the practice of throwing rice remains in decline.

 

VI. The Body Down

What I’m trying to say is that I got choked up at my desk when you finished the marathon, and again when I saw you eating a sandwich at the train station. I thought you were hitting a man when instead you were helping him up, and I’m sorry. When I saw you on your father’s shoulders I loved you both. What I’m trying to say is that I would really like to throw rice at you. I would also like to buy a bag of small white feathers at an art supply store and throw those at you.

 

VII. The Memory

Releasing my skin in the darkness, I know I have been lucky. I rise and join legislator Mae Schmidle at a long table in a library. Auzzi is there, and you. We eat pants.

 

VIII. The Prophecy

I will live every day like I am in love.

O Build-A-Bonfire, O
Blue Subaru
With the mushroom-colored horse
Blanket in the back seat—
Miles beyond Route 46
There is a tall woman 
In a yard
Waiting to receive you
And your art 
Without question.

My sister has been reading a lot about her pores lately. At the moderately priced tourist town spa where we've met for the weekend, a commercial for the dual action microdermabrasion brush comes on the television above the hot wax station, and she swears their blackhead diagram is incomplete. Meanwhile I am filling out a form about the alcohol content of my daily moisturizer. Meanwhile a warm eucalyptus mist is evaporating above the table. Meanwhile a lady whose name is not Amanda is putting sliced cucumbers on my eyelids, and it is almost exactly like it is on television only wetter, like a salad sitting in salt and vinegar in the back of a refrigerator, like Donald Trump eating Doritos on Air Force One. In the trailer park where my sister and I once rode the bikes our parents bought secondhand from the parents of bigger kids, we ate sliced hot dogs off the same plates as kids we didn’t know, will never know the names of, we ate Doritos a lunch lady stirred into cheese; hot, orange, liquid beef. We ate what was given to us like Donald Trump eats what’s given to him on a gold, on a gold-plated, on a gold-painted platter. Which is why this morning when my sister Googled how much to tip a lady who runs a hot stone along a length of collarbone, clavicle, soft hearth of skin along a jawline, twenty dollars seemed like a lot even if twenty dollars seemed like nothing. Because what is it to be an American anyway if not to keep from others what you don’t need, to hold on tightly to what you never owned, to grasp a cucumber between your fingers and say, What can I do with this except to not eat it, to misuse it, to not even enjoy it? What is it to be American if not to have everything, to have all you want, to want to keep the nothing you don’t have absolutely, positively, unequivocally to yourself.

It was supposed to be
a joyous thing
But in the end it was
just another mess
of which we could not rid
ourselves

My mother believes the bird
that won’t stop shitting on her windows 
is
the devil.
If what she means is
the devil is just a bird
that shits on your windows,
then I agree.

1.  My ex-boyfriend got engaged to a girl less than a year after he broke up with me.  We had dinner with her once.  She was a family friend.  She wore hoop earrings and looked like a worst-case scenario Mila Kunis.  I hated her but I didn't know why yet.

2.  You brought a graffiti stencil of my face to my first apartment in Westwood.  My mom hated you but you came over anyway to help us set up.  We ate at California pizza kitchen and you told my mom and I to stop talking and eat our food.

3.  A psychic at Nordstrom Rack told me to quit my teaching job.  I didn't listen to her until four months later, but she told me I looked sad and that she liked my hair.  The blonde looked good on me.  She wanted to know who my colorist was.

4.  You made me pay for my birthday dinner because times were tough.  We went back to my place and took ecstasy that I scored on New Years eve, drugs that I told you I paid for, but really, they were free.

5.  My dealer moved to Tahoe to be a ski instructor.  Not a lot of snow that year, so he came back and tried to call me a bunch, but I joined a dispensary and didn't need him anymore.  I also didn't like the way he kicked in his sleep.

6.  You told me if I kept yelling the police would come.  When you left, I sat on the couch in front of the TV for some time, smoked a cigarette on the balcony overlooking the cars in the garage, then went to sleep and vowed to never speak to you again.  You came over at six in the morning and I let you in and we made love.  You took me to the movies after because there was nothing else to do.

7.  I knew he didn't love me when he’d rather hang out on the stoop with some kid from Idaho than kiss me, rock me gently to sleep, talk to me all night like we used to.  I waited in bed with socks on and my arms crossed, but he was just out there on the steps smoking cigarette after cigarette until he got the courage to tell me to go.

8.  You said if you won the next round of Scategories that I had to kiss you, and that if I won, you had to kiss me.  I played along and even laughed a little but in the end I couldn't kiss you because I was so depressed and we had been through so much.  Don’t you see how much it hurt?

9.  I drove behind my mom’s car, the silverware balancing on boxes in the passenger seat.  I wished a knife would cut my throat, end it all, joked about that later.  It only took one trip, both my mom and I driving, to get all my stuff out of that apartment.  You came home to empty closets, a book I gave you two years ago on your desk, only a wooden spoon in the kitchen sink.

10.  You told me when your parents fought you had to hide your siblings upstairs in your room.  You said you kept them happy when things were bad at home.  You explained that’s why you didn't like it when I raised my voice.  It made you nervous.  It reminded you of the way they used to yell and scream.

11.  I saw him after my therapy session with Beth.  I was feeling pretty good so I went to his halfway house to fuck him and hang out and after we had sex he asked if I could take him to Chipotle and even though I wasn’t hungry I drove us there and bought us lunch, late lunch.  His bathroom didn't have any toilet paper.  The house manager used to call me Giggles.

12.  You used to instant message me while I was at work in Brentwood.  You were in the office and I was at Stacy’s house helping her pitch emails and make calls.  I hated it there, but I looked forward to your messages, the ones where you asked if I was having a good day and I’d say yes, then you asking if you could come over later.  You liked my place, you liked the sandwiches I made you for work, you liked having sex in the morning.

13.  I pretended to be asleep while he was on the phone with some girl’s mom in Port St. Lucie.  Her daughter was on heroin and he was trying to tell the mom that he had to come get her tonight or else it wouldn’t work.  He told her mom that the Lord worked through him and that she had to leave today, soon, to pack her bags for her, that there would be someone who could get her magazines and cigarettes, if she wanted.

14.  You told me to call out sick so I did.  I met you in Venice and we went to the beach.  You put your arms around me and told me you loved me forever and ever.  You made me dinner, steak and potatoes, and we watched a movie.  Your bed was on the floor and you had a pair of my underwear on your shelf.  I loved you so much I could have died back then.

15.  I used to come watch him play softball at the field on Spanish River.  I wore little shorts and crop tops and linked my fingers through the fence.  Sometimes I brought him Gatorade.  Other times I drank iced coffee and it dripped on my legs.  I pretended not to mind the bugs that bit me, all over my arms, my back, my thighs.

16.  You called me from Virginia and we talked late into the night.  You said you thought maybe things could work, in a few years, someday.  I was the only one you ever really loved; she just filled the space.  You played me a song on the guitar and I said I had to go and you argued with me over it and I hung up and cried myself to sleep.

17.  He took me camping for the weekend in the Keys.  I didn't really want to go, but I didn't want to be home either.  We drank coffee in the morning from the store and it was bad but he asked me why I was so afraid and I told him about what happened, how all the trust went out the window, and how I just wanted to love again and be loved and be safe and okay and happy and feel nice.  He listened and that’s all I could ask for then.

18.  You told me you weren’t coming to Bloomington in an email that I read when I got to work, two days before your arrival.  I went to the back room and slammed my fist on the wall.  Carol came in and asked me if I was okay.  I told her what happened and she said you were like a red sock, turning my white world pink.

19.  I drove to Miami to see him because he was on house arrest and couldn’t leave after dark.  We watched LOVE on Netflix and played trivia games about ancient Rome.  He told me it might work better once he got off probation, in four months, if I could wait.  He told me he wanted to see the world and find a nice girl to settle down with, eventually.  He told me to leave him alone after a while and I didn't blame him because I was really serious and fast and wanted a lot from everyone, expected so much.

20.  You stopped calling after I stopped answering.  You left me a message where you laughed in the middle at your own joke and I remembered New Years Eve when we walked to the beach and sat on a blanket.  You told me you thought your life was so boring that you couldn’t talk to your old friends anymore.  You said you had to make up stories or make things sound interesting to feel important, to feel good.  I thought about the love we had and where it went and where it would go when I would finally leave.

Via some prophecy, my son has
reached one half my chronological
age. And there are so many things

he can tell me: when The Macho Man
first claimed the heavyweight belt,
the year I bought him his first dog.

All of these facts and figures, like
millions of useless gigabytes stored
in the fucked up cortex where his

memories live. And I was to believe
that memory was the foundation
for intelligence; the more things you

remember, the wiser you will become.
But these flawless recollections will
not pay his bills, will not renew his

auto insurance. When I am gone,
neither his friends, his god, nor his
imaginary sweetheart will balance

his checkbook, will balance his
blood sugar, will buy him cheap
cigarettes to smoke on the porch

and throw the butts in the aluminum
bucket. When I am gone, when the
mail slides off the coffee table, I have

little doubt that, somewhere, written
in a childlike scribbling, he will note
the exact date and time of my demise.

On the way to T’s childhood Wendy’s I tell her
about mine, a Fancy Wendy’s, with a salad bar,
rooms, tin ceilings or something. I’ve been too afraid
to go back: no person ever steps into the same Wendy’s
twice. T wants to take photos of hers, but we arrive
to find a letter on the door. As of last December’s fire,
the building is unsafe to occupy. A plastic tree still leans
against the window. They didn’t even have time
to put the chairs up. This Wendy’s is now open
only in T’s memory and nothing has changed
since she came here with her grandparents years ago.
T smiles. Inside this Wendy’s, they are still alive. 
We can’t go in, but it’s enough to cloud this glass
with breathing, trying to get a good picture.  

spell for electron microscopes/ for silicate minerals & landfills

 

if my friends say you are a cell tower & I am a bird

 

if when I say I dream of archaeology what I mean is you buried all your trash in a clay-lined cavity/ it was so phylosilicate/ & stuffed with water/ so dental & damaged/ so intrinsic . . .

 

did you know parrots used to eat clay for upset stomachs?/ I like to think of their multicolored plumage against a human landfill/ I mean “like” the way Facebook means it/ the way I “like” your protruding garage & your clean curb with a wheeled bin full of waste

 

did you know this is the future? that mixing things in a pot is “more fun than selling coupons”?/ did you know silicates are quilt-like at the molecular level & filling the land?

 

did you know I drilled into my own subconscious & found you wrapped in plastic/ trying on old t-shirts/ the ones you were wearing when we fell in this tank/ I mean, love, I mean in land fill

 

& I was the drill that unearthed it last night?/ I dreamed your tendons were tendrils of fern/ you were aluminum/ you were a plastic-wrapped thigh

 

we were leg wrestling

 

& I was like a pump in a portapotty

 

I love you like a feces cake loves oxygen

that is to say you break me down/

 

& the future’s archeologists are looking kinda lumpy from here

stuffing their large pocketed coats full of paw plates from Panda Express

 

& if I still wanna eat down to the orange chicken of you

& if I dream I’m an archaeologist & you’re my trash

 

my friend wins things & I say she’s the explicative in my lukewarm ham

 

you’ve been my explicative & I’m dumping you/ I’m explicating

 

& you’ve been buried here in the crust of me/ for over a month / or maybe a decade/ which is the same as a hundred years/ did you know that’s how long it takes to begin to decompose/ if I’m made of you/

 

& did you know the earth’s crust is 90% silicate/ so basically a landfill is a giant trash can/ the land fill is a tiny earth/ the earth has been holding us, loving us, cradling us like baby bottles/ sucking at the nutrient of us/ the dioxin of us/ the sucking garbage in the landfill of its silicate skin

Oh yes, the radio says, I notice
when I feel God tapping me on the heart.
My father’s story of a hitchhiker: 
the young guy in a soldier’s uniform
he picked up—the drive laden with hours left,
and the kid nice enough, hoping to reach
his girlfriend, he said, just in the next town. 
Well look, the radio says, God has wired
our hearts for people.       That’s why I keep this,
the kid had said, tugging his pant leg to 
reveal the long hunting knife in his boot. 
My father had asked him if he ever
felt afraid, entering a stranger’s car. 
I’m not a soldier either, said the kid. 

I cry because of
how much time
we lost of my childhood
not singing in the front seat
of the white truck yelling
swing low
sweet chariot
coming forth
to carry me home

paranoid grandma calls me back
after the phone call drops
to tell me “they’re listening to us
I can’t stop thinking about it
I thought you should know”

I think fuck death! fuck winter
fuck you Alice everyone struggles
fuck the catholic church and
fuck all these poems
that do not sound like poems I like

paranoid grandma calls me back
after the phone call drops
to tell me “they’re listening to us
I can’t stop thinking about it
I thought you should know”

This morning I fixed a pot of coffee
and drank the whole thing —
it is something I am good at:
having enough of something
and then exhausting it.

watched Last Year in
Marienbad, cup in hand,
and thought of how starved
of waiting one must be not
to get it. The man says to the woman:
“You’re like a shadow
and you’re waiting
for me to approach,”
but then she just keeps
slipping away.

wrote a letter to Nelle,
I said: “For love I just get
lost in it.” I received
a package yesterday
of impossibly wrapped
fall leaves. They came
uncrushed I felt freaked out
by it I

don’t know

what in me

is always looking

for things to

fall apart

not to shrink away
from loneliness
but to BE with it
eating hot dogs
with mustard
alone at the bar

I want to be rewarded for my good thoughts. My good purchase. I want free shipping. Gentle handling. I buy eyeliner. The felt tip, and pointed. I want someone to clap. I buy steel boots. I curl my toes. The price is as marked. I click when I walk. I buy diet pills. Thrift store plaques. The words on them. It’s wine o’clock. I buy Plan B. Early bird gets most. I fold my hands at the counter. The smell of clean smoke.

I have hair thick like a wig. I take a pregnancy test. It’s your bathroom. Be sure to wash your hands. Your cabinet is open. I steal one can of legumes. I walk to CVS. Save two dollars on spoons. I buy cream makeup. Hide the veins in my face. I avoid the aquarium, and water in a glass.

You say oh my god once and look quiet at me. You cover my mouth with two hands like a sieve. You leave five hundred dollars, green in the mail. You take care of it. It is your treat. You fall in love for three weeks with somebody nice. I stare at your ankles. Hairless and sharp. You have the prettiest socks. The perfect length. The half off price.

A REAL WOMAN

Has to be able to cook has to be able to clean has to be able to UNHINGE HER JAW LIKE A SNAKE has to be able to nod has to be able to bruise has to HIDE THE EVIDENCE in the room has to be able to clap has to agree has to tell the mommies at the bus stop SHE IS FINE just clumsy in the morning has to TREAT ILLNESS and obsession has to keep her palms FLAT AGAINST HER THIGHS has to be able to SPY has to be able to plot has be able to flirt has to fatten and fatten up ONLY IF THERE IS A BABY INSIDE has to be able to feed has to be able to tease has to resist the urge to BUY HER HUSBAND A COLLAR AND CHAIN HIM TO THE FENCE has to be able to plant has to let spheres of soil GATHER IN THE HOLLOWS OF HER BONES has to SMOKE RINGS LIKE HOLES with the mommies at the bus stop has to FIND THE STREET has to CROSS has to WAIT for the signal

You walk into the room and find soil, leaves, a few red thorns. The thorns are okay to look at, and you think how interesting it would be if someone decided to make a crown of them, a crown of thorns. Now jesus walks into the room because you thought him into the space and now you have to be polite to jesus. Shake his hand. He says please, I go by joe now. How about a hi-five. You’re trying not to laugh at jesus, who is also god, or a vessel for god to come through. You walk into the room and find joe, who could have been god. You pile up leaves with your hands. Say my name means to bind. I am not son of anything. I am not loyal or holy or gift. You walk into the room and move it around. Become interested in rearrangement. There’s lots of stuff you did not know you can hold, carry, did not know you were allowed to, or able, did not know how carrying is good for you.

In January the birds awakened mid-
flight. In February the bats left
their cave and we called it abandoned.
In March a civilization arose
and fell. In April a ream of gauze
unfurled, masking my face
in muslin. The holes became thinner.
In May I learned to breathe.
In June a massive anvil was placed in
the town’s center, where a blacksmith
pounded my face into the shape of a metal
disc. In July the metal became a container for fire.
In August I splintered into a thousand.
In September I was born to a couple
who had not made love. In October
another civil war. In November I began walking.
In December flocks of angels dropped
from the sky like moths. In January
I returned, shaking.

I watch branches land
a quarter of the room

from my face. The rush
of wall breaking as

the trunk shakes
the house like an explosion.

Soon after the war,
when missiles reached

through windows
and we watched

through the black and white
crosshairs on our screen.

 
Now it is our house
that shudders. Here

to witness, I’m thrown
back from the wolf-          

headed figures, the miniature
white and gold fighter planes

I played with, never
thinking, who

watches? I gaze at
the room blown open,

the television’s face
shattered on the floor.

the god of madness

is riding me, my back a saddle.
i want to hear his voices spasm.

o god, pull me by my leash-tongue.
inscribe your name with a penknife.

can i be me and not? both
the thorax and the mirror. both

the teeth and the gun.
his blood my blood, my blood his

hymns of light pouring
from the toppled vase.

i watch him rise, scrambling
to button up his skin.

if there's an exit, let it lead
to another door.

I grew hands by the dozen
I was a generalized reaching
clasping monster it was
not a dream shared or
otherwise it was neither
yours nor mine nor ours

today I’m a tough guy—
digging up holes & eating
all the dirt   when I’m not
clear I was never clear  
when I am I was never not
today I toughly learned
that four screams means
SOS   on a train   you
nuzzled into my neck
& said words mean little
when they come from your
mouth      it hit me like         
a riddle  like a riddle or a joke

let’s say we say nothing
ever happened
& wipe our brains

clean then press
play from
the beginning—

if new, use new, like:
bones of your bones
how far can we go

when will you get
here & which stone
will we meet at       

& what can I not
invent from this
terrible long night

listen: I’ve learned a brand new way
of seeing, through hard & soft eyes.
I’ve learned I may be a fixed
& limited animal. I may know

what is happening, but not how.
we may be entangled by spooky actions.
no, this will never do—                       
I’ve never taught life anything,
& I only woke when I thought I slept.

I can be quiet
I said I can
hide rust sink
I can dry up
into my bones
those hard sponges
pulleyed aloft
each day a routine
I have been living        
too long to remember

The house is settling,
the blue tarps are unfurled
for miles across green lawn,
white tombs litter the yard
like hot pimples, hard, unextractable

Procession winds black and snaking,
umbrellas suck at the sunrays,
shields blocking the evaporation
of the begged-for release
of grief

Our red carpet, our red
rag, red handkerchief,
red IV tube, red dwarf star,
shocked and unnatural glow

Robin’s egg blue window glass,
face pressed, smudged, and
melting, old slow liquid,
unbacked mirror, silverless

Celebration, the color of roses,
we know how heavy the lead
veil of blood is,
sing but don’t forget their voices

I have never painted with oils
but they entice me the way a muddy embankment
entreats slipping. A swamp, sludge, and the most
exceptional noises a child can offer creation. Pallet
knife finger nails mix clay red and river silt alive.
Squish-plop dance in disjointed harmony.

A mess to look forward to. A bath that will
undoubtedly clog the drain. Soil for all of its
assonance. Filth for all its creative rebellion!
Divine eyebrows higher than a lifted
poet. Divine pig in paint and foul-mouth
pleasure. Divine invitation written in fat
disastrous finger-paint smudges. Divine
thrown from Olympus, crashing down
to form a crater that’s part mud pit, part disco.

A museum carved in shit and honey. Bears wading
through the melting corpse of their former
floating kingdom. I divine a truth smeared across
the walls. It makes me cry and I’m not sure
if it’s cause of the words or the smell of rancid
bacon fat. What is spit without first a breath?

I came out of a flower bud
I came out from under a fingernail
I came out of the first written text
I came out of the first telling

A legend birth
                        A spark breath
A riddle sewn before the solve
fathom before depth
            fathom before frontal lobe
the cricket buzz heat birth
the virgo organizing their origin
virga— a breath so heavy it
turns into tears

gasp flight, licking fluttering sand fleas
blanched sick in butter
I came out of the ocean French kissing
the cliffs before French kissing ever existed
DNA tasting— spit rules
pheromone snorting
Farah Moan crying on national television
I came out of a pot of bronzer
and bathed in froths of highlighter
I give myself life
yas I came

air wants
to hold
flame down

like a hand
will reach
through hair

if you
carve out
of a paper boat

you take
a piece
and center it

i do know
how to cut
open how

you must love this
space in order
to consume it


even though

take
a tree
split it
down
middle
with light
perhaps

leave

water still
flowers

 

study of touch

in touch
in good touch
touch upon
be in touch
stay in touch
put to the touch
lose touch
keep touch
keep in touch
in touch with
within touch
near touch
to the touch
touch and run
nice touch

Did we go to Boston twice or did all this happen in one trip? I remember two different rooms but we used to change hotels all the time, just to feel like criminals. Once we stayed in an old converted jail. That was the time I walked all the way back from the bar in my heels. That night he left in a cab with two men from his work and all my stuff in his pockets. I thought a clutch would ruin the line of my arm in photos. I don’t even know what we were fighting about. Something about brunch, and how somehow it was blackmail when I said, I’ve never tried Eggs Benedict before. When I got back to the room it was empty but it felt so good to take my shoes off that I swore up and down I preferred this feeling of relief to the feeling of never having blisters in the first place. I ate the pizza and passed out in my dress and when I woke up there was Eggs Benedict on a silver cart beside my bed. I ate it in bed with a coke from the mini bar, rubbing Polysporin onto my feet.

Lick me with your warm
honey tongue. Give me your port-wine
stain birthmark.

You are your pale
moonlit clavicles,
clanking against mine.
 

Pencil erasers for nipples.

You are your blue
painted toenails and your bare
hands and your silver
nose hoop and your chipped
tooth. You are your ear
piercings that you wear unadorned,
filled back in with scar tissue.

You are your black tattoos.
Bottle you up for me: sweat and
lavender and
chalkboard paint. A labyrinth
of stretch marks, belly button
encircled: iridescent tree rings.

You are your subliminal reach for me in the night

it is that hour of the night when the mud of my leftovers sing out to me. her flat tongue is against my carotid artery against the counter when I smell it. over there. overfilled. avocado smoke. groceries, the forgotten, the intentions, the cupidity. the lingerings

fruit fly eruption. sullied diapers. freckled banana peel drop. wrung out, worn earl gray tea bags. my own little landfill. the mud of my leftovers. my strawberry ooze. ginger-tipped q-tips. holding my nose like an amateur swimmer. staggered dance through the lamp lit mess of the day, yellow drawstrings digging into the lines of my palms

dog eager for the outside, following close, longing for escape

and me too

I dodge the spider web, the garden orb weaver

moon is a streetlight is the moon

dense noise of breath. mosquito bite. tin can clang. owl’s neck swivels. shadow passerby. amphibian hum. river static

return to an accidental marinara splash          a missed toss of a red bell pepper

that I don’t scoop out, that I don’t wipe up

white bag retrieval       tuck

and I don’t look back

it is that hour of the night when

I am not mommy or lover

I am just a thing with shit that I conceal with the unsoiled

Having howled too long
For the abducted soul’s return
To the cold flesh
Of one cherished,
I belabored Death
With an invitation, which she
With grace accepted,
Appearing at my door
One early afternoon.
We ate small cakes with tea.
She was without affectation
And beautiful. It went like this:
 
Sharp lack of ecstasy had been a poison
That thickened blood to a cold paste
And paled my kindled skin to wasted ash,
That at first I did not hear her knock.
 
She knocked again. I rose
And staggered to the door.
 
Sunlight tore through the room’s air
Like ignited birds that scraped
The floor and walls in raucous throngs
With melting, illuminated feathers;
And this as I opened the door
And found her there,
A vision of subdued cheer—
So that I was dazzled, and my eyes failed.
 
I took her for a stranger—and her eyes
Sizzled as she crossly spoke:
 
“Does my stupid lamb lack sense
 Enough to know his Shepherdess?
 A glob of shadow is the slop
 His skull holds, if this be so,
 And his eyes still swirl in their cups—
 Or have I like a cat
 Lapped those milky orbs down
 To the rotted bone?”
 
She smiled then, and I knew her.
She entered, and I closed the door.
 
I took her coat and found the lining
Warm from her body; and as I did,
She touched her finger to my eye,
Which I did not like—
Though it was as soft as a tear—
And said she would not eat them yet;
Though then saw and took
Into her hands two sketches made
In charcoal of my friend, and asked,
Did I feed these same eyes, that once
Seemed half-melted fragments
Of the day’s sky shattered by starry pistols,
Such trash in endless series—
That they now must crawl like worms
Forward through the light they eat?
 
And then I was displeased, because
She was a guest, and I had not asked
Her there to mock me.
I said as much—again
She smiled, and told me
That the likenesses were keen,
Though I was an idiot,
And a poet’s tears are his disgrace;
She said:
 
“What honest shadow won’t dissolve
 And break apart in brightness?
 And here you’ve set, like Pompeii’s stains,
 A ruthless dullness to persist—
 Contrary to sense, contrary to health and elegance.
 The grand, loping blob you weep for now
 Was a mass of slowly rotting thread—
 Nerve, meat, and skin mere tangled string
 In which the soul played kitten—nothing more.”
 
I mumbled, quite dissatisfied,
And offered her her coat;
But she brushed it to the floor
And demanded cake; and I was pressed
By my shoulders into the kitchen.
I’d bought a cake, a luscious
Sachertorte, which she ate and criticized,
Dropping crumbs as she gestured—
And this at times maniacally.
 
I said that she was cruel;
And she leapt up on her chair, arms cocked,
And declaimed her fanatic protest to the ceiling:
 
“Who holds that mercy is a type of crime?
 Or are my gestures harsh? For in truth,
  I ease disgraced excellence; while the twisted child
  Born stifling in the racket of its form,
  Cast out by its parents, I nourish with milk of my flesh.
  To them, as to the infant torn in war—
  Whose slaughtered mother’s blood is the melted arms
  That it hold and soothe—to such disordered lambs,
  I say my knife but combs their throats
  Like shining hair to make them smooth again.
  And then, am I not tender?”
 
She nipped her cake. I wished that I
Could think of some response,
But the reeling frenzy of her speech
Had left me so agape
That she looked at me and said that saints,
When butchered, hold their faces so.
 
She laughed and stepped down. She cut
Another slice of cake
While I turned to start the kettle;
And while it warmed, I went and got
My notes, wherein I’d set
A lengthy accusation, and returned
To find her seated and attentive—
The wedge of cake
She held upright in her hand
And bit with birdlike dartings
Of her smile. I almost laughed—
Though grew serious by remembering
My complaints, and read to her:
 
“You end all good things; though many
 Of us you send, we hear, to grave torture,
 And for them you manifest no end.”
 
At which point she clutched her knees
And rolled about the floor,
That I regretted to have tasked
Her harshly; till I heard
Her laugh, though she tumbled still,
And seemed a cork tossed round
On giggling foam. She stretched
Gasping at my feet and said:
 
“So the poet wheezes sighs and drools
 His honey on the page,
 Like a dull and weepy bumblebee—
 Who lays his friends in mausoleums
 Of carved salt, decayed by rain,
 And lies down even among
 Their carcasses to moan.
 But if you’ll sob so wretchedly,
 And simple as an infant, I’ll soothe
 Your petulance with fresh candy.”
 
She pulled from her purse a skull,
And, standing up, she set it
On the table; and I saw
From the chipped front tooth
It was my friend’s, and I yelled in anger;
Though she smiled and stroked it
Like a pet, and I said
It was an unbecoming pleasure
To so enjoy our losses
And our suffering. She said:
 
“You moan of pain as if it were not good—
 The burning hoop I whip my tigers through
 To give them discipline; and though there be
 From time to time some tardy one who lingers,
 Recognize you not that there are some
 Who still, like Saturn for their heaviness,
 Must be in Heaven ever held in place
 By a disc of flame?”
 
I did not speak, but was confused;
She marked this and continued:
 
“Hell is a bin for the disharmonious doll,
 Who sings too foul or shrill its melody
 When the string is pulled; Heaven is similar,
 Though collects more pleasant mannequins.
 We gods care not for your love or hate, your tears
 Fall not from our eyes; we like the sort of doll
 Who looks like us, and fits its simple habits
 To our own proportions; and such a thing
 Is fine enough. We’ll keep it near.”
 
She stroked the skull and gobbled cake;
I weighed disjointed arguments.
The kettle boiled; I made the tea,
And when I turned around,
I saw she’d set the cups and placed
A third one for the skull.
I poured just two, though saw
Her face and bearing grow severe;
I poured the third; then cut more cake
And sat me sullen down.
She softened and spooned sugar,
In hers and then in ours,
And the swirling liquor seemed to make
Of each thin shell of porcelain
An ear; and this she saw me think, I guess,
And said that they were listening.
She whispered into hers
Before she sipped, which I found grotesque;
And this again she saw, and said
I was just such a shell
Made hot with neatly spinning liquids;
Though as fragile to destruction
As a curling wave. I said:
 
“Though fragile, still I govern force
 Throughout my instant;
 My voice lends its savor to the air,
 My joy and sorrow add their texture and sense
 To the dust of their composition.
 I sail for my few days above the depths
 On a splintering, wooden bubble;
 And though I fall in wreckage to the waves,
 And with my colleagues melt
 Like dispersed sugars, sweetening the deep,
 Yet the carved effect of every life
 Persists in time’s unfractured mass;
 And this dignity is our inviolable home,
 About whose doors you howl and scratch,
 Though may never enter.
 As mere cessation, you lack all quality;
 You do not exist, and drag things into you.”
 
She frowned at me and clucked her tongue.
She said:
 
“What savor, chased to wild
 Extremity, does not,
 Like a hunted animal, turn and bite?
 My touch, and nothing else,
 Translates all thrashing flesh
 To nourishment, or spills honey
 From the cracked heart
 Of a slaughtered enemy.
 The church digests its rooms of clotted
 Prayer, breath locked and rotted
 In the vaulted stone, which I make snap
 And tumble at my will--
 And stifled voices find their gods.
 And if thereby some pleading bones
 Be smashed to jagged dust,
 No cruel, negating hand it was
 That fell to pluck, from its cage of knotted vein,
 The dispassionate animal of smoke—
 But prayers answered more abruptly
 Than one knew one wished.
 To Heaven or to Hell, all’s to be preferred
 That drags one through a hole
 In the floor or ceiling of one’s cell;
 To breathe free, not stifling
 In the moon’s discarded skins
 That fall to earth, ensnaring
 As they do some darting souls—
 Who fall like sleepy snow
 From dreamy, unremembered wombs
 And populate the world.”
 
She sipped her tea. She wiped her hands
Till they were clean of every speck;
And I was lost in rapture to observe
The limber dip and curl of every finger.
 
And now, there can be no doubt at all
That here I lost all sense—
As I took her hand and, ravished, kissed
The shadow of her palm;
Though she laughed, and like a playful ape,
Kissed mine identically.  She said:
 
“Joy is not joy, but a frenzied child,
 Who tears with both fists flesh
 From its petty frame, and weeping, feasts;
 Nor knows love its savaged prey—
 The heart unfolds its wolfish fangs
 To attack its image in another’s blood.
 Am I pretty in your eye?
 Pleasure, like a sick dog gunned down,
 Teeth melting in a pool of foam,
 Gives way to softer ecstasy;
 And I find you beautiful.”
 
We kissed. Much later, in her arms
I asked if she was happy,
And she stretched and smiled;
And moonlight, like evaporated doves,
Fawned and licked her skin.
 
The night progressed, and at some point
I drifted into sleep.
I woke and she was gone—though still,
In the kitchen, my friend’s skull
Sat quiet by its cup.
 
O Wonderful friend!—Does he climb even now
To Heaven on his strangled dreams?
Or are his faults scattered over yet-unborn faces
Like infectious, disfiguring shadows?
Wherever—and in whatever form—
 
Indestructible fool!  Take care!

please believe me
            when i tell you this

            when i tell you of the high concentration of uranium and thorium 

please                                     
you people
            must believe me

            when i tell you studies indicate the presence of these highly radioactive substances in the martian atmosphere

            can only mean
            can only be the result of

you must understand this

            it can only be the result of a deliberate thermonuclear explosion dating back approximately 180 million years ago

please
            listen

            research suggests a civilization once existed on the surface of mars

you people know of the ancient canals
you know of the face

            like the colossal heads carved out of stone around 900 b.c. by the olmecs here on this planet
            like the statues of king antiochus scattered upon the high plains of southeast turkey 

            the monolithic debris of a bygone reign

please
you people
            must believe me

            when i tell you studies indicate the superabundance of xenon-129 found in the northern hemisphere of mars

            can only mean
            can only be the result of

you must understand this

            it can only be the result of a bombardment of high-energy neutrons
            the distinct signature of a precision-based nuclear attack from some unknown cosmic force

please
            listen

            a civilizations was destroyed for no reason we here can comprehend and when i tell you

please believe me
            when i tell you this

            i myself have experienced such loss

please
you people
            must believe me

            when i tell you studies indicate no discernible difference exists between the loss of an entire civilization and that of a single loved one

            it can only mean

you must understand this

            one loss is neither greater nor less than any other loss
            it cannot be quantified
            this loss or that loss

please
            listen

            a loved one leaves nothing but the remains of their destruction
            the trace elements of their own inexplicable annihilation

please
you people
            believe me just this once

            i’ve done the goddamn research

Flat water became rare in the house.
We loosened our jaws and drank
sparkling water from cans. For years
now, it seems the rain has gone off
to buy some cheese and bread. There
was worry for a while. Then anger took hold
of the earth till it cracked of dryness.
Minutes stretched thin and pale
like dough. I thought of the faucet
and it's constant dripping and my inability
to do anything about it. I waited
for the handyman for a minor eternity
and he never showed. Two days passed
before he could come again. There was waiting
followed by more of the same. In the kitchen
the faucet continued to drip. At school,
my students filled watering cans
in the sink inside the office to nourish strawberries
and hot peppers growing in the garden. Before that,
they used a key, that was like a mini tire-iron,
to work the spigot outside
before it became too stripped to function.
In a small pot, behind some hydrangeas,
two sprigs of cilantro sprouted
from seeds thought too old to germinate.
The students were always careless
in their comings and goings, leaving trails
of puddles on the tiled floor. They stayed late,
as asked, to clean up their traces
with brown paper towels,
but never later than the rain.

Yesterday I laid on the carpet staring at the ceiling
wondering how many times it had been painted
and for what reasons and how the slight curvature
of the ceiling and the crown molding I’ve always admired
added precisely 1.8 degrees of difficulty
to the climate of the job. I can imagine the poor guy
in the heat of summer sweating heavy onto his drop cloth
outstretched beneath him, his roller covered in a white
whiter than a herd of skeletons bleached by the sun
in a nearby desert outstretched above his head. Should you
tip your handyman? is something I’ve Googled twice this year.
The ceiling controls the weather not the crown
molding. The flies in the kitchen are distracting,
but they keep the cats busy and I cannot find what’s drawn them.
In the violent white of the bathroom there are also flies, much smaller
and dead already. Their wings pasted to the ceiling by a mixture
of condensation or reflected shower water and dust. What we have here
is an inverted night sky! is what I plan to tell any guest who notices
the grand alabaster overhead interspersed
with specks of black that might be slightly blue if you squint
your eyes the right way. This world is so much more
than trying to make digital people happy. This world
is not just made up of believers and apostates, or of flies
and cats, you can be a doubter or even someone with more
indifference. You could be, as they say, the fly on the wall.
Your buzz neither here nor there, signaling this nor that,
but something else entirely.

These bluejeaned teens in shirts
that say “I love MY JOB” always ask:
Are we celebrating anything tonight?
Yes: we’re celebrating getting out
of the goddamn house showered
with passable outfits on.

Every book says I’ll miss this part.
Maybe early fatherhood is a state 
best imagined from elsewhere, like this 
Texas: imagined in Indiana, deposited
before a fading Sears in Kansas. 
I love it here. The baby can’t

appreciate waiters dancing in the aisle
staring above all our heads. But I can. 
How they keep chicken breasts
this moist is probably something
I don’t want to know. And holy moly 
these green beans. I ask Kara for hers

but she says that’s an awful lot 
of sodium. I’ve already eaten two orders. 
We’ve become parents. My parents
say they’re proud, that we’re doing
a good job. But there are days when 
I’m line dancing because I have to. 

The boy swung the car door open and knocked
the boy off his bike and the boy jumped
from the room he lit on fire and the boy
emailed me to get out of class because the boy
saw the boy jump and the boy got knocked off
his bike by the car door in the sun on the last
spring day beneath the blooms right before the boy
emailed and the boy might be dead the college
didn’t say and I teach a writing class today we learn
the Three Most Important Words in the English Language
I ask the students do you know and the boy raises
his hand and the boy says fuck this shit
and I say this is all so insufficient and what
does that mean the boy might be dead the boy
might’ve burned the boy might be crazy the boy
might live the boy might not be much more
depressed than I am or than the boys in the class
or the boys in the yards sinking stained
balls in cups or lying on the sidewalk by the car
in a tank top buzz cut watching falling petals
stick to bloody palms while the other boy looks
and what are we trying to learn what does
he and why did the boy jump the college didn’t
say and why did he light the room and
why did I not say to my students
what would I have said to my students
I sat on the porch while the boy tumbled
into the street and stayed there and the other
boy the one in the car said dude sorry I didn’t
check the mirror and the boy moaned and I
thought the flowers looked nice in the light
and the boy’s blood did too framed pink
with cherry blossoms that won’t be there tomorrow

I felt so guilty about the couch
where I came, leaving a stain

in the Sioux City air
bnb. I got on my knees,

tried to rub clean the microsuede
with hand soap and spit.

There was a family
beside a cross on the shelf.

They’d trace me,
put me on a list—

but when we left
our host wrote to say

You left my home immaculate.

The ghost rolls in like a fog and a headache
behind the eyes. It wallows in the mud to shed
excess heat. It is the carpet of fur shed on the couch
after escape. The feather falling from the back
of the bird fledged too soon.

It never wants to leave you, the ghost.
A spirit that has hikikomori-ed your body.
Ghost rolled tight around the stripper pole of your spine.
Ghost running laps across your bodily meridians,
each movement a constellation of tongue and armpits,
of gut, groin, and ankle bone.

It sits on your chest, a throne.
There are many ghosts that sit on chests
but this one doesn’t want to steal your breath
so much as push out whatever remains,
its birth an expulsion.
A vague outline. Wave coming up to the shoreline
but only darkening the sand around your feet.
A vague outlaw. Two samurai facing off,
blades angled against the sunrise.

It uses an outside voice inside the corkscrew spaces
of your head. It says words with irony:
mother, mishap, melodic; mute, immerse, madness.
It retreats deeper and deeper, until you can’t even see it.
The way a splinter warps the whorls
of your fingerprint, the ghost will warp
the spaces inside.

The fear of the ghost is darker than the grief
you refused to feel, the hole in your chest the ghost
exploited. The deepest black ever created. Dense scream
growling on the horizon, a monsoon hurling waves
over your body pinned to sand. Decimation by salt
for a body that is an open wound.

One night, you and the ghost climb to the top of a hill.
The ghost is in the final stages, embedded in you
like a deep sleep hypothermia. The moon glowed
and I clung to the earth of you, kissed your body
as if you were ground my feet had never set upon.
We turned together, in this space, a mutual gyre.
You clinging to my hand, you now
becoming my ghost.

An iceberg’s color is determined
by how it interacts with light.
What color would I be
under your absent gaze?
Green, black, striped, or rainbowed
starlings mimicking an oil spill perhaps.
You’re not here anymore
to greet me at baggage claim and
there’s a shift of light and understanding
as the carousel whirls around,
beading and unbeading.
The police dog keeps sniffing me in line,
keeps hovering around my knees.
To seek danger as a game
is a world I’ve forgotten and now
what I feared the most came true
in the inlay strip of wood
becoming its own petrified
creation on your finger. I heard.
A wedding ring is a thing of great
stillness. They say that murmurations
used to describe starlings can also be used
to describe the way snow banks
slide down a mountain.
I know we don’t need to chorus
our hurts with each other anymore.
Just look to our nearest seven neighbors
and mass bash the glass.
Look at all this cargo, all this freight.
We could drown in this avalanche
unless we synchronize and shape shift.
Unless we tambourine bank the cusp.

When you fuck do you ever think of the first time,
how you had to turn the lights off and your dress hit the floor
like a new stain and you had to hold yourself back
from getting to your knees to tend the carpet. How you got under the covers
even though it was July, and how sweat was not yet
sexy, it was just sweat, and your job was to be pushed into
and for most of it your eyes were closed
and even though you’d wanted it and wanted him, all night
you hadn’t known if the kiss was coming. Can you
imagine what you imagined then? That love would be
all white dress shirts in bright doorways. Now, that sounds like
ghosts, but then it sounded like dirty weekends and spring temperatures.
Where did you learn about fucking? Mum and dad gave you a book
and then you watched dragonflies over water, in flight and
attached (the first time attachment was worrying) and after that,
porn on dial up. Two lifeguards buffering
beside a turquoise pool. The frantic movement of the first time
turns out more like stuttering than buffering. Like a paused VHS tape
maybe, or a scratched record. How far back do we have to go?
It’s like the first first time, two people in a cave
finding the darkest corner to lie down in and the bones of her back
pounding the gravel, or Adam and Eve
bored after a day or two of perfection, like, what do we do
with these bits and oh this hurts and is this wetness
good or bad (see: the water imagery…) until they learned to love
the taste of salt and the way teeth leave flowers on the skin
and Eve began holding Adam down, learned she liked
to push his face into the ever-dewey grass while he gasped.
And maybe what’s really happening, is this is the only part of the story
you know, and so every time you try to do it better.
Try to rescrew the screw. Push his head into the pillow.
Show yourself you know what the fuck you’re doing
that all the practice was worth it. The stains have all set
and the flowers are blooming yellow, and you want to show
the first you, want to say, hey, this is how you like it,
save time, flip him on top of the duvet cover
(blue checkered, cotton), taste the sweat now.



At the farmers’ market one Sunday morning
she hands me a bouquet of small tornadoes
and because no one has ever given me tornadoes like this before
I am embarrassed. I say Thank you I say, Will they need water?
The tornadoes are like tangled bedsheets, like roots
deep under the earth, knotweed maybe,
which is everywhere. She tells me to let them eat,
that eating is what tornadoes do,
she tells me to start them small, with olives maybe,
or shelled peanuts, and move on to bigger things later.
The tornadoes love to play with their tissue
paper wrapping, and I can feel their breath on my face
when I lean down to sniff the new-beginnings smell
of a strong gust. The tornadoes rattle
the vase I place them in, they swallow hungrily, they suck
my feeding fingers like they are kissing my prints,
like they recognise me, know its me that nourishes them.
Knotweed is named after feminine parts: Fallopia Japonica.
This is a thing in me I never feel, but I know
is there. I don’t know whether it is insult or respect, this choice of name
it says, we will tie you up and strangle you all
so I suppose it depends who is reading
the encyclopedia of flora. The tornadoes have no roots, yet they grow,
upwards and she slips her hand
up my shirt as she says What’s in the fridge? They’re hungry.
and the tornadoes lick paint off the ceiling
and yellowed plaster shows itself in ‘O’s around calm white
centres. The tornadoes guzzle raw steak, they swallow
pints and pints of milk. She says, They want the whole cow
and a foam comes off them, a body-deep pink.
I can’t keep my eyes, my ears, from the tornadoes
as we fuck. Their noise is like want. Their noise is like please.
Their noise is bigger than the rooms of my apartment.
And I suppose I begin to be afraid, but
she tells me, No, You don’t understand, We’re going to watch them eat
this whole one-horse town. And although one horse town
is a phrase I’ve never heard used in real life before,
and shows a flair for drama, I follow her,
I stand back with her, we watch the world as it is ripped
open and laid bare, watch as it quivers before us,
dirt under its tongue, and under the dirt
all those roots.

We start with this joke, that in any given room there’s someone
one or both of us has fucked. This is almost true here

and at first we point them out, but our pointing fingers
get tired, so tired we feel headachey and a little jealous.

We stop pointing. We draw ‘x’s across our nipples, because they are treasure
and you stab the lid of a mason jar,

we are going to save our coins for a move. I’ve got to get out
but I have no sense of direction. I blame Google Maps,

you blame poetry. You tell me I have both in my pocket, but only one helps us at all.
I am pouring myself everywhere but never fitting. I can’t stay straight. It’s cute in the bath

but not in the street. I guess I should have seen this coming.
When you take our savings to the bank they total

five dollars forty-five. Not even enough for a bottle
of brown liquor. The thing is, in any given room here there’s someone

one or both of us have fucked, or will fuck. Isn’t that funny?
Fucking other people. Imagine me fucking other people.

I know you do already. It’s the geometry of this small town
and of the way you and I cross, perpendicular

when what we need is to be parallel, or maybe to intersect
at multiple points. If we knew anything about maths maybe

we would save more money, or I would be able to control
the angles at which I fall. But how things are - we’re all just

lines, crossing at random on various planes. You always wanted me
to write poems about you, and I guess now I am. We end with this joke

that in any given room there is someone one or both of us has fucked, and you want that
to stop, and I can’t stop it, and anyway, we may well be in different rooms entirely.

Two separate friends have shown
me The Ecstasy of St Teresa
recently. Their readings on Bernini differed,
one using two fingers
to zoom in on her face and the fold
of her robes
observing how, lost like that,
she represents the infinite
in as much as we can ever touch
the infinite; in dreams and in
stone made soft and in how long stone lasts.
The other pointed out that her perfect
spread toes are the perfect spread toes
of orgasm, which comparatively might
seem crass, but orgasm is also an attempt at
a few seconds of infinity, an attempt to more
than just exist. He says I’ve always liked
this bit on a girl,
his tongue touches
the fold of my knee-pit,
and I can feel the saints above us–
Basil with his fingers almost touching as if he has
something to say but can’t quite find
the words, though maybe if we give him
enough time he’ll deliver.

When we’re done and back to our hangovers
the boy stands and looks for his pants,
says, I like the icon paintings.
I didn’t put them up there to watch over me,
but now I suppose they have no choice
and I like how they remind me of better places
where even religion is beautiful,
steeped in blood and gold leaf.
Last night he told me
about his Baptist upbringing.
How he has only recently stopped being afraid
of everything. He told me about architecture;
how he likes circles, how he likes poured
concrete but also Borromini. He told me,
Architects love things that seem impossible
and I told him that actually sounds pretty
brave, and maybe that is where
infinity is hiding—

in the almost impossibleness of art.
For example in a poem,
when meaning blooms
in the crack of light between two lines
like moss on old rock,
or in the scalding blue of those monasteries
in Montenegro, where I dropped money into
an honesty box and sometimes palmed two
gold-haloed saints, and people walked in straight lines
down carpet worn flat and black
to kiss the forehead or toes of Jesus,
Mary and Joseph. He kisses my shins,
though we are far from religious reverie,
and on the wall above us St Basil remains stern in almost-prayer,
his palms never touching, the space between them
reminding me that no skin ever really touches any other skin,
that atoms are only ever almost pressed together
infinitely close but always apart.

on a plastic chair in
front of a sunset like
a tennis ball, I
say «we all go through
it

I was reading today how trees, though not touching directly,
talk to each other, keep aware of each other’s inhabitants,
health, overall well-being, and I mention this to my coworker,
who thinks I’m absolutely insane, and she’s right, probably,
but I send her the article about certain funghi that take root
under all forests, lines of trees, and how trees send nutrients
through underground networks, making sure that no tree
falls surrounded by the others, each of them strong and standing,
at her desk I’m huddled behind her, watching her watch the
ideas, turns to me and says, goodness, even the trees treat 
each other better than we do and of course they do, it’s a
low threshold, and yet, I’m shocked, too, at this statement,
at its truth and how easily I accept it. The funghi the trees
talk through is called Mycelia, a name that feels possessive,
like it’s something I’ve owned, or worked for. And I want
to work, harder, every day, for a world where we take care
of each other, completely. That a mite eating the bark from
the bottom up wouldn’t be a sacrifice, wouldn’t end in a loss
or several. That we, all of us, would stay intertwined.


