There’s no looking back. Looking back 
has been removed as an option. “Going forward” 
is on the control panel, not “sideways,” 
not “staying put.” If we looked back, 
the future would feel unwanted. It would be 
as if knights in the time of knights, 
whenever that was, took off their helmets 
and used them as ashtrays. That’s how the future 
would feel if we looked back, like armor 
denied the chance for glory in battle.
If you’ve ever been denied the chance for glory 
in battle, you wouldn’t do this to a helmet 
or a codpiece or the future, wouldn’t look back 
or discuss looking back or even have a back.
You’d get rid of your back, you’d be all front,
all face, kneecaps, the zone of genitalia.
I’m sorry to speak to you like this 
but it’s serious business, whatever we’re doing. 
We’re going forward into the not looking back. 
That’s exactly what we’re doing. We’re getting 
things done. As soon as the thing is done, 
it hasn’t been done, it’s in the past, the past 
is behind us and behind us isn’t there, 
as I’ve just clarified. But don’t look back 
if you missed the recent clarification. It’s also 
not there, your Achilles heel is gone, no one 
can wound you with an arrow. Bulldozers 
the color of sunrise heap piles 
of the fresh start on a tomorrow that seems 
like such a long time ago. We used to clap 
erasers after class, take the dust of language out 
and set it free in clouds of coughing, 
then wash the chalkboards of the last sign 
of memory. Clean slate. How fresh life feels, 
without the encumbrance of life.

My mother sits befuddled at her telephone,
uncertain who she means to call
or why, which pill was the one
she feared she took.
Her dial tone is a tiny car,
its driver asleep, leaning on the horn.
These broken nights, when rest comes
late or not at all, her voice
gets lower, rougher, her father’s voice
emerging in her own.
One more day, she tells herself,
though what she is approaching she could not say.
And in time it comes, the mercy
of the empty places. In time
her mind gives out like headlights
over the darkened water. Closer,
I tell my mother, and she gazes up,
bemused, and down again;
hold the receiver closer, closer,
the phone’s grid of little figures
looking back. So foreign to her now,
this belly full of numbers
sparked and glowing, this far alarm
pulsing in her hand.

Among the dead in a stranger’s plowed field,
I stand alone with no sign of help. Almost
like the lunar surface, with only the ghosts
of dying Poplars surrounding me. ‘We’ll
make it back’ I tell myself, and realize
only these trees know this history, standing
erect with cold rusting barb wire banding
their pale trunks that have withered and dried.
I plant my tripod like the stainless legs
of a lunar-lander, attempt to frame
this vacuum of symmetry. And like
the perimeter, I remember we’re all vague
with brief lives, a flick of a shutter to explain
a few footsteps searching for returning light.

all the armor plates cannot protect you, eremite
the way you burrow into the vulnerable part of the forest
and pray god the clippers don’t get you: their blades
whirring above your chitinous form
threatening to whack your tiny head off at the thorax
you have clung to one liana after another
tarzan-swinging into each savory tuck and fold
of the map. incautious the people who ran naked
in the dense light & let you —
[people meaning me. & many others]
so the infestation starts: one unguarded prick
a nook in which you suck and suck
until the itch to kill you, a primate reflex, prevails
as you gorge in the troughs and ditches of desire
plumping like an old man pickled in alcohol
the agile fingers seek you out, pull at your hind legs
crack your meaty shell, you token of fleeting devotion
a pest, a pest, a rubious skin: douse us with kerosene

There’s a beach in San Diego where you can
drop your clothes like shed skin onto the black sand,
walk your tired, naked body into the open sea
and curl up under the froth, tumble like a rock
or stretch out and ride a wave as it curls over your head
like cut glass. You can float on your back and look
toward shore where the others are nothing but
fleshy gestures, more of the organism you were
born to and have broken from to test this salt
and solitude, this rushing silence beyond
the breaking waves, your heavy bones floating
between your faith in the human and the ruddy
horizon, that gate made of seaweed and pearls
opening under you, closing over you, asking for nothing
but your stillness, your breath, your small beating
heart, and when the great hinge rasps its welcome
you wake to hear them calling, look to see them
waving their tiny, sun-smitten arms. Blurred
by distance their formless forms merge and you
can hardly believe you are of them, your body
buoyant, set loose, relieved of its burdens,
its squalor and shame. And what brought you here
is what brings you back, not love or faith
but their fear and fragility, their voices cast out
against the deafening wind, splashing
toward you — so many — against the waves.

It is January.
It rises up out of the ice
and puts on
a pair of pants
then outgrows
the pair of pants.
It lives in a house
then outgrows
the front door.
When it breaks
through the roof
you see
its silhouette
against
a red light.
You think it will bite
your face off
but it will not bite
your face off.

There’s a picture draped behind each face.
Huge black light posters, in fact.
A half-glimpse of her hair lasts days,
a stare at eyes, harbored hours. My sister
and I played psychodrama: She gets hurt,
I’d cry, too — sand dug in our knees, eyes meet,
hearts tramp down on a patch of grass.
The camera, too, reacts once.
An immense, cherubic instant.
People say it’s a second of feeling
just the right moment, but it can last a
good ten minutes. A trumpet could blast,
right in the subway, of a love refrain.
It can’t be, you realize. This won’t last
for long at all. A brush of an eyelash.
A clarion in the background, a voice.

The birders lie dressed in their beds,
gravely waiting. Soon, they will step
out in the dark with their pages of lists
and boxes. Have seen, Have seen:
They will mark them off. Their quarry
is one of two shrikes in the county: Butcher
birds spearing their weight in elephant
stag beetles on barbed wire. Louder
human power will ignite the place you live.
Remember the mounted head of the pig
on the fence, facing away from the soon-to-be-
burning house. The shrike is not a mocking
bird, though gray with white wing patches.
Have not seen, empty box, and yet it is,
still is. The birders will fill their boxes
and wait to see what change it brings.
The things that they will see and miss
this morning will be there, the round moon
a small piece in the great funnel leading to the eye,
the lens of the field glasses even wider than
the moon. The beak of the shrike, bearing a beetle,
will only take shape as the moon dissipates.

Llamas dot the hills. White rugs on a green rug.
You never had an iPod, so you can’t imagine how
much better it is now. We have been to the Moon
and made him our doormat. Painkiller of the night,
he still shines, though we have blackened his eye
by punching it closed. Perhaps his forehead shines.
Spain is better, too: yellow flowers, useless flowers,
a destination vacation. Pessoa might have been the
alarm clock of the mountain slope with his contingent
of sheep, lazily shepherding his multiple selves into
crooked pens, but you are my sad dictionary, César.
I raise my hoof to you. Crippled though it is, I am.

I am a veritable fontof metal knowledge though
I’m sure a certain Brooklynite would disagree
I made out once to Celtic Frost.
Doom seems like an interesting proposition & speed is fun
& at sixteen it’s much easier
to sport a pentagram, corpse paint, fuck the fucking establishment
at thirty-four, an embarrassment.At thirty-four a bit of a miraculous
a bit of charm & pendanta bit of brown bottle green bottlestale
roomautumn leaves a sign of [unintelligible]Devil’s Island.

In the Yard today, the pine needles began snowing
down. The way they caught the light was curious.
And the maple’s leaves, all red and ochre, were
already littering the walkway. And I, well I sat
thinking the same dark thoughts I have had
since childhood. You know the ones. I need
not explain them to You, of all people.
But it is so easy to call things dark thoughts,
a kind of lazy shorthand. Too easy to forget
the maxim that everyone is good in Your eyes.
We both know this is not true, is a lie. I mean,
the high school counselor they put away for life…
How can he be good in Your eyes? Sometimes,
I am convinced no one is good in Your eyes.
Dark thoughts, yes. I am doubting again.
I doubt the pine needles, the maple leaves,
the robin carrying on its stupid song,
my own voice mumbling on a slate blue terrace.
Easy to doubt. Always easy. And the old Jesuit
who lectured me on this? Well, he doubted, too.
But I am not quite ready to be broken just yet.
I have a few things left in me, a few surprises.
No magic is as good as Your magic, but I have
hidden cards up my sleeve, twisted the handkerchief,
slipped the coin behind my watch. I still have
a few tricks left to play. And the light shifting
on the terrace, the pine needles coming down,
I know what they mean. I get what You are trying
to get at. I am here, God, I am here. I am waiting
for You to blind me with a sunstorm of stars.

Color of J.C. Penney’s jewelry, trinket
in a Cracker Jack box, color of roadside
weeds, candy wrapper in a gutter. Color
of streamers tied to the handlebars
of a rusty bike, color of rust on the bike’s
dented fender. Color of food stamps
and welfare checks, dirt swept
into the long hole of the missing board
on the back porch, the untended sore,
phlegm in the hotel toilet bowl. Color
of mold in the broken refrigerator, light
bulb hung over the dog-shredded screen,
color of curtainless kitchen windows
throbbing through the dark, color
of underwear stains, old bandages, knees
of worn jeans, filters of generic cigarettes,
brand x bottles of beer, lighter flints,
match heads, dry leaves. Color
of blocks of cheese and government butter,
rolled oats, crust of white bread, bacon fat,
two fingers of oil shivering in the pan,
chicken wings dragged through cornmeal,
the three-legged cat, two hairs left on the head
of the naked doll, the spikes in the iris
of her rolling eyes, the bottoms of unwashed
feet, seals on divorce papers, notices of default,
ancient coat hangers, bingo chips, the pawned
topaz ring, lottery tickets, mustard on a cracker,
sulfur, factory lights at night, hills of sawdust
and shallow pans of brake fluid, bees seething
in a dead tree knot, tinder in a box, pennies
in a jar, coffee stained teeth, a busted piano’s
ivory keys, bed bugs, fleas, algae scum simmering
on a pond, the carp floating beneath. Color
of the crane and chain of the wrecking ball
stranded in sun glare, the loud bell of the sun,
the clock-ticking stars, shade in the bathroom
stuck half-way down, rag rugs, lye soap,
nicotine slick in the grooves of kitchen ashtray,
the worn handles of soup ladles, tin roses
painted on the still born baby’s shoebox cradle,
brass tip of the veteran’s cane, Gold Bond powder
that eats sweat from the creases, A & D ointment,
Listerine, dirt roads, fool’s gold, litter of kittens
in the corn crib, tobacco spit, strip of light
under the closed door. Color
of unshaven stubble along the scar on a man’s
cheek, floor wax on a woman’s knees, bouillon
cubes in foil, the backs of flies in spider webs,
fishing line at sunset, honey in a bucket, dead
clover, color of the edges of bargain basement
books dropped in the bin, dust rising in gold
motes onto the long tables in the public library
where the homeless come to sit in rows, heads
fallen on their folded arms like good school
children, taking a nap.

I don’t trust you if you haven’t gone to Folsom
when the corn is high
and the place has been eleven years without paint—
except that one line they’re going to shoot you
if you cross—
and I don’t trust you if you haven’t crossed it
at least one time, and I don’t trust you if you
haven’t stood in front of strangers to talk around
another man’s sin, to bake the cake he baked
with his father in a slum in ’63 which fell and fell
and he’s been falling ever since—
I don’t trust you if you leave boys in the middle
of their trials—
and I don’t trust you if you haven’t wanted to
save someone, just once, if you haven’t spoken to
men living where the light is always on
and you can’t turn it off, and so it goes, first—
I don’t trust you if you haven’t gone to that place,
and I don’t trust you if you have.

The maple leaves are as big as my face.
If I was going to rob a bank, I’d wear this mask
of falling, kind of yellow and orange,
“he had a yorange face,” the teller would say.
I’m far away, counting the loot. Not that it matters
but there’s nothing I want to buy. The only reason
for a motorcycle is the metallic flatulence,
I’m sure knife sharpeners mean well
but I like my blades dull, to have to lean
into cutting the body into pieces.
There’s no body, no crime. I put one leaf
on each stair: falling walks up,
falling walks down. Put one in the mailbox
with your address: falling arrives.
There were two box turtles on the road,
one crushed, one not. I put the crushed one
under leaves, picked the other one up
and made the sound of an airplane as I walked it
to the side. Always the feeling
of large transportation going on over my head,
making its own propeller sound, God you say
and I say something gets us around
we’re not equipped to hear. This one leaf
jumped right in front of me, I wondered
how many suicides wave goodbye, where the unseen
gestures go. More important than the note I left
under your windshield-wiper was the notion
we can be shielded. The note blew away, but where
it was, there’s the chance I could have said
anything, even what you needed to hear.

When the caseworker opened the file
and said, this will be difficult, did you
imagine my whole fist around your finger?
Did you hold the photograph
and think of how small I was, my entire weight
fitting into your palms? Difficult,
your already busy life —
six kids, husband, an outgrown house. At 42,
was there something in those papers
that made you want to do it again? I want to
remember your approach, your echo of
sensible flats in the hospital corridor,
the caseworker with the file folder under
her arm. Your Polaroid snap,
how when you said to me years later, I knew
when I saw you, I want to think of myself
reaching for your bright mouth,
your turquoise necklace,
everything I could get my hands on.

After the Vision Fire, November 1995
You kicked at the campfire, went home. The conflagration
climbed the hills, ate every offered ration
of manzanita and bishop pine until the land was one
black sea for miles. It’s a conundrum
why you didn’t try harder, a humdrum
carelessness really, that made the grass spit flame. May it drum
into the room where we hope you are sleepless, the ta-ra of your promotion
to a rank we do not think you understand. May the wide ocean
be your measure, that its waves shun
you. May you learn from this how ultimate is the momentary,
that each act tears
you from the last, that you are heir
to homelessness, to the fire you made and the fire after.
May flickering paper walls stir
thought. And we are
sending you something else as well, to crackle and swish
in the taffeta wind — what may stir you soon, what we wish
for you forever. Enough of sleeplessness, bring on dreams. Shhhh.

Black knife, black wish,
the thing comes over the canyon wall
a single black slit
in the sacred heart of the sky,
the long black sentence of its body
the length of the cross,
pure bird,
both animal and symbol,
the tips of its wrought iron wings
serrated, cruel,
and when our guide tells us
to open our arms,
throw our pain out to it,
I think of how we lost everything
two people can have,
and as the bird soars overhead —
its belly night-black with youth,
I wish it my suffering,
this hardening in me,
I give the bird
with its tearing feet
my pain, and for a moment —
Jesus, pray for us,
it’s enough just to see it.

They show no signs of finding the food,
though I’ve left it for weeks, though
the winter is rough and a trail of hulls
extends through the garden, and the birds,
which are said to be harbingers of things,
eat from the neighbors. In the yard: the black
seeds. In the telephone mouthpiece: holes.
Each one listens and sucks in speech,
gives to me voice, the ghost of a voice.
In the morning, the suction-cupped feeder’s
slid from the window and splayed untouched
sunflower, hard as words from your mouth.
And now it is a dead mouth, and I think
the soul must be the voice, that which leaves
the body, that which I forgot first: music
ribbon, melody hill. In movies, the detectives
take the phone apart and find miles of curling
wire. The listening device, that sharp-
tongued piece, the bug, the plant, looks out
of place, is pinched between finger and thumb,
held up to light. Then, silence! No one speaks.


In 1887 the Army Benevolent Fund decided
to charge rent to veterans who cluttered
their otherwise peaceful brains. In 1423
the Indian Ocean demanded respite and
the starfish departed for a spell, vacationed
in Brittany, became the first buttons. Last year
I determined the precise weight of the animals.
They were so grateful they made me mayor.
History’s full of recipes & despair. In illustrations
it’s a tugboat and we’ll all be carried home.
My understanding’s incomplete. For instance,
these costumes are clearly stunning, but what’s
occurring underneath? No liver would call me
a friend. More importantly, the twentieth century
gave us Chevrolets. We get around. Even now,
gnawing on the future’s lip, I see workers en route
and there is nothing they’re not bound to mend.

Look at this man at his window all agog
at the mortal weather. Fall’s doing its misty thing,
leaves swirling to the ground, and most of us,
it seems, are a little past our sell-by dates.
Comfort comes in various guises,
like the soft grandmotherly hands of day
rolling you back to sleep after night frost.
Or: not like that at all: it depends
on factors like how many dead flies per sill,
how bright the stars, where do clouds go
when midnight moon shines its spot …
To love that well which thou must leave ere long?
Well, kind of. Mostly it’s the slow quilt
slipping to the floor some time in the night,
and running after it in time-lapse dreams,
sleet ticking on your face like rice thrown at a bride.

Of course you invited them in: faces painted
like trick-or-treaters, carrying pointy spears.
The youngest clutched his goat, the tallest
her stack of bowls, and you had rooms to spare.
They fill the house with song and drums;
they show you the dance for morning, the dance
for evening, the dance for mowing the lawn.
They yank the dust covers off your heart.
Now you have sheets to iron, skirts to mend.
You wish your husband was here to see this:
You are useful. You are adored. They want
marrow for breakfast, pancakes for supper.
They like to watch you work the griddle.
You try to teach the youngest to play checkers,
but he wants to play Tied to the Stake, Capture
the Blonde. Some nights they get a little loud
in their chanting, and you worry where the cats
disappeared to. But then they show some
unexpected kindness: a vertebrae necklace,
a cool compress, a broth of leeks and onion.
They need your gentle hand, your quick stitch.
They need for you to live, at least until they need
to kill you. Some nights the house rises up
on chicken legs and turns in circles around you.
You are their egg — their center, the warmth
and flutter. They will wait as long as they can.

In the past, I’m told, men pushed their heavy furnishings
to the walls each night,
the cavernous middles swept of belonging
that they might not stumble.
Because there was given to each a second night
to emerge from the first
cocoon of sleep and speak in ways
the day impeded.
Father,
I am clearing out the rooms
between our sleeps
that we may sit in our second night
and say those things as cannot
come later.

The barbed wire fence stripped
the boy’s body like an apple peeler
when he lost control — slid right through it.
Ribbons of him still dangle
like shoe laces that are too long —
and we might keep pieces inside ourselves
like mason jars of pickled radishes,
but they’re nothing to share with company;
they’ll sit in the back of our pantries,
the boy’s picture will stick on the wall,
an old report card he folded into his
back pocket with a forged signature,
will be sloughed off into a dusty box,
when they’re done deconstructing
his bedroom becomes the inky spare
bedroom the baby gets who will never understand
who the pictures are but will know
not to respond to mother’s night terrors —
standing at the door mumbling his name.

We could have lived anywhere,
strung light and power
around a tree.
You could have dried your hair.
We made money in the wind,
caught for a minute
on limbs and blew away.
Yes dear, perhaps we sinned —
arguing which debt could go
first or stay years, proposed bets
until our pockets were bare,
invited birds to spend the night
to nestle in your blouse
whipped into rags by a clothes line,
while we slept. But no,
we lived in this house.


My mind grew quiet
like a house at dusk,
rooms black, except
for moonlight stroking walls.
Then sleep unlocked the door.
When sleep appeared, removed
its robe, and wrapped its arms
around my neck,
whispering plunder in my ear,
I even welcomed death
to snuggle down. When death
sistered itself to sleep,
not brusque, but coy and clever
as the start of fall —
signaled
by a first vermilion leaf,
a chill against my cheek —
then the sky opened like a box
too full of diamond stars.
When the stars reduced all nights
to a jar of stones, 
gray pebbles in a hand,
then my mind could settle in
its house and still.

The sidewalk split open to reveal the dirt
underneath it, the sky sometimes splitting open too,
the way an entire rack
of school supplies tumbles over and on top of you.
We are always swallowing our laughs.
We are always admitting to ourselves
far too late
that dusk is a joke and we are the punch-line. The morning grows biblical
in the dull street-light haze. An orchard.
What sea fell from the sky? What sky can turn from blue
to the pure color of an Asian pear — no matter, it falls too.
Sometimes at the market I forget
who I am, as if lost in a field of corn, not a maze, but it might as well be.
And when you grab my hand — for just a second — I am not sure who
you are. Looking for a mirror
out of the corner of my eye, and out of the corner of my eye,
it is Fall
and like the redbud we planted months ago in the yard,
I am lucky to be alive

The shuttered room a mind’s throw
from the truant girl flashing sequined heels
linen and lipstick oxcarts
fried bread 
the Chinese district
her body as shorthand
for what his body mistook for love —
you knew the lovers would fail but nothing stops
the double-timed insouciance
leaving mother and brothers 
a blindsight the plantation
hammered to its slant foundation.
The victrola’s fox trot one more static to bear.
‡
Because hunger traced the Mekong.
Because water broke
the salt-row harvest.
Because wind fluttered the girl’s neckline
Indochina minted on your tongue.
Marguerite Duras wrote there are no seasons in that part of the world …
no spring, no renewal
no sound for the girl’s hand releasing the rail,
the ferry an image you held in that humid air.
‡
Fortune. Fever.
The lover twice her age. In the colony
unthinkable
‡
The alley patterned the wall in submarine blooms.
The girl returned
root-bound 
to the bachelor’s room,
her body betraying its grammar, 
the bone rose, the notched zero.
‡
1929 Saigon
rehearsed the girl
for the canopy viewed
from the footbridge:
his wedding
silk brocade.
‡
Whiffs of burnt sugar drift
into the room, the smell of roasted peanuts, 
Chinese soups, roast meat,
herbs, jasmine, dust, incense, charcoal fires,
they carry fire 
about in baskets here,
it’s sold in the street, the smell of the city
is the smell of the villages
upcountry, of the forest…
Marguerite was the French girl
writing the snaked road / scent swarming /
limbs slickened with resins / the lover raising
a palmful of water / after love
you enter and leave / you leave writing
it was already too late.
‡
Out of lung sacs.
Out of blood. Mosquito nets.
Out of mornings in Sa Dec
the glamour of the girl 
grew separate from the house 
flooded with voices
the river’s clockwork sunburned trees
the scissors inside her singing the sea, the immensity…

No entry, no door, no
clean line around
the drifts that twist
and send sand flying in the wind.
The extreme comes only
when you’re in,
well into the basins
floored with salt
and copper flecked rocks,
when temperatures
spike and plunge
and creosote lives long.
Think pronghorn, think hawk,
think of red dirt.
You can bask now:
water-like light
shining hard
in that wash of unwalked land.

Mother willed me a box of ashes from her burnt house.
Maybe they’re pearl-ash, from the tangle of chokers
she kept on her dresser. Maybe they’re what’s left
of the placemats I used to lay out every evening
in the little yellow prefab we moved after the war,
after the six months of Daddy’s silence as
Mother dressed him and fed him and let him
turn his face away. For the rest of his life, he
would not stop her slapping me. Maybe they’re
the books I loved when I was young, the ones
she wouldn’t let me take for my own child,
maybe the cinders of my favorite Djinn,
perched in blue splendor on a stone. If the ashes
were that Djinn, I would spread them on a table
for my granddaughter’s hands to swirl. Then
she’d sit on my lap and we’d read out loud
while dusk settled over the pasture, like the
sweet relief after anger, when fire has eaten all.

Even a week later
				the hand is clear
	sitting in the leaves like soap in a bowl.

It's easy to discern when a body is dead.

							Most of us are animals.

			Most of us know when we're not alone.

A head that doesn't turn toward on-leaf footsteps isn't alive.

You don't have to touch it to know.

							Even when we saw the blood in the room.

			The holes all over her body came next.

All you had to do was look at her hand.

							If you weren't thinking about your sister.

		If you weren't huffing the cold air.

In the Hotel Devotion
there is no running water,
no power, no stairs,
no bed. There is only
the woman who holds
a river in her mouth,
fireflies in her hands,
the woman who bends
for you, opens for you.
There is only this book,
this pen in your hand,
your name the only name.
Outside, pigeons bellying
down the alleys of night.
Inside, this sadness
blooming in your throat.
Sometimes a handful of
light is mistaken for love. I
did not know it was a river
until I tried to swallow.

Her mind, in its dying, grows
into a version of who she almost was.
For even then, when he came down the stairs,
she said, and nearly dropped the baby,
he did drop the baby
she misnames now as someone else’s child,
a neighbor who lived, not in that city
but another from a different time
altogether. The baby was fine,
I don’t want to cause you pain
as you anticipate your own erasures
through hers, it’s the gift of them
I’m drawn to, how ripping the foreground
away creates a whole new landscape,
one that only remembers at the frays,
one she moves through as with new arms
or new ways of swinging her old arms
to a tune that who cares if it’s real.
How do we say that, what the case is
with the smallest turning of an ant
back to the nest, bearing the dead
to be dismantled into a brighter living?
Until finally there is bowl in her mouth
as she points at a chickadee, giving us earthenware
that flies, that sings as I have long felt
everything sings but was afraid to be corny
and say so. That’s what we’ve done to each other,
made us hide the simple pleas to matter
to matter, as most traditions have killed
the other possible ways of arranging dishes
on the table. So you were saying
she needs greater care. I agree, but not
because she talks like someone’s spinning a wheel
in her head that clicks down to the chance
that any odd word is right. I love that sound
as only someone who isn’t her child could,
as someone who believes that’s the game
we’re all playing. Like right now,
I want a bright word to come up,
one that invokes loss in a numinous way,
but I’m faced, as is so often the case,
with a need to stop, not because an end
has been reached but because middles
are where we live and have to get done
what we can, which is little, mind you,
though this little keeps me busy
and appreciative of the memory books have
when I drop them for the pages I’ve left open,
how they spread as if to say, “this was
important to you, this idea you can’t recall,”
and this forgetting is a new bracket, holding
I don’t know what I can never say where.

the only place left to shave is inside your ears
you are almost perfectly smooth: the way you lie
the way you lift your rump like a powdery teacake
you are a gelid centerpiece at your best friend’s wedding
you are an iceprincess of a man, frozen in time
everything you do, you do in time: you arrive in time
you depart in time, but you never save yourself in time
that’s the one thing you can’t do: save yourself
and so you shave yourself instead: back of the neck
chest, nipples, balls. the strop struck with the blade
cries the same desperate tone that the soapmug employs
it’s a whisking sound, it’s a gooey sound
you serve yourself like a creamy dessert
smooth, remarkably smooth, somebody should cut you
again, dust you and serve you to the bride’s stupid sister
stupid enough to believe you as sugar, counterfeit groom

The article said it helps to look for one thing,
as a way of accidentally discovering something else.
I picked bears. I was looking for bears.
It didn’t work. I mean
all I ever got was bears.
The secretary at the elementary school
which had recently seceded
from the Governor Wentworth District
was a bear, and also a steamboat enthusiast.
At the gallery
I saw a miniature daguerreotype
of a bear reclining naked
on a mossy embankment.
I was reminded of my childhood ballet teacher,
her elegant teeth.
I complained to my friends.
I said I am looking for bears
and I am finding them everywhere
but I am not finding, for example,
a town in Tennessee
populated entirely by historians
who refute the Persian Wars.
My friends looked at one another
and ordered a new round
while at the back of the room
a bear in a tiny car
drove in circles on the platform.
Maybe you have a similar problem.
Maybe for you it’s phone booths
which you chose for their disappearance
and their mostly romantic history.
When I arrived at the motel room
the bear was already there, shivering,
because of the air conditioner
which we could not control.
All night long the television
broadcast interviews on hibernation.
At three I fell asleep, informed.

I passed through the small hills
of my mother’s hips one cold morning
and never looked back, until now, cutting
her hard toenails the yellow of blanched corn,
sitting her with her on the bed’s edge,
combing out the tuft of hair at the crown
of her head where it ratted up as she slept,
her thumbs locked into her fists, a gesture
as old as she is, her bald knees fallen together
beneath a blue nightgown. The stroke
took whole pages of words, random years
torn from the calendar, the names of roses
leaning out over her driveway, Cadenza,
Great Western, American Beauty. She can’t
think, can’t drink her morning tea, do her
crossword puzzle in ink. She’s afraid
of everything, the sound of the front door
opening, light falling through the blinds–
she pulls her legs up so the bright bars
won’t touch her feet. I help her
with the buttons on her sweater. She looks
hard at me and says the word sleeve.
Exactly, I tell her and her face relaxes
for the first time in weeks. I lay down
next to her on the flowered sheets and tell her
a story about the day she was born, head
first into a hard world, The Great Depression,
shanties, Hoovervilles, railroads and unions.
I tell her about Amelia Earhart and she asks
Air? and points to the ceiling, says Heart?
and points to her chest. Yes, I say. I sing
Cole Porter songs, Brother, Can You Spare
a Dime. When I recite lines from Gone
with the Wind she sits up and says Potatoes!
and I say, Right again. I read her Sandburg,
some Frost, and she closes her eyes. I say yes,
yes, and tuck her in. It’s summer. She’s tired.
No one knows where she’s been.

Coma of ice and dust, sublimated
Accidental star of Bethlehem, your
Streaked passage, thumb-smudge of showered light,
Bookends lives. Bayeux stitchers wove into
Their tapestry your asterisk.
Babylonians etched you into stone.
I was seven for this century’s
Second viewing. My father saw first your
Slap-dash corona above hill’s rim,
the yellowed center of a purple bruise.
I followed his pointing finger to your
Hanging blaze. Many I knew would be long-
Buried the next time you circled back.
The mathematical certainty of
Cosmic cycles brought this home: your next
Arrival will find me, if at all,
The bent curlicue of an ice-sheathed birch, gray
At the edges. Until then, comet, I
Will do as you have done; I will
Doggedly chase my tail, that
Radiant wake of my own substance burning.

The twilight smells like moths.
Moths and libraries and children’s breath
preserved in formaldehyde.
It’s in our hair and our cloaks reek of it.
Everywhere the years have accumulated in layers
like the stale smoke of magic.
Nothing glows. Forget youthful ex-
foliation, alchemical regeneration.
Here you can scrub beauty all you want,
but when you’re finished the ash
fallen across the bridge of your nose
is still dull as rain.
Note that we don’t really look like birds.
People just say that because
our footprints resemble the shadow
of the lightning branch. In the blur of dim,
where dawn would be, we walk the beach.
The sand is gray. The water is gray.
Of course. You might think it’s monotonous.
Or, like the others, you might surmise
our shared eye makes us powerful.
Perhaps. Because what you take
for a quest to conquer evil looks to us
like the sea’s hammered metal.
Also, when we recall paintings of love,
we never fall headlong into crimson
but sit around all day on our driftwood
debating the intensity of angles.

This from those who drove out
to see the others drive their cars
around the church, up and down
the road in front, the one out back,
back and forth the roads on the sides
until worship ended and the girls came out
sweaty from hallelujahs. Each driver
beckoned one into a car and drove her out
not too far where the woods thickened
and they could park so that no car
was within sight of another. Then sound
took over and what they said they heard
was birthing and the spirit spilling forth.

Together,	
twenty and I keep the kingdom in our midst at bay —
trade IDs, sponsor carnivals for the lapsed sons			
of the neighborhood, make vicious feints 
now and again at sealing the deal. This is the deal: 
we are going to date. Not nubiles; each other. He 
will bolster my credibility with the Epicureans
who challenge gravity on the college lawn. I will 
park him beside village cranks in the Queen City 
and teach him to separate agony from disbelief. 
In the evening we will coordinate a six-act with the 
Worst Night of My Life. A certified PBT operator
will deliver the epigram and keep the after-party
beverages from the littlest. I will not say I could do 
better; he will not say I could have done worse. 
Opening night we will compose ourselves behind 
the curtain. This isn't everything. This is one thing 
we do. One night only and then we dim the lights 
forever. Rumors will circulate of a split, a bad fall. 
Your hands have touched the hands of a murderer, he'll say 
as the audience departs. Shake my hand or die, 
I'll respond. Thirteen minutes later, he is devoured.

Hour Seventy Two: In Which the Witch Describeth Her God
The rim of the wheel and the spokes held inside the fountain
and fish the water the open of the fish’s mouth filled with
water the wolf’s hair standing guard against rain the rain
that slides from the wolf’s slate coat the forest marten furred
in darkness the darkness itself and the light lying within its
sealed lips the delphinium forcing its purple skull free from
earth and the earth which forces it to freedom the tongue of
the pony against muzzled green and the grass which greets him
with greenness the russet peel cradling white flesh and the
white flesh inside cradled the vision sewn to the reverse of
the lid and the lid which leads the eye to a vision the moon
a seed pearl and the sky its woad fabric the jug and the water
frozen in the jug’s form the limb and the bone that stands in
its skin the shore and the wave which stretches its fingers
towards shore the womb and the child quickened inside its
wet the lung and the breath spreading its sides the fire
that warms and the fire that frees you of body by burning

A seraph flings the window wide
and the walls, like two moth wings, shimmer
into green flames. A cranium-white moon
pulls the lovers backward into the cobalt air. You read
the small lanterns of their eyes
to glimpse what must be
a place of aftermath. A bottle of champagne
emptied into the wet grass. Everything
in the village quivers with the lover’s music.
They join the night —
settle over archway, over stream —
into that pasture where one brightness
trades another.

My father’s body has become a crippled shrine,
a complex-compound formula misfiring.
Three times daily he takes up our offerings
of L-dopa laced through with regret —
not for falling ill but for all our missteps
and shuffling when in his prime.
For years, we spun in silence and insomnia.
Moon blind, my mother holds a gavel poised
above her bird-shaped prayers. One more
visit to his doctor and she’ll loose her swing,
bringing a judgment down on all our heads,
a flutter of bruised wings. Now, there’s no god
left in this universe to hear my confession.

In the paradise
dream I wasn’t a ghost, I
was watching from the shade
under a dry tree — casual
as that now seems —
the sky
opening not in a storm
but in a fury of violets.
And below, the pitch, the red
wings of monsters, the dark loam
and thunder in my ribs,
and in eyes gold
heels ascending a ladder.
The robes of angels.
Into a fury of heavenly flowers.
When I awoke the red earth
in a light of its own
making —

I half expected to find your name, Dad, the obit
telling, like so many others, of wild times
and remains released from St. Gabriel’s morgue
three months after the flood, zipped in black,
the yellow teeth alone making sense. Ever since
you dove from iron steps into the condo pool
during a pre-landfall lightening storm,
we’ve bet on you kicking it by hurricane.
I wish you’d come back and play the holdout
that you are — one last season of mojitos
and gold medallions. Just like before —
ignore our pleas, ignore the mayor’s call,
and sit tight with your stash of fruit cocktail
while your sisters twist their rosaries in Monroe.
I’ll take anything but the call that came
in the middle of the night — death’s understudy,
death’s friend-of-a-friend — and the chaos
of dressing in yesterday’s clothes, more of us
crammed in the Grand Marquis than clowns
in a circus wagon. Then the waiting,
our scarlet frowns horseshoes aiming south,
Jerry jump starting the vigil when we dozed
by jerking your brain dead bed and shouting,
It’s a miracle! He moved, but you were unchanged.
Your eyes roamed everywhere but to our faces.
At least you’ll never know how we made out
or that they’re giving tours of the Ninth Ward —
truck on roof, barge on car and car, shotgun house
shifted two blocks from where its pilings stand.
You’d never ride a bus headed that way,
like me holding sacred what the flood line
underscores, grim chorus of painted words.

If the moon comes out bearing nicks and bite marks,
you’ll find me smoothing my skin of its cares tonight.
Under a halo the size of a ring, the old
arguments sit splitting their oldest hairs tonight.
Look at me crooked. Mistake me for Eve. If looks
deceive, who knows which mask our maker wears tonight?
On the tablecloth, red and bending like bows, wine
glass stains stutter their elliptical prayers tonight.
Yet again, love drops anchor where lust dug its moat.
On the roof, angels play musical chairs tonight.
My signature moves like loops and lightning. Letter
posted, I’ll sleep the sleep of millionaires tonight.

I dreamt that a plane crash burned your body,
that the ocean opened its mouth to swallow
your ashes, and only your jewelry survived —
the blue star with a diamond core; earrings
to match. Nightgown ballooning around me,
I ran to your room, begged for a space in your bed.
Some nights, when you touched my temples,
your fingers smelled like gardens. In your lullabies,
the roofs on the houses were always thatched.
Wearing your necklace and old bridesmaid dresses,
I stuffed tissues into the backs of your shoes, mixed
potions in the bathroom and whispered to the mirror.
You left for parties, Aruba, the public library,
and I saw bridges collapsing, saw men in dark clothes
flick their tongues, then coil their hands around your neck.
You had promised me the stars, the ones set against
blackness, and the ones against your skin. When I die,
you said. You said they’d be mine when you died.
In dreams, we wove baskets out of sunflowers; my back
became a bridge. I clasped your fingers to my face
at night, and dreamt myself a pilot pierced with stars.

First a spark, then flames of floral consensus.
We’re a patch on a hill under a freeway
with enough mineral seepage to start a yellow riot.
A thousand button heads bowed beneath
the concrete proscenium—roar of idling engines
and the screech-hiss-honk we’ve come to hear
as applause. Just look at those cars lining up.
Eyes cast on us not the road. We’re candy
for the weary and ground-trodden, lemony pearls
at the city’s soot-stained feet. In the quotidian
straits of rush hour, where boulderday meets
bouldernight, we dash the blues with our siren
show, landscape boosting your nerves
for the long drive home. No need to thank us;
we thrive on simple gifts. Bouquet to the world
of sun-stung blossoms, our own standing ovation.

Fallen from focus, streetlamps turn to faint
plots. Anything we ever said in confidence
is now lost among wintered statues,
your cemetery and its white lawn of concrete teeth.
The city is still a patchwork: the spilt light
of unlocked trees, a broken moon’s
better shade. Beyond all that we lie together
in some unnumbered room reserved for memory.
Please, it’s dark out. Wait. The windows
won’t have anything for us till morning.

More people are killed by falling coconuts than by sharks.
Creationists tell us animals were not carnivorous before The Fall,
that the dinosaurs’ long teeth were necessary for opening coconuts.
Teeth like sharks’ sawing the sea’s strange bodies.
The would-be teeth in a chicken embryo’s beak.
Our science begins by unbuilding the bird:
we find in the chicken teeth and tails like the old T-rex’s.
We find sharks were all once apples in God’s great eye.
Along the beach, the children collect sharks’ teeth in dresden teacups.
Scientists tell us sharks don’t like the ways we taste,
while my people are killed by falling coconuts.
My hands are falling coconuts and this
tea tastes, gently, of bitter anise.
My people are dying for a weapon.
Or a tongue, or a tail
too strong to tuck between their legs. The coconuts tell us nothing.
My palms turn red in fall. My people —
found starving with the shore by the sharks —
I have them eating out of my hands.

My dropout brother swears a mouthful of freon
at the pressure gauge factory — his station
calibrated fittings for water mains, rescue
squads, crimson ladder trucks. Freon line
obstructed, he lifts the cool siphon to his mouth.
What were you thinking? Seventeen, saving
for his first kick-ass import MGB. Shift
supervisor scoffing, Skoal-yellow teeth:
Dumbass move, Goodman. He cuts a corner
and splices his blood in two. Grief begins with how,
not why. First week in oncology Mark confides in mom:
Before I could do anything, it just evaporated
in my mouth. It was there, and then it was gone. 
I wasn’t there, sawdust concrete floor,
siphon rising to his lips. He came home
ghost-faced, went to bed. Dreamt he
swallowed sky until his blood turned
to wind. Shift supervisor retelling the story
at home over dinner, mouth spitting peas,
fork in his piggy fist. Mark cuts a corner
and swallows glass, his blood squeezed
thin as a microscope slide. It was there, then
it was gone. Grief begins with a story
I’m not sure how to tell. Eighteen years
after his funeral mom confides to us
a new religion that almost explains
everything. Before I could do anything,
it just evaporated in my mouth. That night
I came home ghost-faced, went to bed.
Dreamt us careening his convertible up Holy Hill,
switchback wooded moraines, top down
as it starts to drizzle. Dear dropout sick
of school, your blood swallows wind. Grief
begins with every story I try to tell. I wasn’t there,
your hair thinning to nothing. My mouth burns cold.
Rain on the windshield disappearing fast as it falls.

For the 141 in the Triangle Waist Shirt Factory, Union Square, 1911
They hear women inside, the clatter of hands
               on locked doors. Firemen lift their faces, stretch
       their broken nets across the street,
                       and watch as one by one the burning women

leap. The first lands with her smoldering skirt
               over her face. One girl waves her arms
       to keep herself upright until she hits.
                       Women link hands, say goodbye

in six languages and fill their skirts with eighty feet
               of air. Some bodies bend over the iron fence,
       their knuckles brushing concrete.
                       A spectator covers her throat, but not

her eyes. Bootsoles and limp hoses grow slick
               with blood, and firemen turn to each other and say
       They hit the sidewalk like rain. After thirty
                       minutes, they break down the doors

to collect the remains of unfinished stitches
               and immigrant daughters. Seven engagement rings
        on needle-stung fingers. Three days to name
                       the recognizable dead.

Start from scratch.
There goes the cult of
the sleepless late twenties,
all burned out matchsticks.
The orbs of their heads
are darker when seen
from above.
Their posture is the arc
of sunset. Beautifully bent.

Her hair shining in afternoon light, 
a lower register in a voice rich with innuendo; 

                                           anything's a catalyst 

            dropped into the hungry funnel 
                                  of the eyes or ears (the machine
                                  abhors a vacuum). 

                                             It winds 
                                  on narrow rails downwards, 
                                             dropping finally 

                                                      into a still green pool
                                                              that begins to bubble and fizz.

                       The hiss of carbonation wakes 
                                  the dog 
                                             (much-loved yellow dog that 
                       died years back, lay down 
                       in the shade of the maple and never got up) 
                                  that still resides--

                                  some days playful, romp-ready, others 
                                             swollen and buzzed by flies--

                       beside the small propeller which begins
		
                                             to turn in the breeze of the dog's wag 
                                                        (pleased to be noticed again 
                       after many months of slumber in the dark). 

Before the rush of wind 
                       a small blue flame leaps up; continues leaping, 
                       each time higher, 
                                  burning the string that has secured 
                                  a creaking pulley bearing buckets full of 

                                              smell of mother's shampoo     

                                                 shreds of skinned knee      

                                                     father's voice at the door      

                                                        hairy thing under the bed        

                                                                        summer's best tomato

                       which each in turn 
                                                 descend to strike a ledge 
                       that overturns the buckets one by one 
                                                                   into a chute that drains
                                                                              into a vat where
                                  they combine and ball into a glob

                                       that shines as bright as mercury 

                                           then gels heavy as lead 
                                                     mottled with pale tissue of a burn
 
                                                 and drops through the final tube to land
                                                 on a conveyor belt that bears it to his hand. 
					
                       Here, this is for you, 
                                  with your shining hair.
                        Speak; set 
                                  this absurd machine to work; 

                                  make its gears notch, 
                                  make its slight flame flare.

In various suites the newlyweds carom
and — slapdash — suck, hum, cough, release,
after which even the sheets are suggestive
of a draft, or a well-tied knot, or a sunken
dowry said to shimmer miles off the shelf.
Pretty soon, romance clings like an epiphyte,
crowding out even the heartiest principles.
One buys the other a clutch of Calla lilies;
One buys the other a weekend in Maine
where (somehow) not lost in cultivation,
“coral” goes on meaning “lobster ovaries,”
eaten poached, no less. It is a little much,
one whispers. The other: Tut-tut, my love, and,
you’ve got something right — no — right — here.

World gets chance to name new 7 wonders
What are the new seven wonders, a wren
in a hedge, a hummingbird’s red-feathered throat,
wild elk that return to bugle at night
on the outskirts of some improbable city?
All that remains of the original marvels:
a vast museum of unnoticed things.
We’ll never see the Hanging Gardens,
never touch the Colossus of Rhodes.
The statue of Zeus, the Temple of Artemis —
only the Great Pyramid endures.
Look for an adjective. Look
for all the clues, the bloodstains, the footprints,
the fields that weep.
Once I picked figures from clouds; now
I must memorize the heavy elements.
The heaviest will guide movement,
DaVinci wrote. Like dream,
wonder reduces to elemental dust, stories
that are a little bit prayer, a little bit
captured beetle pinned to a velvet board,
a little of what waits to be named.

Nothing else in the swamp rises beyond
the surprise of you
                         and your sweet repetition.  
 
Your boldness I'd expect of the cottonmouth
sunning by the bald cypress,  
 
your plenitude matched only
                                    by last year's
tent caterpillars, whose droppings,
when they fell,
                         ticked a steady shower.   
 
And what of the music in your name,
hiding your poison?  
 
You are danger, deep-throated cup
lipping the stippled light,
                         brightening the leaf mold.  

            Dear red-stained lily. Rain lily.
Zephyr lily. Dear fairy lily.        
                                    Wild Easter lily.  
My dear, dear stagger grass.

Come, love, undress me anyway,
let your fingers fly
to my ruddy buttons,
my lips to your opened
underworld. The children,
cocooned in beds,
are dreaming of turtles
in iron canyons. The cat can watch
for all I care, here,
in the living room, where propped
pillows and candle glint
conjure palaces. Imagine
ruling my empire of thighs, laying
siege to my sunken tombs.
On my knees, with you
behind, the gold brocade
of your dead aunt’s rug
embeds its fleur across my brow.
We both know I don’t deserve it —
dust conspires on the mantle,
a lost peach grows green fur
in the fridge’s hoary crypt.
But, listen, love,
love me anyway.
You see those shimmering dots
peering through the snot-smudged windows?
They could be eyes
of the dog I saw yesterday:
coyote mama driven down
from the bull-dozed hills.
She was lost, zig-zagging
the streets, her swollen teats
jiggling nervously towards traffic.
And the mailman and I
stood there, dumbstruck,
passing envelopes between us.
Not caring, not wanting to know
whatever bad news it was
she was trying to deliver.

Again the old heart returns				
with its old heat, that old alertness					
of muscle, and the weave of desire through-
out, out of which I say truthfully
             when I was a much younger man
I ought to have spent so many more hours
touching myself —

                         ankles and boots,
ankles beneath boots and boots with ankles
inside, and what is the luxury of a knee
             if it is not to wear it
while it impacts with wood like a leaf, a bolt
against metal, or flesh returning to all flesh?
This is the bird I become in my bed,

the flutter of that old picturesque courage
from the years I had more teeth than I knew,
more toes, more spots to be touched
than anyone has ever been touched, down
on the bed I throw me to relearn all of that,
to win that courage, that old eliding
flex that wakes me yes wakes me from sleep.


What of the altar's fire, burnt through flesh, 
now licking the bone? To the embers, we gave 
horns and hymns, our laughter, the blue throat
of a bird. We gave the dying fire our pleasure
and it caught, it burned. Our dancing 
drew a perimeter around the mount, then 
a perimeter around the perimeter. The fire 
warmed the earth, pleased our feet, 
our beautiful bodies. We were bad children,
but only children. The fire grew and we gave it
more: We pulled trees from the forest,
burning even the roots, we gave it arrows,
the hides from beneath our beds.  
We sang and all that was green turned orange, 
and all orange to black. We gave the fire 
the staff, the length of our hair, we gave it 
our bread.
                  Father, we built your altar, but the fire 
grew and our desire grew with it. We were children 
and we became torches. But did we pass through
the fire and come out clean? No. We were bad 
and only children. We walked into the fire.  
We ate the ash, we licked the bone. 

The failing kidney is a portal — the leaky
    heart valve, the clot, the lesion in the brain:
All doors unlocking themselves. Likewise
    outside the body: the razorblade,
The bottle of barbiturates, the utility pole
    beside the curve in the icy highway,
The rifle over the mantelpiece (it must
    go off). He understands the radio
On the shelf by the bath in particular
    as a crystal hatchway, hermetically unsealing,
Leading, after a prelude of unspectacular
    fireworks, to a region beyond
The invention of the hinge and the hasp,
    where jamb and lintel are less
Than ugly rumors, and nobody has
    a key to worry over, wear out,
Misplace, twist off, or jangle obsessively.

As a sycamore on 104th
makes plastic bags fettered to limbs
into garments of muslin and wind,
so have you filled me with holes.
As a fox sparrow under a hedge
behind a fence twits and prets
and goes unnoticed, so have your
small touches worked into my fourth
ventricle an unspoken chorus
I can’t call up and can’t forget.
I forgot to tell you when you left
how I swallowed you while we slept —
not as in the throat, as in
the bird, its unsung note.

They strung up the clowns
Because it was already a circus.

Because the musicians were still playing and
            Bears were common.

Because the harlequin's head perched above the ruff,
            Never seemed to belong to him.

Because the clowns laughed at the accusation
            And turned on their too large heels in leaving.

Because the girl had gone missing.

Because the auguste already knew the finite properties of air
            And had been spinning in it.

Because the clowns were tumbling toward the train
            And the town could not bear more loss.

Because the approaching winter was already
            Wielding darkness in its fists.

Because the earth let out a throaty guffaw
            As the town thrust the clowns in it.

Already what I knew to be true
is all tenses: has changed, is changing,
will change. No more planet
Pluto. Welcome Nunavut.
I heard the Spanish alphabet dumped
the long lazy roll of the doble ele,
and though I’ve since been corrected,
I liked it better when I thought it retired
to mango plantations, blue parrots screaming
overhead. Pretty soon farewell to polar bears
and the very last card catalog
and my parents — and haven’t you too
wondered of your friends who will go first,
and will it be anything like The Big Chill
and if yes, which one of you gets
to be Kevin Kline in tiny gray shorts?
It’s easier to say goodbye to places
because they’re what you carry with you
and after enough new driver’s license photos
you actually pull a good one: nice hair,
something resembling a chin. Sometimes
I miss only stupid things: a set of blue
plates we stole three apartments ago,
the perfect shade of green they turned
under a thin coat of yolk. Their chipped
lips. Better to focus on the plates
than which one of you will die first. Envy
the television hippopotamus you watched
together on the last night in your old place.
The dry British narrator: Their courtship
is quick. She tries not to drown.

The main plotlines are never important.
As in Shakespeare, it’s merely the precis
Over which laureate neighbors quiver.
Remember the Judge, crying, indignant,
Remember Rodney, heckling him with loud
Wild bets. After the gumball scuffle scene
And some caddy in a half nelson cried,
They’re off to the green world to choose up teams,
A tourney decided by bombfire. The slobs —
Dancing to Journey, a saturnalian
Gang bang on the grass — have beaten the snobs.
Chased by Rodney’s goons, the Judge, Shylockian,
Pulls out Willy, his Excalibur club,
For one last swing in sweltering Bushwood.

Suppose everything depends on being loved
by the others. When you root in the night-heap              
you are special to them: they see your coat             
           as though it were hung across the moon
to dry, and they love you. What they believe is 
that they live by the sharp of your teeth; it's true —
everything which comes to them 
                                              goes first 
           through the cool industry of your watch,
and those legs all smaller things run before. If
you love them, you hunt. If they love you,
it is best that you forget it, when a doe tacks hard

into the wash of the stream, and where your kind
has always been going is exactly where you are —
that gentle bed, doing what you love. There is no 
single word for the charity of your smile.

A lost voice gets in the cereal box, eats
the oats. Six months later,
you pour the voice into a bowl, it’s dead,
you give it anyway mouth to mouth.
Your wife comes home, sees your lips
haven’t been alone, accuses you of making out.
When you kick the radiator
in your divorced apartment, no heat rises.
Somewhere a woman
walks up to the weather and mimes the storm.
Your letter home is sent by accident
to the clink. “I miss you,” a condemned man
reads on the five hundredth Tuesday
of his near-death experience. In return
he writes, “You have handwriting
capable of pulling an inside job.”
Somewhere a woman
slips a note through a slot. “This is a robbery.
Give me all the screaming you’ve got.”

There, just in front of the jetty, a boy had drowned
after a boat wake sucked him down. I know him.
To understand, to remember his name places me
among the several damned. It is of the best days.
The earth, fresh. The surfers practice
their cursives on the waves. That part of the beach
is cordoned off by yellow caution streamers
which click in the wind. Kids fly their kites by the scene,
while parents beckon them back to their proper blankets.
I am becalmed. The ocean pools around me
crossing itself back into itself. I too am
a boy and therefore, a camera — the glittering
sun-sea continuum is all I know of the world.
But it is not the world, and this shoal
has its share of ghosts. Each curl
comes forth to wash me, clavicle to femur,
my elbow tucked under my hand
as I hold my arm tight to my body. Stick
straight, I withstand each buffet, spray
on my lips and the cold fastidious fingers
of ocean water down my length.
Sand, like a thin mustard plaster on my back,
I shred the grains as I move. A scatter-fire of selves
leap into the water. I am trying my best
to wade to the boats, but the white
intensity of the sun holds me. Beneath me
does not look like the grave of anybody,
anybody at all. It is just green and loll. The diatoms
join and part and join again.
The gulls skirl above my head, sacramental
and in crescendo. They speak for my voice
because things are as they are. Slim islands
rise, just within my view and I imagine
the dead boy is there, reigning over a procession
of candles and crosses. His ankles
festooned with peonies and he is forever
twelve. I want to talk to that boy. I want to hold
his hand and walk headlong to the horizon.
I want the masts of the tall ships to not be
funerary wands but kindling branches
held aloft to steer us from the depths
of these deep seas. Let the blood in my body
drag me down awhile. Let the coral
and the moray eel open pathways for us in the reef.
Let me remember a boy who was a boy.

Who could help it — chalked hop-scotch
on the sidewalk, don’t we always jump?
Now I know elephants do not appear in clouds,
and no one puts messages in a bottle anymore,
but there was the massage: empty apartment,
tall ceilings, white walls, windowsill candles,
and across the pub table you did offer
a pot of gold at this end of the rainbow —
so who said yes to climbing pigmy oaks,
hanging up-side-down for pictures,
and climbing the air in playground swings
passing each other in opposite directions,
yes, to playing air-hockey left-handed,
yes, to skin and eyelashes and fingernails on skin?
I did. And you did. Even if the message reads,
No one ever wins; we’re always chasing a tail,
pretending to play fair, pretending love
is a possibility tangible as plastic pucks,
telling ourselves that this time will be
different. Last time I watched him smell
tomatoes in the garden: cupping his hands,
scooping the leaves like water to his face.
Last time those hands made me come,
last silences curved and hollow as a conch.
Hold it to your ear and hear God creating.
Didn’t we trust that voice once? So much
like a mother’s, shaping hope with the shape
of a mouth always moving yet also poised
to receive what we to had to offer,
a body for holding, a body for breathing
which wasn’t and somehow was enough,
is enough. It has been broken for you,
I have been broken for you. Will you part
your lips to receive me as the host
the morning we prepare breakfast?
I’ll brew coffee and you’ll harvest rosemary
for eggs. And in this communion, light
will play a game too: now you see me,
now you don’t. And we will believe
the other will emerge from a blind spot,
for a moment brilliant and glowing.

Stop the car. There. Now
breathe with me. That broken
Ford needs only a swift kick
to set it right. Listen. The radio
man says For Sale, says Believe.
You believed in me. I believed
in highways. We fell in love.
I’m sorry. I know this bone-white
sky isn’t right. I had to see it
myself. Stare down the throat
of a double-wide, walk the blasted
streets of Billings. This was me,
years before you. I wanted to say
Montana again, and mean it.
Yes. I know. It’s never enough.
The world is mostly broken.
But listen. Breathe with me
here. Taste the dust. We have
three days of highway. I’ll drive,
carry these nowhere bones. Home.

A woman walks to the river every day,
out of a Babylon of wild horses and insubordinate
goats, her white dress flows off her like milk.
She carries a scale and a vase and her blindfold
has slipped enough to let her see
the path that avenues through boulders
moonburst with lichen and the cave
near the apple trees draped with snakes.
She walks to the water, where her dress falls
from her, where her blindfold decorates
the stones crowding the river’s edge, where
she slides into the smoky water glowing like a moon.
The elders watch from their blind
of olive trees that smell green in the sun
and the air smells of granite and pine
and beneath the bright, too bright, sun,
the stone smells only of itself.

Our napkins have sailed
lap to lip, lie stained with the same
shadow settled in empty cups,
twilight loosening visual hold.
Sunset isn’t finished yet,
sky still working the color of rosehip —
I’m hoping for a steeped pink
that may never come.
Ruann says she has a gift
for reading tea leaves, washed-up
bits claiming symbiotic dreams —
she doesn’t want to hear about
my life’s cause-and-effect,
an old brew of past choices,
patterns and directions
even I don’t bother to read.
My bad mood deflected
by Ru’s upbeat,
who turns on the patio light,
telling me I’ve got nothing
to worry about, a new job
at the bottom of my cup.
Her neighbor meanwhile
is out in his yard again,
misting his red dangling
fuchsias, spying on us
through that hole in the fence,
the greedy eye of hard times
already staring me down.

And she will slap me & slam
out of this story.
Another prison narrative
ending in photography.
We were drinking chamomile tea,
contemplating international apples.
You were having a good visit with your spirit
& a terribly awkward friend.
Now at the airport, a person
who has difficulty with authenticity
climbs out of her plastic bags.
In actions as well as words,
we are sorry.
Lately you’ve been glistening
in & out of luck,
filling one notebook after another.
Lately you’ve been wandering.
I faced east to know you
but you were already recording
our farewell music,
a tinny drum & just a few bells…

There go the dead leaves, there go
the sticks. She is rushing, anxious
to usher away the last rain.
What moving water says to the senses:
We are all connecting, concocting
means of reaching into each other’s
being. You’ll rot knocking into your own
walls. Water will wear down the walls
of the shack that has sat on the edge
of the creek since before the first
storm of three, the three big storms
that sank us into dissipation.
Deep in the creek wait the remains
of the roots of the tree that made
the shack. Any gaze sustains it: yours,
mine, suspends it between rain
and creek, inviting and heavy, wanting it
back. Look away and let it go back.

Rain brings the husband home early,
white dots specking his neck and skull,
a primered knuckle through the milk jug
without apology for the swig
or cold hand on her breast. Downed lines
mean dark when he’d rather have sun
to finish the job, or if here, like now, inside her,
light to watch himself by (and her), overalls
at his ankles, spattered with the colors
of the housewives of the neighborhoods.
Naked he’s hers again, until the throb of power
restored, the refrigerator
kicking in, and under the stairs
where his ribs anchor hers to the floor,
a bare bulb burning into her eyes.
Outside — the deck slick, boots
warped with chill, amphibious —
there’s his forehead to kiss
and the letdown of thunder, the crotch
of her jeans gritting along her skin’s
seam. At her feet, to the spit
of soaked gravel (his retreating tires)
a handful of furred sow’s ears listen
for spring without head or brain.

As the story goes, the raven’s wings
aren’t black. They’re waves, capping
dark omens. Crows with curtained throats.
Who knows what falls from the shelf
inside us. Even gods skin their knees
to bleed. The man at the end of the aisle
is pocketing two-for-one toothbrushes.
The cashier is hand-perking her breasts
and picking her teeth with a receipt.
I’m sorry you won’t see your son, his skin
peeling its white scarf through blizzards.
I haven’t sanded the road, won’t
strut across town in my ballet slippers.
Your shape in this bed is my shape.
Erase my whole notes from your page.
Two stoplights ago, the wind
off a pickup pulled us further from home.
When I said the moonlight made graves
to square off the night, I meant to say
pull over. Listen: my heart’s a gutter
of ravens tugging at the firmament.

Suppose I’ll go then to the hardware store
where they still hang steel buckets for bulk nails
I weigh and bag in a small paper sack.
Wander past chain links wound tight on wooden
spools. And rope displays. I test its rough threads,
the hewn braid snaps taut in my hands. Pulling
shroud-laid twine through a fist, I clench
a flame that burns from nothing. My raw palm.
I need the industry of things, flat heads
heavy in a breast pocket, their points cut
the bag, my chest, when I find you alone
watching the road, and force a long embrace.

Another day in the cloak and dagger biz,
blue-eyed contacts one day, brown, then gray.
Carbon fiber pen, explosive watch and six
documents to plant in a diplomat’s bungalow.
Eating lamb tournedos at a cafe in Kiev,
Falafal, in a brown bag, the color of ecru.
Grand views over trees hanging their russet
heads near the Aisne or Tagus rivers.
I’m a specialist of disguise, slick, a master
juggling times, roles. Off-the-chart IQ.
Keen-eyed kite above the canyon’s lip,
lofted on a column of air, watchful, so
meticulously prepared. I know things men
never admit, even to themselves, the golem
opening from outstretched palms. Dull
promises of green valleys beyond, a quick,
quiet death — not for me. I’m a late night DJ
rocking the radio waves, a warrior’s hari-kari
shriek on a cold night. Bodies lie in a swath
that streaks from Syracuse to Syria. A gig
under two managers, that’s all it is. A stiff
violation of national security? They’ll have
weeks of old trails and counter-trails: I lead
x amount of lives, each dusted with talc.
You hunt for The Snake while we confab:
zeroes and ones I’ve shaped into a cobra.

All gospels spell it out the same way. In the beginning,
     there was a promising baseball card collection
and casserole dinners. From there, the stories diverge.
     One goes thus: an invitation begot a coffee break
begot a matinee begot her legs wrapped tightly
     around his legs begot a mortgage begot a child.
The child wasn't the child they wished for but he was
     a child. He had many qualities that marked him
as a child. His first word was alpha, the word they knew
     him by thereafter. He grew and lived among them
until they kicked him out for general laziness. Take
     a bath, they called. Take your comic books. Take
a hike, so he hiked for forty minutes at a comfortable pace
     of forty meters per hour. Then he spent time
wandering the desert in his Honda Civic hatchback,
     drinking from a canteen and talking to stick figures
he drew in the sand. Then he cast himself down
     on a friend's couch. He mastered Metroid there,
perfected Mac and Cheese. There he gathered men
     around him, saying "Let's go fish," saying, "Someone
bring some goddamn beer." Someone brought some goddamn beer.
     They fashioned a fishing boat from a life raft,
cast out nets and caught lake trout. That night
     they feasted on everything but bones.
An "I-Can't-Stand-My-Father" chant started up,
     but soon it lost their interest.
Someone pointed to the stars and said, "We made all this.
     Can you believe it?" No one could believe it.

In Pasig, they put up a wall of facades
to make every day a kind of Easter ––
gaudy resurrection, behind which the city
crowds, tin roofs like a completed puzzle
someone has pushed up against a wall. This is all
in order to say, of course, that artifice
is either end of a magnet, depending on who
feels worse that day, you or your imagination.
For me, the latter, no contest –– I appreciate
breakfasts of pandesal with strawberry jam,
and realize that the permanence of dead fish
is not a zero-sum equation. I’m fine, thank you
for asking. But those roofs, that Pepto-pink
blockade damming them from the loud streets ––
maybe I’ll arch over it, gather several
banana leaves on each arm like glossy flight feathers
and wave myself over everything covered
in dust and scales, flail over the thick of it
because nothing that’s awkward is worth doing
halfway. I did not intend originally for this
to become a metaphor for loving you, but here,
see how unsettlingly yellow this mango is?
Are you afraid of that sweetness? It’s all right ––
the Pasig river asphyxiates itself nearly daily.
I am made of green things rising despite
themselves, of an uncomfortable wet heat,
and in these sidelong spaces I’m willing
to admit that the current end of all motion
would be to push up against your turned back
in the morning, forbidden and quiet and pale.

What do you do during communion? Sit on your hands.
Count each body around you as it stands, measure
the width of the gaps. Conjugate Latin verbs.
Laudo: To praise. Study the clerical collar: the rib
of an infant, a nest, a shield. Press your hands
against the ridged metal bleachers until they are lined
like sheet music. Follow the trajectory of hymns
as they rise above you and through the court’s high basket.
Laudant: They praise: They cup the right palm over
the left, they guide the chalice to their lips. You conjure
your imaginary minyan. Catalogue the smells of the high
school make-shift chapel: popcorn, dust, rubber, wax.
Laudas: You praise: You cover your eyes with your palm,
name Adonai in your father’s tongue. Count the red shirts,
then the white ones. Guess the weight of the invisible
star you carry inside your body: more or less than a bowl
of ash, a mouth of fire. What do you do during
communion? Look at your hands. Count the bodies
as they return. Feel the star pushing against your skin,
your shirt. Paint a landscape: the chapel a field of light
filled trees, and you a single leaf on a broken olive branch,
wild and rootless, unable or unwilling to graft.

Remember that twisty gravel two-track 
that crunched under our boots, from hopping off 

the jetty to slouching into town? No, not even
a town. A clutch of green and pale blue

houses and a church. There's always a church. 
And I was saying, "Lily, have you ever —" 

but then a raspy 
                              trrr-tree-ar! 
                                                   and then a "what 
           the shit!" 
                              and then 
a needley flash 
                                          of black and 

                    white zizzed right 

into my head —
                              Arctic terns

will divebomb anything that stumbles 
too close, so we must've tramped right by

oblivious to the speckly eggs plopped down 
in grassy dimples you can only see

if you're looking. Well, now we're looking. 
"The trick," the old priest smiled, "is to carry 

a big stick. Not to swing, but whatever 
comes near, terns will zero in and spike 

the top of it. So a stick held high could save 
your scalp." Which would've been good to know

ten minutes ago. Stickless, we ducked
into church to see the murals a wandering Catalan 

painted back in '65, in trade for a pew 
to sleep on and three squares a day. 

Baltazar knew what he was doing, alright. 
He ate well all summer. I forgot my bleeding head

when I saw his blond Christ in a snowflake
covered sweater, not flanked by thieves 

but arm-in-arm with a pair of sheep farmers —
actual locals, twin bachelors who'd only

recently died, the priest confided (handing me
a bandage), quite happily in their sleep.

Last night I dreamed you
lost as an old shoe lying,
strings untied, on the macadam.
I’m speeding down the road,
and you are everywhere I look:
brushy bluestem, thick with abandon.
Dented mailbox, gravel drive,
fake flowers nailed
to the tree trunk at the curve.
A flock of small birds
darkens with synchronized turning.
Silvers, veering back again.

Let's undress & let our bodies float above us.
The moon is new as pitch & given
enough time, the river will brush out the mountain,
so it is better to start off with sex
than with longing. We call this fashion. But the bed
& the tumbling of bodies, this is an ending.

Then how do we begin?                   Fully clothed.
No. This is boring.                          Yes. We need tits.
No. Less terminal. Ankles?              Yes. Wrists.
Yes. Vulnerable. The memory of both soft spot & skull.

Yes. Let's just make a pair of cat faces for a masquerade.  Or
give me your hand & we'll meander. Forget the moon,
the mount, the ocean & the hard-on. Forget the body's tangle.
We don't need the ocean. I know. I've seen every beachhead
from Normandy to your doorstep & 
this is not the ocean.                        This is oxygen.
Listen. The moon is pitched & new again. No more, no less.
Listen. Cartilage. Bronchiole. Alveolus. Artery. Night sky.
Yes. 

Oh, loved, beloved, you are dew on the jewel-weed,
sheep among the lilies. The apple branch. The rapture
of bats and stars and grass singing, warm as new wine.
You are
the loved, my beloved — light in the bone, tender green,
the dinner bell ringing; aprons on the line — yellow muslin
and green — you are the end of the world and the first unfurling.
You are
the love, lemon and rind. Soft pine, cicada, swamp and vine.
Cattails at the edge of the road. Blue-eyed dragonfly.
Moon. Friend. Lizard in the woodpile. Sweet surprise.
You are the sky between my arms —

I.
The wind throws bones
before she rises: the boiled,
the worried, the whistle-clean
and twisted, she asks them
what is happening to her.
“A storm is coming,” old men
say, reduced to aching bridle joints
that go, and go, and nowhere.
Dogs roll over like spadefuls
of dirt and wait for the sky
to weigh on them. Fresh
kills and former lakes
come down. It has rained
stranger things: strays
and swallows, bellmetal
and open doors, red meat torn
from hinges and raised off
like roofs. Eyefuls of anything
pour down and solve the ground
till bladefuls of grave roll over.
II.
It happens the same way
every year: the cliff is a pale
uprising, a man is marked
and eases down the air,
streaming behind a hitch
in the throat, streaming behind
the bridling hair, unsolving
as he falls and falling still
past deep drifts of unbury.
Each year he lands and drowns
an acre of yield. Say the word
died this way, his side
still pouring oxbow and meander;
say he was buried by rising
gorge and red dogs tracked
his old-rose in and out;
and say there was no cave.
Say that rimstone and relief
do not exist, that air bells
are not ringing, that pitch and parts
per million are impossible.
Say there is no rill or shall,
say a hum is not a hill, say
he did not find a well
to give back his bucket-eyed head.

The stores ran out of butter every day.
So you ran out, escaped your parents’ house,
the crystal vases and the crystal bowls
of caviar. You were crystal too,
but hollow and ringing to the finger’s touch.
Around the corner, you heard a Polonaise
pushed from the lungs of some winded instrument.
The sky was soot, or else beet soup. So sour
you bought the one limp pastry at the bakery,
your mouth stuck shut with rose petal jam.
You dreamed of warmth though you were always cold.
You dreamed of fleeing west, of white cites
where the word for hunger had ten synonyms,
and desire was a shopping cart to wheel
across the concrete floor. And everything
was an open hand wanting to be filled.

Already the panic has begun. The questions: Who will crash? What 
                    will burn out? Instead of generators flaring, transformers blowing up —

          power shriveled and disintegrating into gray sky — lightning surges 

          in gunmetal bursts. No footprints on the sidewalks like those 
on Mexican beaches, spring break: no sirens to rescue the helpless, 

                    beheaded, the drug lords and headlines of shattered families 

we keep reading about. I want so badly now to hold you under this sky, 
                    but already you’re asleep, as lights pop on and off in massive dilation, 

          the snow swirling in and out against rattling windows. We hear fire trucks 

          and minor collisions at the end of an alley. Our power wavers: 
A car into a telephone pole? A dying limb collapsing powers lines? 

                    We’ve never seen the city like this: where wars weren’t reenacted, 

where horses trampled through grass before street grids, unlike Pennsylvania,
                    where school was never cancelled, where we drove drunk after last call, 

          roads never too slick for us to handle. There are few cars now, 

          three floors below, wheels spinning as they turn from street to street. 
I’m sure we’re not the only onlookers — children want to bury their hands, 

                    challenge frostbite and everything unknown. You asked me the other day 

how we ended up in Richmond, or maybe how you ended up here, and I 
                    took the how to mean why. Still I keep waiting for rats to scuttle 

          and zigzag from sewer to sewer, but the storm doesn’t tempt them. 

          The same with squirrels, who can’t be found, who care nothing about 
electricity, out now for who-knows-how-long. I imagine unmonitored 

                    fireplaces, roofs weighted to collapse, hidden circuit sparks 

waiting to catch curtains: anything that will burn. But we’re safe now, 
                    we think, and consider ourselves the smart ones, not out swerving 

          over roads: necessary drives toward dying fathers, perpetual business trips, 

          addicts shuddering through alleys to find warmth in their veins. 
We have candles burning, our battery-less flashlight crank-turned 

                    and shining. There are those assuming this will be the end, 

feverishly kissing as only six inches come down, and for the moment 
                    I want to be next to them as the snow changes to hail, pocking 

          the white pool on our balcony. On the other side of our country, 

Californians flee from wildfires. The fifty who died months ago 
                    in the Buffalo plane crash may look down upon us now, unable 

          to lend forgiveness. Tomorrow we’ll hear of fuel trucks separating 

          on the interstate, splitting slowly as the hail turns to rain, 
to black ice and its chaotic invisibility. The lightning rips like distant 

                    and seconds-long bombs, and while no one reaches their fire escapes, 

some have packed and, for now, left this world behind, while others 
                    take let’s-make-love-before-we-die as the only thing they have.

          You may be asleep right now, but without the fan whirring 

          its white noise, the silence will keep me awake all night,
streetlights still flickering in blackness, while children, with school 

                    cancelled for days, remain tucked inside their beds. 

What we want is to say we feel something: the this-may-be-it 
                    that we live through, the ton of metal beneath us 

          when flat tires skid our families toward the guardrail. And in this city 

          of grids and apartments and always-just-miles-away shootings, 
we’re locked into something now, something we tell ourselves 

                    will not end in ash, drifting down, only to blanket us all.

I know spring by the hawk pinning down songbirds
in my neighbor’s yard,
the little Ophelias crying in their blown-away silks
that the sky
has lied, a hedge has lied.
Then the pool
of chaos — the hawk in clench and drill and
thresh.
How quickly the song goes out of them. The
aftermath, soft,
circular. A labyrinth in ruins
I let the wind blow through
for days.
And then the rain, its soaking drench. Sun.
On the back porch slab the arterial runs of worms
dried
to a beaten silver even the stars might envy.
The trails a Silk Road crawled
body and spice
to the far cities, moist domains. And so now I stand
and the moon hangs as bold
as talon.
The black teeth whisper — narrow seeds — as the column
fills. The dead are not my worry,
slave to song.
Finch: come back. Cardinal, wren.
That one bird on that one branch
like Coltrane
on a cylinder of smack.
From high in the stacks of the power plant
where it nests,
the hawk banks
the pollen-heroined air of the neighborhood, sifts for
sparrow, muscle and throat.

look aside while i lift my hem
(in some cases the lure dangles, the female simply
eats the male)
nestle in, my sisters left their ghastly asters
on the coverlet.
working tongue. the body replete.
a visceral epistle.
(tear at the membrane
the water fins in)

We examine the ratios of spheres: Pluto
an atom next to the moon, the moon a freckle
on the skin of the sun, the sun a gold fleck
in the eye of Pollux, itself dwarfed
by smoldering Antares — there is always
something bigger. Later, I pack you into me
like a Russian doll, and we draw the curtains
of our eyelids against the freeway’s distant glow,
foglights combing the walls of our tent
like spectral fingers. Morning reveals
we are surrounded by Winnebagos. Still
the blue-eyed grass hosts the violinning
of crickets, the skirring parabolas of rattlers
through the prairie, a wildness audible
around the edges of the parking lot
we mistook for wilderness. There is always
something smaller to knock out of your boots
in the morning. From the pink constellation
of bites on your ankles we infer
motivation: You’re sweetest here. And here. And
here where the yellow-gray vertebral earth
holds our thumbprints for a moment before
turning to chalk, and here where the glass roof
lets the sky inside, and here where the tourists
snapping pictures are a brief galaxy
of flashbulbs refulgent as stars.

To move is to experience pain. To turn
the head, impossible. The bone shattered
as easily as the glass window, and the cord,
the spinal cord, knew its fortress of bone
had been weakened by assault. The room,
in its mottled grays, smelled like Lysol,
smelled like the bitter chemical of cleanliness.
To say “trapped” would be imprecise.
To say “restrained” would be a misnomer.
And on the television hung in the corner
of the room, Bruce Lee had entered the dirt
courtyard, his arms cycling and cycling,
his cry a warning to the men circling the pit.
“Enter the Dragon.” I had seen it before.
But I was not Bruce Lee. I was the man
broken by Bruce Lee’s leaping hands — hands
to the head, hands to the neck. And I know
now that the cracked bone is not necessarily
a broken bone. I know this now. I have studied
long enough to become those men who stood
by my bed in white coats. But still, when I go back,
there is the Dragon and the broken glass, the vertebra
shattered, the body forced to lie still. I know better now.
I know how to throw my voice, how to lie, to reassure
someone he will live, that he will, in fact, not die.

To coax out your spirit I left a fifth of Cutty Sark
on the highboy, paper lantern in the cherry tree,
map of indeterminable coast by the bed, borrowed
Tempest, tattersall-covered, in the bed, full-fathom
five, a crushed Mexican lily, born of paper from
our tax holiday you lined the sea with, a stop-gap,
while I sheltered upstairs on a cool wide spread,
waiting for you to die. Love-making was never easy,
but to transcribe it? Minus a mouth, your tear-jerkers
turn to gas and fly. I sink into your syntax one
antiquated line at a time, as if I understand. But I
never did. You are too much for me, even dead.

I’m thinking of living forever.
I think that way I might finally
get my gig straight and solve the crosswords.
I’m considering outlasting everyone
although I know I’d have a hard time
explaining not having read Ulysses
past the first chapter.
I don’t care if death smells like nutmeg.
I don’t buy the plotline on eternal rest.
By staying alive someday
I might manage to hail a taxi,
and fulfill my father’s wish
of reaching town without a red light.
I couldn’t expect to avoid anger or brooding
or to make the journey with my beasts appeased.
But I might walk vast expanses
of earth and always be beginning
and I love beginning
or could learn
to love it.

A house. A bridge. A mountain. How many features
make up a landscape, how empty the canvas.
Our books repeat the seven basic plots.
Another adds, “We’re just a pack of neurons.”
Then we forget everything.
Is this the twilight of the golden age?
An hour in a museum — and I know all about art.
A day in a foreign city — and I know all cities.
A week with you — and I know love.
(Two more weeks, I know the end of love.)
Our lives are comfortable, long.
We go to the movies, even when no movies are playing.
We keep ourselves interested — games, travels,
sometimes a party — till we die from some accident
or disease, but mostly boredom.
Every morning we proclaim: “The world is within
my understanding.” What’s stopping us, though?
These marble hands. These limestone eyes.
The boiling earth. The swollen sun.

Had you been able to see your mother
when she was young and slim and loved to dance
you would not be so swift to dismiss her.
She swayed then with that charming elegance
that only young women command, that grace
of figure and motion that makes young men
forget that all grow old, that all replace
their parents, then yield earth to their children.
In those brief moments of dance, when her dress
would cling to her here, and swirl from her there,
she became beauty itself: pure, changeless,
and ecstatic. Though time made her austere,
and age slowed her, young men would once opine,
I wish I were the shadows on her skin.

In this city whose name you can’t pronounce —
where women pace barefoot in dry grass and rusting
bottle caps, sandals in hands, skirts trailing for days;
where old men pack grocery aisles, tens of them, alone,
palming blocks of Edam; where flower-sellers, mustached,
slick-haired, silk ties cinched tightly, flit restaurant to restaurant
like rumors, roses spilling from their arms, pockets full of coins,
while outside, street kids release firecrackers from paper shrouds;
where paraders roam squares, scarves waving,
whose chants rise even as the bottles fall to stone;
where girls in wooden fair-booths, eyes study-weary
beneath the ridiculous haberdashery of corporate America,
slice salami for bankers and tourists and the hungry poor
with soiled bills outstretched — I think of you.
You told me once you’d rather do without all that,
that you’d only ever have one home and that wasn’t it,
that you’d never call this home, said you’d never
lost anything here. Home is the place we lose things:
daylight hunched over engines and their elegies
to oil, the decades of dust; money year after year
bailing your boys out of jail in towns with names
familiar as worn flannel; sleep, teeth (one to an apple,
one to a walnut you find nestled in black leaves
behind a church); your fear of losing me every time
I return to feel your stubble against my cheek.
Here, thousands of birds on spires and antennae
raise their terrible throats to the morning
as though they’d never met. Right now
I am alone in a train car with a girl you’ll never know,
and as we idle at a border crossing, eyeing each other’s passports
for the first time, she gives me handfuls of radishes,
and I know I will lose her, lose whole days pacing alleys
in the cobbled pastels of this city I will also lose,
which will become, as I speed away from it, my home.

Five o’clock in the listening room,
autumn. Apples, ripe as poppies,
are dropping from the sky. Outside
beside the balustrade the Son of Man
is not hiding. He is not balding. Hello.
We dance to Philip Glass. (People
think when Jesus said “The Son
of Man” he meant himself. But
we know they’re wrong.) And how
the blind god lies, saying, Ceci
n’est pas une pomme, saying,
Pleasure is here. Take it.
That’s where the blind god’s
got it wrong. That’s where
the Son of Man takes off his mask—
it is not the apple of lust or
temptation. It is just an apple:
core and seed and flesh.

No longer can I just climb through—the time
Is past for going back. But you are there
Still conning books in Hebrew, right to left,
Or moving little jars on the dresser top
Like red and white pieces on a chessboard. Still
You look up curiously at me when I pass
As if you’d ask me something—maybe why
I’ve left you locked inside. I’d say because
That is where I’d have reflections stay,
In surfaces, where they cannot disquiet,
Shallow, for all that they seem deep at bottom;
Though it’s to you I look to set things right—
(The blouse askew, hair silvering here and here)—
Where everything reverses save for time.

I want to name stars the way Ian Fleming named women.
Every falling star a Domino Vitali,
The star of Bethlehem rechristened Vesper Lynd,
The pole star reliably Moneypenny.
Bodies celestial deserve such invention,
And not just the stars, the blonde comets too.
Name one for Honey Rider coming
Again and again, almost the same gold
As Botticelli’s Ursula Undress
Holding her own seashell on Crab Kythera.
Imagine our own lonely Sol
Stripped bare
Letting us in on her full name,
Solitaire,
And the implacable black hole
At our galaxy’s core
Pussy Galore.
2. The Short and Happy Life of Plenty O’Toole
This one died in golden paint,
Fleshious metal, trophy blonde.
This one splashed among piranhas.
This one, while she danced with Bond,
Swung in his arms as a pistol rose,
Took the bullet, and took a dip.
This one licked some poison dripped
Down a thread onto her lip.
This one suffered death by hammock,
Strangled in its rope cocoon.
This one drowned herself in Venice,
The only one who died too soon.
How much better so to perish,
Well before the next year’s film;
Not to move into his flat,
Wipe his sink, or cook for him;
Mix the drink, then see him irked you
Served him his martini stirred.
Even worse, for all the jam he
Wipes on his pyjama shirt,
Old man’s diet, tea and toast
(How old is he? Ninety-four?),
He can go to sleep in sagging
Age and wake as Roger Moore,
Only in his dossier
Rotting like a Dorian Gray.
Leave the balcony unlocked
And he’ll slip out for days and days,
Where he’s gone top secret, always,
Never one Wish You Were Here.
He recalls them by their perfumes,
Names them, like champagnes, by year.
3. Hymn to Sean Connery
Connery, how did I end up
A double o thirty-year-old
Father of two?
So must all international adolescents of mystery
Grow into men domestically mastered —
For the hand that starts out as a Walther PPK,
Knuckles by the cheek, index finger in the air,
Ages into a handshake
And signs, signs, signs away,
And time, that strolls past the daydreaming
Camera shutter
Has been known to turn without warning
And with the gun hidden at its side
Shoot daydreamers dead,
The circle swaying to and fro
Before it tumbles to the lower right hand corner,
Goes white, and dilates
Into the first scene
Of the rest of a life.
Connery, before the baccarat, you too
Held earthly burdens, earthly offices —
Bricklayer, coffin polisher, milkman;
Connery, eternal bachelor, may I too
Someday unzip this mortal scuba suit
And reveal the tuxedo beneath.

Fog this morning. Thick. And loving the thick bodies 
of live oaks, the skinny-hipped cypress. The way 
                                                            fog is the world before me, 
closes the world behind me. 
                                                Still I know the river 
is there. We move south together, each bend 
and turn of ourselves.
⊕

Near Midnight, Mississippi, the steep-banked roil 
of the Yazoo slows, spreads, 
                                    hangs like the one time 
as a boy I saw my grandmother. Naked. Her belly.
⊕

See how the cypress reaches into swamp water? Into dead leaves?
Into mud? Can you imagine? Mud 
                        what you love? In this world of six winds mud the one 
thing that holds you? You hold?
⊕

I must be lost. The ocean, 
            this great-swallowing body, has taken
the highway, the trees, my river. I walk waveblown sand. Scrub 
                                                                        a grit of it from my eyes. 

We know so little. We must believe
in everything. So let us pray: 
                                                            To grandmothers and rivers, 
pray. To thick oaks and any town called Midnight, 
pray. To sagging, naked bellies, to mud in your hands, 
                                                                        my mouth of sand, 
pray. To fog and this morning from the fog 
                                    like dark revelation, the blackbirds rising.
                                    Their thousand wings and the one wind a chorus,
                                    an orison that was, I swear, this 

sound of waves, pray.

My father’s heart is a little red car
he parks in the garage with his golf clubs and gun.

My father’s heart is Dick Cheney in a wheelchair
with a black hat on.

My father’s heart is a truckload of tomatoes,
a dead Vargas girl tucked 
under the mounds of waxy fruit.

My father’s heart bleeds and bleeds into a glass tumbler.
He drinks it over ice every day at half past five.

When he dozes off, the moon creeps up 
the walls of his big house, its oleander eye 

making the trees glow outside.
                                           And the leaves 

on the ghost trees quiver. He wakes and looking out 
sees his children in their green, flickering shapes.

My father’s heart leaps with longing; it reels,
but the windows are shut, sealed tight.

And nothing, not even his God, gets in.

So it’s you, all along, to whom I should have prayed,
ruler of ghosts, curses. I dreamed of my father night after night,
wished when I opened my eyes he would be sitting on my bed,
waking me to eat. Each turn down a grocery aisle, I looked
for his cart filled with fruit, coffee. Driving the car
he bought me, I held my hand across the passenger seat,
waited to feel his fingertips. Nothing. Persephone,
I know you didn’t choose Hades, know you make the best of it,
loving the beautiful dead, touring the Underworld with kings,
using the harvest moon’s light to carry out your whims.
I know you don’t give up your dead. But what about
the weakest version of all they used to be, slightest glint
of their eyes, maybe, scent of their hair on a pillow, sheet.
If I offer you gifts of colored glass, fresh evergreen,
silk robes, berries, if I offer to take your place two months
of every year, if I sing at your knees. . . . Iron Queen,
I will pay any price. Just send my father’s ghost.

Giant salamanders, blue-black and purple-black, lie
along the bottom of this stream in Northern China —
I cannot even balance the place’s name on my tongue.
They lie like bruises in the stone-strewn pools, two meters long
and older now than I will ever be. My naked
feet are the moon color of such fish as each night wake
them to hunger. My cold lungs ache. With bankside willows
going gold and half moon hunched where the cloud-flank narrows,
this stream becomes a kind of syrinx that can speak two
languages at once: beneath the perfect fluency
of water you hear salamanders in their submarine
discourse through the rocks and know that tooth-glint, that ghost-rheum
in their eyes. So how does a man cross here and not upset
the surface, cross so that only his shadow gets wet?

Half the year, all we smell is the sewage treatment plant,
down near the boat launch ramp.
And all we hear is the chug of bass boats idling in,
the slide of the hitch pin.
The black-coated dog swims and shakes himself dry. He is
rid of fleas, which weren’t his.
Would that we could rid ourselves of everything not ours:
reverse the birthing hour,
return the beastings to their teats; jizz to its bushed nub.
Cars circle here at night —
They flash their lights at someone in the outhouse shadow
or pass like slinking cats
afraid to taste the stranger’s milk. It’s okay, my dear.
Someone cares for you here.
Were you dying, here’s a fine place for your mangy head.
Hush. Someone’s backing in.

I was told you were buried on the coldest day of the year.  The priest
        allowed the families to pull their cars to the casket
and watch through the windshield, watch as your brother broke
        his ankle punching the knife-edge blade of a shovel
into the hardened ground for your headstone.
        Someone suggested a pick axe, boiling water, 
a handful of salt to accelerate the thaw.

that the week before, you walked around the house,
        placing pennies and aspirin in your flower vases to keep them alive,
watching the pennies sink hard, the aspirin dissolve like paper umbrellas, 
        forgetting that hair is the first to go in sickness
that it comes apart in the teeth of a comb
        comes apart in the hands of others.

I was told that the nurse did her best with bandages,
        a sling made from old bed sheets cinched 
and tied to the meat of your shoulder,
        and how you were amazed that the recoil of a rifle
could be enough to break a jaw. 

My god, it must have been something to see — the children in the backseats
        heads bowed, asleep or praying, 
the priest stealing away to the columbarium —
        a respite from the wind, 
as your brother used his good ankle to kick a spade 
        into the frozen ground, shaving back strips of earth
like the peel of an orange until the stone stood upright. 

And how the rest of the family, hunched in the headlights       
        breathing small prayers, warm air into the palms
of their hands, offered what they could:  an ungloved hand to turn 
        the pages of the bible, another to strike the matches
and light the candles. I was told they returned to their cars,
        windows cracked, where they could draw enough breath 
to hear each other sing.

They hump like grunts in a long line
down out of the woods, all black
against the snow, and go behind
the house to a rally point out back
to eat from piles of corn feed
we put out there to ease their lot,
hoping that tonight at least
they won’t starve. Some get shot
as a matter of course, others freeze
before the winter’s out, some
are taken quickly by diseases
only the birds know, and some
troop on with their heads down,
not wanting to be found.

You start in the garden. I start
in the fruit. In the wasp who penetrates
the fruit, her gauzy abdomen silver.
Each egg she lays costs the tree one
potential offspring. Each pollinator
must be worth it. I start in the inner
ovule, the small ear-shaped flowers
filled with eggs. I start where a million die
and one survives. You start at the opposite end.
We arrive in the middle to contemplate
the darkling wasp, the child insect
under the hull, under the protein-based
cake-bell, like Jonah’s resolve
in the cavern of whale. Inept, at the very best,
with her gluey wings still sort of stuck
to one another. I start in the stem base.
In the back of the brain where the story has grown
to something funicular, to a singer
swinging on a long, loose cable over
the stage. To the girl with the jump rope.
To the father singing hallelujah. Though,
in starting, I do have thoughts for you. My thoughts
are pacified towards you. I have clung
to order and reason for so long.
I have beloved as you said it, but not
how I saw it. Because you ended on the message
from the lord’s mouth. Because the wasp
bites her way free, makes her flight
to another living tree with all those
sweet sacrifices strung upon it.

I tell you about the little heart that beats in the dead.
I am not dead you say. I am not dead so my heart
beats big you say. My heart beats like a Sony Walkman,
big, duh. My heart is a teenage girl’s eyes, it’s 1998
and Leo will hold on, won’t hold on — the ship is not a little
heart — it’s like God will sink this ship. Why not? This ship beats
like a motherfucker. When I undress, your wrist beats
and I want to sexy talk all over it. Your wrist is dead
weight on my waist. I watch TV and get a little
turned on watching reruns, knowing whose heart
will get eaten last. It’s not like it’s 1998,
and we still have three years till the iPod gives the Sony Walkman
a firefly heart. The firefly died on the day, my Sony Walkman
somewhere out in the desert. Your heart beats
slower in the desert air. Your desert heart is so 1998.
We should be big heads on a movie poster, dead
trumpets left in shallow graves, and your heart
nothing but a spit-stained trombone. This is a little
honest, but I love it when your mouth is a little
shut. I love it when my headphones crackle, when my Sony Walkman
has that little red light. The batteries are dead my heart
whispers in the sexiest falsetto of all time. Really, it beats
the falsettos of the boy bands on my ex girlfriend’s wall. She’s dead,
not really. She’s holed up with some guy she met in 1998,
the same year she saw Titanic eight times in three weeks. In 1998
I was too young to know how to cry with my shoulder blades. Little
by little I crack, her voice a symphony I mute. Your voice is dead
when I’m underwater. I’m flying Jack, I’m flying. My Sony Walkman
is dead when I’m underwater: the batteries don’t say anything: the beats
stagnate. I build your heart a replica heart.
I tell it stories of how it’s so much better than your real heart.
Your replica heart scratches, skips. I blow on it, but it’s not 1998
and two years later the world won’t end, but beats
in your heart will go on. I’m sad enough that a little
piece of me is stuck under a punctured life raft. My Sony Walkman
is an iceberg melting in bath water, almost dead.
Let me draw your naked heart on the couch. My Sony Walkman
is stuck in 1998, is stuck in Rose’s cold breath, almost dead.
It just beats like it only knows how to a little.

Keyboards click, phone lines light up, and before
She’s started it’s noon, then late, then too late,
And she won’t ever catch up entirely.
It seems so much is at stake, but the floor
Thins out, doors lock, the deftly scribbled slate
Is brushed blank; lobbies clear, boardrooms empty,
Leaving the day’s tally, sum, and remainder.
She looks up from the desk to find light gone
Again; thinks of early friends gone distant,
Prospects departed, like an ending summer,
When, in the chill, she could lie on the lawn,
Unable to recall how the months were spent,
When lightning poured rivulets of blue light
And ended, far off, before she saw it.

Is this how the gods see us? Lusty, tangle-
Maned mustangs shifting speeds and angles,
Sparking blue rime off winter ground? You were
The one, Sibyl, they cut from the herd —
Zeroed the loop around your throat, the words
No different than a strangler’s hand, closing.
Woman reduced to a pair of legs, sea-black mare,
Your front hooves shriek high, charging up the air.
When your airway shuts, consider yourself chosen.
The god has pounced on your back,
And, clamping you, he lets you buck
Until the tempest of your temper calms.
Your neck is whispered over by his palms.
He leans and whispers. Broken in, you nod
And turn the verses ridden by your god.
⊕

What divine wind swept us, Sibyl, down
Each other’s throats? What sacred ground
Did we trespass to earn the curse
Of being one another’s first?
We visited no oracles because we knew
Our love had zero future and infinite youth.
No Sibylline leaf or Delphic verse
Would ever riddle to the truth:
How sometimes the most necessary
Journeys, Sibyl, hurry
Lovers to a cemetery
Where the lovers ride on, and the love lies buried,
The long, hard road, Sibyl, the dead-end road
You straddled me and rode.

Sometimes at breakfast a face or two: a magazine
I took from the dentist’s, an interview
with an actor. Lately, getting ready
to go out, I am sure I see the familiar arc
of your body through the screen of the back door,
raking leaves under the maple
again, whatever
that says about me. Now when I go,
I go out the front and into the streets; there are birds there.
It isn’t loneliness, but close; solitude, the way Pam
says we deal by methods that are more
or less practical. Walking,
I feel strangely connected, followed by geese awhile.
It’s the credits of a film about being young
told many years after.
Walking toward a bridge not yet in the frame.

A small man is surrounded 
      by only great, expansive
      land — forever wheat, 
      the horns of steers
      so bright gnats orbit them.  

Disregard what you know 
of Tulsa, the single story
shopping mall and the zit 
faced kid named Albert
who worked the grill 
at the Steer and Shake,
who put bacon on your burger, 
no charge.

This is my dream, 
not your memory
of a summer in '96.  

I once heard you say
that dreams are like ticks. 

      I went to Oklahoma 
      just now, for a few minutes 
      between orders — let me tell you, 
      the wind was so high 
      I had to lean 
      straight into it,
      the sky so blue 
      my hair stood on end.
      There were no hills, 
      I was the tallest thing around.

Wednesday’s garbage.
Swearing off the good stuff.
Watching early-birds rile a mist
from the slope (a trail of a trail of last car out).
A curtain of airport cuts the pylon.
Radios nip air;
their mouths are small, politic larks
scrimping. You’d like to drift
above the flatline of dispassion
or jostle in the tumult
swans deal in. Where’s the exit for that
highway? In a book by R. Crumb
a caption under telephone poles
reads Ugly. Ugly. Ugly.

A helix of gull squall all drove & dip
                        plucks Odysseus like a harp.

            Fastened to a mast on a ship 
riding shelves, he meditates on Penelope

dressed in doves. Through the mad flutter
            & oar spiral the thick-necked sirens sing 

naked on the pocked shore. In this variation
the sirens are men,

their bodies spread open like oysters, opal 
            sheen revealing the gray flesh 

of what he never knew he wanted, 
                        his chest a swarm of Pollock. 

They reach for Odysseus who reaches, his wrists
                              bruising against cords. 

Now the sea is prodded by seals,
                        now his boys wheel paddles 

overhead, brine splattering their shirtlessness, 
Odysseus’s feet curling 

into questions. Clutched mast, drywood 
            splinters, his blood flowing freely now.

                        He loosens an unheard song
left swelling in his chest, a music box 

                                          the wind tips open —

infest the arbor: three neat shafts
evenly spaced in the last rafter.
The females dig in to hollow out
egg chambers. Nature gave them good
instincts: they bore in on the under-
face to shelter their shelter.
The dust of their tunneling speckles
the red roses white, as though
the roses themselves were infested.
Standing here, quiet, you can hear
the scrape-scrape-scrape of their diligence
and, there, in the first shaft, black
against the smooth, pale wood, a fore-
leg appears, then the other,
and with her mandibles, she pushes
the wood dust out. It’s unfortunate,
really, that chance landed them here.
They’re beautiful—metallic blue-
black, with salt-and-pepper fuzz like
a wrap about their shoulders—and
they are ingeniously designed:
on the foreleg, where the meta-
tarsus meets the tibia, is
a small, rounded cleft that they run
up their antennae to brush away
the dust. And they’re harmless: they rarely
sting. Still, they bore in, then turn
and burrow with the grain for a good
foot. It would take a month for them
to empty their egg chambers.
Then to breed, and year after year,
more would home in and adopt
these tunnels. And more tunneling in
the other rafters. More dust speckling
the roses. More buzz and beauty,
but each chooses his own beauty.
For the bees, you have poison;
for the rafter, woodplugs and glue
to seal up these shafts, these future-
chambers you cannot let bloom.

yr bread. We can be prison food, happily. And if hungry is beautiful in any of these ways, I want to eat I want to eat I want to eat it.
& ready before. When u step out naked of the tub: je ne sais pas mon nom. We are close to bed now. One late night snack. I’m butter
where’s yr sense of weightfulness? Things r all we are: bits of borings & booms. But in sleep we’re in battery love: charging
be a lesson in the syntax of bodies: soon between us will be only sleep & sleeping things. Tell me one is not yellow & buxom & beginning;
Birdbath out back but we r the birds of this tub, our little boat almost sunk & us beneath it; necks smeared w/a pithy brightness. Let this

Maybe it was enough to believe the Zodiac’s blazing entirety
would be cast from the sky, an effortless handful of salt
scattered to the Kansas plains’ red wheat. Out West,
souls every day were shedding their Earthly inheritance—the refused
histories of cause and effect, blight, hunger with a trace
of Santa Fe Railway coal dusting grocers’ displays—
and my grandfather, too, who, having left Topeka
for Los Angeles’s early sprawl, exits the train station’s dim
into day’s white flash, takes one step onto his upturned
apple crate, a new Bible in his palm, and he begins
to explain why all things are fire, what it is that makes you ache
awake, and why this must be so. Once, on a gritty
city beach in California—flies, stinking strands of kelp
rotting, Styrofoam—he and I sat watching a gull choir
first eyeball, then swoop, then peck, almost in unison,
something tangled in a blue tarp washed-in above the tide-pull.
A drowning victim, maybe. A vagrant. And though unable
to see what was there, when he put his hand in mine
I could not have even counted all the things I wished
to believe in, and which would still be true if what I remembered
was the sound of the waves landing, but now there is only the lungless
hot breath of L.A. on my cheek, the cries of gulls,
their wings ruffling into flight. The night after his memorial,
someone dug a hole into Kansas silt loam, dropped
into it the plastic baggie with his ashen remains.
Nothing then but distance in every direction. Above us, a satellite’s
beacon begged the horizon for home, the heavens’ scales
measured the darkness, and that’s all.

If I could, I would protect you from your own sorrow;
from the frayed ends of welcome mats, the crush of 5 AM
traffic, maple trees and the stock market’s long descent.
I would shelter you from mortgaged rooms that open
inward and deflect the day’s inglorious path to pill-filled
nights; pensioners along the promenade, the foghorn’s
amorous cry. Mostly, I would harbor you from appetites
old — young — your hopes rife as wildfire to disarm
any woman for an hour, a grope never more
than an ottoman away. In Thailand, they say a generous
heart is a water heart, but today tears don’t come that way.
You say, I can’t make love without music, as if this were revelation
made into art — praise song for what rhythms your body prays.

Cento V
"When in doubt, do nothing."
                              —Marcus Aurelius. 
To do it week after week, & keep one's sanity, 
is quite a trick. 
                    I am in doubt. 
Cocktail parties with martinis & uninteresting guests—
nobody much gives a damn whether you write 
or take dope or read the American Magazine.
                                                  I play things like 
"What Is This Thing Called Love?" & "St. Louis Blues" 
on the Steinway concert grand in the music room. 
                                        I wish awfully that you 
would come back to N.Y. for a while.
Last night, 
          found an album of Bix Beiderbecke 
records buried among Bach & Shostakovich. 
                                        All were dutifully played. 
Late in the evening, sitting out in the hallway, 
quite alone, on the cooling radiator, head in hands.
So much to say, & as you once said:
          some things just don't get into letters.

Halogen bleaches
night’s black fabric,
whitewashes the dust.
Redeyes jet the milk
like backswimmers,
and their breathings
become a landscape.
The open-mouthed
and force fed tunnels
scattering aerosols.
The illuminated city,
turbine-soundtracked.
What is washed out—
stars, slow satellites
pivot behind scrim.
In a public park, I lay
flat like a photograph
developing, adapting
to dark like Purkinje
in his geranium field.
I should not be out
so late, in the least-
lit suburban nook.
Restless and curious,
I run a long line
until it adapts to dirt,
until I, in tall grass,
lost and a trespasser,
jump the barbed wire
binding some acerage,
a radio tower, tumble
and gasp on my back
at the baroque ocean
overhead, and to no one,
say I want to be closer,
and climb the latticework.

Red would want to walk along Fisherman’s Wharf
and recall the first time he had seen the shrunken heads
in the back of Ye Olde Curiosity Shop, and seeing them again,
would gather up the years between like discarded clothes
in need of washing and wonder aloud how a head
once so full of seeing, how a mouth that had tasted
the finest meat or the sweetest words, how the caves
of the ears could be reduced to a state of dried fruit
and locked in a glass case. He loved to know
what of a body could last, his own body seeming intent
on disappearance — our great grandfather
having known nearly a century before us —
we listened with wonder and skepticism, nodding
as he talked of a silver ferry called Kalakala,
thinking only to appease him but thinking also
that his mind had become lost on the way
to his tongue. After all he was 97, and soon shriveled
into sleep, and was placed in a case of earth
and only then did we find the silver ferry come back
from Alaska, docked in Lake Union, where he had first seen it,
and his curiosity became ours to tell — in a story where
we return like king salmon to the tacky aisles of souvenirs,
not being able to resist a known origin, a glass case
like a silvered pool, where, when we bend down expecting
to see the faces of the long dead, we see our own.

I keep a note
a friend left in a book of photos:
lavender light over the snow flats —
and I wonder if he used it in a poem,
or if seeing, if the pleasure, was enough?
Now that you and I aren’t lovers,
I notice how the light at times
will race up your obedient body,
and reveal the flame I looked for —
the life I said I saw,
and hoped would be enough.

This flatness is a sickness.
But this sickness can be cured
with a house.
So for Susan
he built one. Till his hands were tired,
he built one, then added
on, etc.
“As much as the sky
swallows the landscape,”
he’d say, “this
is how much I love you.”
He’d say this
but he wouldn’t
mean it. He’d have one
hand covering his eyes.
Susan knew. She’d leave
the hot sky for her cool
floor. On the linoleum,
she’d wonder, “Is this
how God terrifies? Or is this
just the horizon?”
And outside the house, all over
the yard, their children lay looking
like desperate actors.

That the switchbacked trail of tracks I’ve followed –
through the pocked and fractured canyons
which make of this planet a naked maze of desert
and resembled, from orbit, the abstract whorls
of thumbprints, shifting – have led, at last,
to nothing yet; that one will seem sometimes
practically a bear’s track (clawed, heavy,
if not exactly massive) and elsewhere muted,
maybe clothed, as in a practiced shoe;
that, too, they’re always intervaled at random
and immaculate, as though laid down in a vacuum,
static – strange since any easy impact scored
across the rubble here is backfilled in a minute:
these facts force me to concede that it must be
an angel or a compact god I faintly saw,
but saw for certain, crest the distant ridge
and then withdraw beyond it. On that day
I left my station. Black sand swirling at dawn,
at dusk, and every mile another spiraled rock stack
branching like a giant cactus (eroded accident
or sacral, tool-carved artifact?): this place,
selectively amnesiac, subtracts me even now
past an empty water pack, the accelerating sun,
past my prayer and the wracked horizon.

Call yourself crazy, but these swallows in the eaves speak 
of arriving, of settling in like flames. 
                        It is midnight when you flee

with your daughter into the garden, blessing 
a nursing bra, holey pair of panties. How you stare, amazed
   as people grow from the ground, shimmering

in tuxedos to praise the raging body 
of your home, gaping 
   windows keeping nothing sacred. Morning you return, 

                                                            your house a post-
holocaust sanctuary, plastic curtain grafted to the altar 
of your vanity. You see in the sodden marriage 

of your photos a glue no prying will undo:  wife to husband,
the mouth of your child an O against the ear of a relative  
   whose name escapes you. All next year 

you dream of flight, of burning and birth.  You find 
a looseness in this. You sleep longer,
   wandering often
                                    amongst the ashes where you haunt
the ghosts of your belongings:  knitting needle stuck 
to the baby's doll, the hearts of sweaters eaten by mice.  

You admire charred trees for their audacity 
to reach beyond earth, think of planting beans, of attaining heaven 
   by climbing. You pine for simpler things, 

whole days outside. Blood, as a method of expression, not a map 
of your years. In the soil you find another piece of glass 
   and your eyes burn – 

pollen, or the low morning sun – you've no time to question it now, 
what with these seeds to tamp down, one more year rushing by
                                                      like a house on fire.

The first step: picture a field. Panting
heaps of grass.
Clouds: thumb prints
on the sky’s face. A figure
in the field, waving
with the birds. No. Not the figure.
The field. Birds bleeding
into the distance. Picture the sun setting: a hidden
house, a crow’s nest,
the battered sky. Its unraveling
belly. The figure, now
with a finger
in the moon’s mouth. Try
again. Field:
a grass stain skidded
across a child’s elbow. Yellowing
sky. Everything yawning. And the figure —
one cold hand reaching
up the sun’s shirt.

In romantic comedy I must adhere
to wacky codicil in will
demanding astral levitation
and dating psychic phlebotomist.
“Hello, hello,” I wave and jollily yodel,
then wander farther yonder, calling,
“Pick me,” direct dotted-line object
of the zombies’ outstretched arms,
leading economic indicator scruffy fringes of their shirt cuffs.
I dream I watch Andy Warhol’s “Sleep” in 3-D IMAX,
poet John Giorno snoozing giant for many hours,
and wake confettied with popcorn, lap soaked with cola.
As if light were altered by what it touches,
dirtied by glancing on gutter water,
then traveled scattered, smudged,
I’m already nostalgic for what just happened,
endlessly reminiscent about each prior instant,
flickers on outskirts of vision,
those iffy, flimsy instances
ceaselessly expanding, factor by which flashback
content increases in each subsequent sequel.

We heard the fish there cursive through the coral,
That starfish prowl the boulders, that seaweed
would flay the salty diorama, and like a quarrel
dissolving, the shore-world would go to bed.
We heard the stars would paint a glassy mural
Across both sky and waves. We heard the thread
of each star’s light would weave into a laurel
that rests upon the island’s bowing head.
We’re folded in the jeep with chicken crates,
children, and ancient men with smiles like crusts.
I put my headphones in. The music greets
the stench and heat, like light a door its never
entered. The coastline gleams. Even the dust
is silent now. I want to live forever.

After all the soldiers come into the café
there’s a lot more café to go around.
Someone falls through insulation in the attic
and somebody else either is or isn’t
able to catch them, or break their fall.
In the paperback book you’re reading
you’re about to go on a date with a restaurant
in a distant town you’ve never heard of.
You’re sitting outside on a bench in front
of the pharmacy, waiting for your order.
Someone describes a magnolia’s flowers
as being “like a lily’s,” but you know better.
There is some shooting in the distance.
“It’s just boys,” your lover says,
in the paperback novel you’re reading.
You wonder what anybody was doing
in the attic to start with, and why doesn’t
the café do more or better business
in this town, a town you’ve heard of,
where you live. You are thinking about rain
when the shooting starts again, closer.

Though the mechanics have picketed,
the flights go off as planned. What do we
do now? Worry, drink, trust in the Lord?
Entering through the accordioned tunnel
as if embarking on some afterlife, we rise
to freakish heights for our hour of worship,
communing in a church that emits
a muffled roar, the deacons wielding
drink carts and chicken Kiev. The epauleted
preacher remains curtained, cosseted,
contemplating his sermon. On descent
we hear his sturdy baritone attempting
to scaffold our faith and feel blessed
by our proximity to God, or a little
woozy from the Bacardi, or maybe
frequent flying has bludgeoned our beliefs
and we feel nothing but a faint
poultry-induced nausea as we touch down,
paraffin wings intact, good children
obeying the whims of their fathers.

The steam, a too-early, wet-haired winter
morning. They had shot off the bloodhound’s
paw. The passing Jesuit was angry. Whistled
through his horsey teeth slow music gathered
the loose folds of his gut with crossed
arms let go again. Dipped the frayed dangle
of hair flesh. A dimpled bowl of warm water. Looked
the shave nick, the naked shank. A tolerant
frown broke; his rotund body’s buttery
aura. The silver points of hair-ends. Then
gone. A memory in the choir loft, the petery
beast washed up to the back of the throat; the slaver
of consumptive spit; two shafts of coal
smoke. Now washed back down again with a mouth
of hot tea and cream, above the impatient
sticky-eyed hound. The two saltwhite shooters
beetling around the periphery, picking tobacco
from their teeth, effete, apostolic.

thank god they see me. the water
is getting in
at private places. oh doctor.
oh mother. what moves so
slyly? rain rain
go away. my foot caught
at the ankle by a hook —
oh mother, what moves so
under the hems of me? remind me
is this river or sea and the fish
that bite? & if it’s night
how can you tell? the water
& my foot caught
between two stones,
right? oh doctor
of concussions, listen to what moves
with your stethoscope. oh
mother of fevers
sorry about my new coat.
tuck me in like always & let the water
undo my hair
& my virginity
the doctor
can prove later.

There was a time along the river, 
                                 in the snow and cold. I didn't know
where I was going. I had come crashing 
through river birch, willows, 
                                            sumac that tore my feet.
I had no shoes. My pants were a problem. Baggy, striped. 
I took them off. Everything, 
                                                       I took it off. There 
along the frozen river I stripped bare-ass naked –
fat carp were iced into the falls, some big dark owl came over 
quiet as suffering Christ,
                                                                  and I was my body, 
like a boy out all day and who cares how cold it is.
My breaths steamed out in chuffs and huffs,
my tongue tasted weeds and water, 
                                            black leach-track stones 
up from the river's muddy bottom. Beneath the ice, 
even there, the river knows. So I followed.
Wherever it was going.                                 
                                 Red flags trailing from my blue feet. 

Out the country club's picture window, I guess, someone 
saw me. Or my bleeding. 
                      And now I sit here warm as toast,
my body lost, toeless feet black as stones. 
Why? What's it worth?
                                                       I tell you every night 
I dream the Winnebago River, long wing of ice
and leaning penitent trees. Miracle carp 
                                                                  unfroze, flopping 
bare-assed in the snow. Sirens. And this time I stop, 
still as river birch: Above me my owl god 
of flight and silence, 
                                            and having with my own eyes seen, 
I am Job. The falling snow? Not silver coins or rings, 
not some thousand-thousand sheep.
                                 For as they rush out –
rifles, bullhorns, blackshoes, blackshoes –
on my rucked and filthy skin 
                      there is this light-shot skin of snow.

In the famous symphony, you know the part
where voices rain down: first, soprano,
then mezzo soprano, followed by a cascade
of alto, tenor and bass: voices fall, run over
swim beyond each other and back, devouring,
picking the other up until they lift in unison
transcending time and space: that’s where
I want to live: right there.

Because we’re looking for the Seven Sisters,
that’s why we’re here, embedded in the grass
like river rocks in silt or little moons
of deer eyes in the woods, or constellations
like pushpins holding up the heft of night—
and damn, if it weren’t for the clouds. We say we’re here
for the sake of ritual—yes, ritual, rite—
an ordinary out-of-the-ordinary
duty to warm air and this patch of sky.
And what is any night but a threshold kiss?
I’m thinking temporary, temporary.
Conditions were perfect 300 million years
ago, so now, a thousand feet of darkness
below us, men are paid by the ton to haul
out pieces of the dark, a handful of coal
as black as emptiness, as our mountain holding
its shape against the sky tonight, the gown
tearing at its seams, but holding. We think
we’re in the dark but we have no idea.
We think that we have time to burn and lean
together as if against the inevitable.
As if space might cave. I’m thinking patience
and the dark line of lips touching—pursed
or in a kiss, a border is a border.

The buzz comes from the baseline and the rubble border
to the jungle, here at the village’s one standing rim, the only cement
left with lines. And even the boys hitting short shots know
to hold up, shirtless in the midday sun, and even the girls
stop at three notches in the nearby trees, even the washed-up drunks
jacking threes grow still, let their misses trail off in the high grass.
They know him by the shadows off his shoulders, straight
from the Guam Rec leagues, the legend of cracked backboards
and splintered posts, blow-bys and blocked shots to the bleachers,
basking in the crowds rubbing dust-clouds in the windy seasons,
the air-ball swishes at the no-net courts of Tol, the half-quiet
girls toeing the patched grass, staring, lonely for no one. Here he dribbles
twice to his left and loops a no-look pass to himself, and if there’s a word
for the curves he made, the arc and degrees of space in his wake, lost
in the launch of it all, there was enough jump under the palms of his feet
for all the rolling eyes, all the bandannas flapping when he rushed break-
neck to the basket, the rock grinding to a halt on the touch before take-off,
the overcast background by his head, higher than any man, poster-high,
ladder-high, higher than their fathers’ hands, cupped on his forearm
and cocked like a neck about to bite, the ball ripping over the rim
with sprays of rust-flecks and rotted wood, and a reverb of grunts
makes its way in waves, and all the boys stand up, and all
the almost-dunkers, all the finger-tip rim touchers, the stilted wrists
and lead feet, all the stomping ones, the finesse boys with not-enough
ups or the right kicks, all the tall ones with no hops, all the jammed-thumbs,
they all watch the ball’s slow roll in the gravel, the endless mud from potholes
never patched, praising the last bounces, the previous motion hanging muggy
in the air, seeing the ball lean from lace to lace, still spinning and not stopping —

i. 

Because old novels are always furnished — red velvet 
      and larkspur. 
Because parlor speaks her.  
Because David said to his son Solomon, pure gold 
      for the mercy-seat of the Lord, gold too 
            for the flesh-hooks.  

ii.

Because this frame is gilded.
Because these vanities are intricate and 
      exquisitely wrought.  
Because wood dries over time like skin
      and both may burn.  

iii.

Because the moon is her heirloom.
Because if she drapes herself on this sofa just so,
      she might be a muse.  
Because if she drapes herself on this sofa just so,
      she will be tragic.  

iv.

Because she gets the feeling that something 
      is hiding under this veneer.
Because time is a chair with claws 
      and a wingéd back. 
Because there are flames in the mahogany 
      and tigers in the oak.  

v.

Because she needs a language 
      to distinguish between new 
            and new to me.  
Because she has no history.  
Because someone carved this rose from ash.

A rustle. All they got of him was cloth.
He ran till he lost them, ran till he was lost,
Hands low across his shame, the forearms crossed.
A city blocked his way. He scraped its stones
Like Adam in the briars. His King enthorned,
Nailed to the flesh, no easy robe to slip,
His skin began to crack at the heels and lips.
Come dusk, his nakedness was threadbare, torn.
His scabs rebled and bred the scarab and moth.
It seemed they chewed their way out from within.
A yew was the one tree that would shelter him —
A strange one, all its branches warped like some
Fire-damaged candelabrum salvaged from
A savaged temple. Crawling close, he found
The urine of Judas cooling on the ground.
The toes — eye level, once he stood — still dripped.
Nearby, a dead horse buzzed. The flies skipped
From it to him and rubbed their hands and sipped.
Its hide slid at the tug like a tablecloth,
The lips drawn back to bare the teeth, then more,
The snout, the neck, the muscle’s wrap and thatch,
The flank, until the horse had sloughed a horse.
He wormed inside to sleep a spell. To hatch.
His comforter was warm, his sleep was sound.
He dreamed the yew-tree straight, and Judas cut down.
The cock crowed thrice. A child crowned.

Pray for black-outs. For
a packed grandstand. Pray for
ex-cons and no back door.
Pray for Milwaukee men eating
turkey legs whole, who watch ours
as we climb the chairlift stairs —
pray for the heavy Clydesdale
hooves and the girl who waves
the 4-H flag. For our footsteps
swept out with the dirt. We’ll spike
our shake-ups and drink them
with the safety men. I’ll sever
the Spider’s arms so they’ll fall
around its trunk; you’ll watch closely
on the ground. They know we’ll ride
the Himalaya, so pray for the wrong
direction. For broken levers. For
the Alabama man to drop down
onto the console. We’ll clutch our
slutty drinks. We’ll stumble
to the Log Jam. Pray for frayed
seatbelts. Pray for the long drop.
Pray that tonight, when our mothers
rise from their incense blankets,
their sacrificial wine, from their shrines
winking like fairway lights, when
they look down at our waiting beds —
pray for the salt in the sheets,
for the body hollows. Pray for
their mouths, then. Pray then
for the final break.

Something happened in here
that I can't quite write about    A front 
tooth of his is chipped and why 

his poem explores: Much like God
it's good I don't need him
because he is no longer there

I cannot write about the morning
we were supposed to look at Eliot's "Prufrock"
and fog shuffled across the yard

like a zombie    everyone locked up
until it passed    waiting for safety
for the moment white jumpsuits 

could be scoped and gauged by towers
Or when a bird was trapped inside 
and an inmate corralled it with a box

and set it free    Some things happen
in a way that makes them too big
to be carried in the lines and relays

that web overhead    He turned
in his books today    In his handshake 
there seemed to be a promise

that a great many lives are to be lost
and lost more than once
but that he will have no hand in it

The farmer, husband
to my French teacher and friend
to my mother,
lifted a length
of pipe above his head,
brought it down
hard. Spat anger:
Goddamn possum.
Chickens erupted,
night interrupted
by this intruder, violence.
I remember
feathers, squawks,
a soft cracking sound
almost gentle
as steel
found skull. Goddamn
egg-stealing, hen-killing
fucking possum.
It was dark in the barn
but not
dark enough.
I saw the way
my mother looked at him.

When we were children we wanted to be orphans.
The snow came early and halved the treeline.
Branches still flush with leaves heaved with ice and snow
and split at the waist. The sky was then a curtain
lifted on an empty stage. We crawled in the snow
to the back of the yard — past the clothesline taut with ice,
past the barn where cows stomped their feet in frosted mud.
In the farthest corner of the yard, under the tree
whose bark was ridged so deep we pressed our fingers through
and felt the tree’s black heart, we made of snow and fallen limbs
a cave, nestled in to wait for evening. Each branch
was encased in ice, slender tubes we slipped off and held
to the pale evening light. We shivered in our snowsuits,
whispering the story of our parents’ death. We imagined
the tragic news, our photogenic weeping, tire tracks
on the gravel drive covered again in snow. But no.
We did not wish. We knew our small thoughts had power,
as when the winter before, after he told me
your father’s gone and won’t come back and waited,
thin-lipped, to see me cry, I wished my grandfather dead
and within the year we’d buried him. The days
were slow and edgeless, so we imagined them
torn. This was no game. When the darkness came
and our mother called us over and over, we did not move.

Asleep on the roof when rain comes,
water collects in the dips of his collarbone.
Dirty haired boy, my rascal, my sacrifice. Never
an easy dream. I watch him wrestle my shadow, shut eyelids
trembling, one fist ready for me.
Leave him a blanket, leave him alone.
Night before, found him caked in dirt,
sleeping in a ditch, wet black stones for pillows.
What kind of father does he make me, this boy
I find tangled in the hair of willows, curled fetal
in the grove?
Once, I found him in a far field, the mountain’s peak
like a blade above us both.

Shepherd of the specimened dead
into fading archives of slides, you
through whose head our herds went
straggling in Latin, two by two
in high binomials; homo
discriber, obscure Noah
stranded far from the slow,
irrelevant swelling of our oceans,
what we will never know we have
no need of numbering, and we will
acknowledge nothing new under
the steadily escalating sunlight.
Ark of our lack,
in your wake all will speak
in a single tongue’s common terms.
Your kingdoms will contract
to crops and flocks, feed and feasts,
as we scatter in pairs your names,
forgetting and forgetting
until only ours remain.

I was working the knots out from a yard
of my wife’s hair, its dark fan ghosting
the surface of the water, when one of the bubbles
her pursed lips counted into the trough
puttered: “Daniel, Daniel, I think the horses
have returned.” And so it was. Drawing up
over the winter-burnt grasses, two of them
sleek and mud-black, led a third, that stippled colt
a year now lost, up along the erosion-bed
to the flattening where we’d built our farm.
The horses stopped, just outside the shadows,
like us sidestepping the hollow barn —
in the sky was hung a triangle of blue,
three fronts converging on the valley.
For an instant, the dust seemed fixed,
pinned by the horses to the ground
like tulle on a dress-form, or the thinning quilt
thrown over that dark bed where we lie.
My wife, desperate for salving, held still,
still under, and I set the horses to drink
the last of the friction uncurled from her hair.
Down it seeped, down their brute necks
and barreled trunks, down to their hooves, until
shying, they stomped it into ground, for the lightning
to gather up and return it to the wind.
I turn away, look to the far horizon —
picture myself on a galloping back.
“Please,” she says, “please — ” Wanting me
to reach for her, and drown there, again.

Our father and I are down on our knees
side by side, with razor blades in our hands
and rags in a bucket to wipe away
the ancient glue. This glue is like the blood
in the heart of the lamb we dissected
in school. It makes black crescents of our nails
and stains the heels of our hands. Turpentine
can’t bring it up alone. So we must scrape
this scabrous raw floor with our blades until
our wrists and fingers ache. We never speak
a word, only breathing hard and sweating
into the clots we brush away, listening
to the grind of the razor and the slap
of the rag, the hitch in my father’s throat,
his low, anxious breaking of wind. Like monks,
he says. Or do I imagine he’s said
anything to me? His father died young,
of his heart. His face is flushed, and the vein
in his forehead arrives. He orders me
to finish on my own. I’ll be working
for ages alone. I’m glad that he’s gone,
I breathe easier now. I work harder
now, too. On my knees, this monk whose fingers
ache for heaven. Whenever he returns
he’ll find our floor is finished, perfect soon.

Like guillotines, every lesson from childhood
taught me about precision and punishment.
What I was told, I was told truthfully. If you renounce hunger
then you have renounced nothing. Night severed day, as
every hand that fed me turned me against the last.
I was a poor girl, mortal, but I had the eyes through which
old men wanted to see — pearled tears that loved the world, occult,
tears summoned by a keen-edged slap across the face.
And now? A little sugar, a little salt: snow falling over my path,
lisping, so soft, the distance between swept and wept.

I can’t help but see the first few crocuses that will
somehow shoot through the layers of ash
like fingers still tender and bright enough to redeem
the particulate drizzle that will no doubt keep
staining our expectant faces as we huddle in cellars,
under overpasses, crouching on hazmat pallets
and wondering how to fill the silences piling above us
like stricken snow. I think of Pavlov sweating
on his deathbed, requesting nothing but a bowl of mud
from the creek near his boyhood home in Ryazan
where he sailed newsprint yachts and packed pies
so thick his mouth would water for days after.
And when he cradled that dish of earth, he must have
sighed, smiling, sinking both hands deep into memory
so his fever had no choice but to break. I think of you
and hear the last yellow line train sparking to a stop
beneath your bedroom window on Killingsworth, that
voice always warning, Doors are closing. I wish I could
go back now and tape the wolfish sounds we’d make
when we made love, though I know or say I know
there may never be a way to replay them.

Mentally, we are in love 
          with each other or chemically, 
however they say, our minds 
          with minds of their own and 
nothing as old-fashioned as making 
          a lover with a rib. But how do we 
keep from moving forward too 
          quickly and what do we do 
with all the preciousness and time-
          lessness and sadness? Even history 
can't keep us. We keep inventing 
          newfangled ways to be in the world. 
Just yesterday I overheard a husband 
          say give me a vacuum to clean 
the orange sky. Imagine an antique 
          computer. Imagine a zoomed-in, 
pixelated hurt. Let's be vegan. 
          Let's drive a Prius. Let's find a robot 
to make our bed and bring us tea. 
          My dear, I promise to homeschool 
you if you homeschool me. I am 
          a 21st century wife. Tonight I'll touch
you in some otherworldly way 
          and we'll copyright it, youtube it, 
tell the general public this is our way 
          of being modern. We know all 
the proper ways to evolve. Once 
          we lived by the sundial, the wrist-
watch, the harvest's gold. Now we 
          are learning to breathe in bytes.
We are tracing the lightwaves 
          and brainwaves back to some 
historically complex time. We are 
          closing the bedroom door. Still 
there's a blue drop of light. But no high-tech 
          way to say you're mine. No way to love 
each other but with these ancient bodies.

I kiss her, and her hands flit up like toys,
like white doves into the air. Light falls
across her bony shoulder, forming a false
bandolier. She gently mouths no-noise,
twists cracked lips until vibrations thrum
within the hollow of her throat. Silence
breaks — she keens, a human theremin.
I pull her close, pausing to glance
at every plum-dark bruise, the stump of tongue,
her emptied velvet mouth. She stares at me.
I touch her neck where words must be
shuttered within. Climbing each rung
of ribs, my fingers seem to understand
what she wants and is. But she reaches for a pen,
shaking her head, and grabs my hand,
writes, “Nightingale.” In the windowpane,
a bird sights its reflection, strikes,
dizzying itself; hops back to revise
its angle, strike again. Her wet eyes
flicker brownly, then overfill, streaks
of mascara blackening each cheek.
We sit listening to the sound of a small
body battering glass, its thwarted music. Speak
to me, I plead. She shivers as we fall
together on the bed yet holds me like a child,
stroking my hair, rubbing my brow. I whisper
sweet gibberish to her wounds, kiss her
like she’s a creature broken and made mild,
until she flies from me, a feathered thing,
and I’m left clutching scraps of dawn, of nothing.

My Grandpa Evo had a special fork 
whose tines bent out wide to accommodate 
as much scungili pasta as he could fit 
into his wide Italian mouth.  I can 
still see him shoveling it in, slurping 
and licking his lips, slugging Fortissimo 
and laughing, smiling at all of us, our
family, before him at tables spread out 
across the yard.  Sunday dinner, my mouth 
open wide in compagnia di comari, 
panting with laughter, I see him 
in their eyes.  Who can be alone,
chi sarebbe solo, among so many 
          who are dead?

Now we begin to introduce
Mr. James Montgomery of Newton, Mass.,
to Mr. Tomas Krakowski of Houston, Tex.,
only Mr. Krakowski is dead.
He, at least, will have few objections
to the hand-over. If there are complications,
it will not be his finger that flips the bird
and wanders off — inchworming its way
down the hallway, past the pharmaceutical lockers,
with plans for tickling the night nurse —
but Montgomery’s mangled hand
that rejects their promotion.
Though the stitching will be expert,
the alignment of the bones against
their new partners perfect, the body wants
to be only itself. It will expel invaders,
send archers, their arrows alight.
Its will is still beyond us. To negotiate
the truce, we bring in the ancients:
writhing in their jar, a prescription
forever rewriting itself in saline.
They draw the bad blood out, make
the seam where man is stitched to man
more friendly, add a natural
anti-coagulant.
Science is just magic
with more bar graphs.
Or magic was always science
with more chanting — I forget
how the PR department
likes us to say it now.
When the villagers thought us witches,
some of us liked to go out onto stony hillsides caked
in moonlight and chant for hours,
just to live up to their expectations.
Now in the long green halls,
I comfort pale bald children
with the contents of my pockets:
a lollypop, a stethoscope,
a shrunken human head.
Sometimes I make the mouth say
Darlings, you are not alone.

He'd been a tourist in churches, there for a look at the glass 
      and a half-hearted pang of the sublime beneath vaulted ceilings,

But there was always the fickering silhouette of some woman 
      who prayed over a candle she'd lit; then the guilt

Of the faithless would usher him out to afternoon's heat-
      dazzled streets. After the corner store's worn linoleum

And six pack, he wondered if he could feel anything holy 
      given years of the nightly news's nightly war, given 

His wife's retelling of her days working with abused 
      and molested children. So when he came across these

Beautiful, deadly coils risen up toward heaven and the power 
      lines that converged in a perfect cage to hold it back,

He couldn't explain the current that ran through him, 
      except to say the hum of it, the substation's carcinogenic

Psalm, seemed to cycle at the same rate as the soul, 
      which stirred slightly from its hibernation

In the unpainted apse at the back of its hermetic cell.

Pass them. You must. Dark-uniformed, sharp-creased —

the whole force here. No squads to cruise Northeast,

                        Their stiff, flag-bearing ranks strand toward the hill

to work the trash-pocked site of that soured drug-deal

                        near the cathedral. Pass, through the crush of badges

where chaos blasted and bled from festered grudges

                        and guns? You must. You must: you are called to sing,

into this grief, this grace-and-gospel wailing,

                        to wring from air high-chanted ceremonies,

where young men hug, grim-faced, and lower their eyes,

                        strung taut, while priests and politicians speak

to their own open graves, next month, next week —

                        O hard recessional hymn where no one touches!

File past the suit-clean body, the casket’s satin ruches.

                        In one patrolman’s hands, the rosewood box of ashes.

Here comes the finch out of the mine.
Well, almost. In the dark, here comes
the yellow school bus
full of fragile lives,
for which we can do little
but bless the jostled heads
as they go on the same trip down
into the same town? Not this time.
This isn’t just another day;
love is the much anticipated
field trip out, now and t

In rain, the smell of pine and old cement
returns to me, unlike the night, which can’t,
we raced downtown past colds we should have caught
to see some place our friend had bragged about
with marble steps ascending from the park,
and shelves in wood antique as it was dark,
an antebellum chandelier and view,
at bedside, of the monument. All true,
and all so nearly what we could afford,
though we’d have liked a guest room. You demurred,
descending to the street, and voiced some doubt
the sink or stove had roused, which you forgot
amid the ghosts of neighbors we would host,
decades of coffee stains and burning toast,
the lullabies and tales we’d not yet penned,
and those blank years, without me, at the end.

I used to love dirt. I’d dig first, then bury —
candy wrappers, colored rags, pens —
things I could unearth again. One day,
a woman’s voice stopped me, her cry:
come out, come out now, but I couldn’t see her.
She came like darkness perching,
her voice circled round the neighborhood
like a windhover, hoarse and purling,
I saw a black river flood up the steps
to our deaf house. Then everything went still.
Grandma stopped me at the door
from entering your bedroom
because you were nursing my brother,
because you needed rest. I didn’t find
the woman in the house. When did she leave?
From where? I heard she snatched the baby
by the hair cursing you both. I saw you cry.
Even now, when I ask about it, you flinch
and say I misremember, meaning there’ll be things
you cannot uncover. Give up, give up.

That for a winter’s share of months —
which felt then to her like years —
teacher shut the schoolhouse doors.
That one day sunlight dazzled the still snow-blue mountains.
That it was nearly freezing but for the light
it seemed the day was warm.
That she found digging in the creek bank with a dull axe
a frog frozen as a stone, not a beat left
in its still bright heart.
That even in the brace of April, on her way to school again,
the wind’s hard blade bit to the bloody quick
her old horse’s hocks and belly.
That one tight knot of ice at a time the creek
came unstuck. That all day it pulled and snapped —
like pine burls in a fire,
like gunshots for no reason in the night,
like the marrow bones mother Warman broke between her teeth.
That at recess the Warman boys would steal potatoes
and kisses, chase her until her head spun,
her good heart heaving with the burn and throb
of blood. How she loved it —
the three of them back of the clapboard school,
mineral smell of snowmelt and mountain,
lick of government grease down a still-warm potato.
How her own body warmed as the world warmed,
how like riding home in the whole-sky spill of spring rain
there was no clean line between her and it.
How finally it was rain, not snow.
How when the creek slid back into its channel they found both boys
tangled naked in the roots of a cottonwood, how on the flood grass
they laid them out like fish. How they were then their bodies,
how they were not their bodies,
how the hearts of boys do not freeze but fill.
How on the way to school she rode
by Mother Warman, wailing near cottonwoods,
notching her wrists and shoulders. How those May mornings
her old horse loved more than anything
the hearts of plum flowers. How teacher made the Crow girls wash
with lye their lousy hair. How they screamed. That for days after
their scalps were white as snow.

        I never wanted to be an astronaut, suffocated 
by thought: all that tethers a man to ship is ingenuity 
and wiring.
        Never a doctor, for all the skin 
I’ve split open, each scar’s lip chatter 
a permanent marker of foolishness:
        How I kicked my way out of brotherhood 
fights; lifted more than I should to impress 
all those beautiful girls who valued me more 
as a good listener, because I could repeat back 
like a tape recorder, the important phrases. 
How I wanted to be Indiana Jones, his whole cowboy- 
professor balancing act — to ruggedly flex my intellect — 
tripping over Australopithecus and patriarchal society 
in bar conversations, house warming parties 
and baby showers.
        You’re unavoidable, I hear an old lady 
on the train whisper: like fire once it realizes 
it can breathe, you prey on the world, leave us all 
self-described martyrs in our own ashes.
        By now, I should be loudly objecting 
to the needling pleas of aunts who still believe 
I want to go to law school. That I should forget 
about writing a book and be happy 
correcting the mixing of past and present tense; 
suggesting changes in the vagaries of somethings 
and someones in the midnight scripts of adrenaline- 
rushed youth, their worlds half constructed 
in night’s silent race with dawn.
        Raised fatherless and slight, uncles 
want me to roughen my pretty hands, deaden 
a few layers at work in the same daily dark 
they live — await factory downsizes in drinking 
clubs named after better animals than man, 
where it’s all gamble on football and gobble 
the remnants from cracked peanut shells 
piling in glass cigarette trays.

It’s too easy to be the ancient Chinese poet disobeying his master. To hide, tucked inside a single bluebell on a meadow obscured by hoof prints. Right now I have done something so wrong to the oxcart that the ox refuses to move. The flattening of one thing in the cool light of dawn by someone so careful. In the paperback book you’re reading, casually by the roadside, there’s always a river. Everyone wants to float down the river in a raft, to persist and drift like a dynasty of harmless circumstances. The ancient Chinese poet will clamor to be let back into the poem, the fragrance of death tumbling over him like green feathers. If we haven’t yet felt the illusory nature of divinity, we’re definitely too late. This will be the shortest year ever. The year of the ox and oxcart, the year of green feathers, the bird in the furnace, you know what I mean.

You swim to the next cove, the only act
of leaving you can take here in the water’s
flow. Kicking away, you shred the lake
into heavy white spray. I clutch an orange raft,
poor swimmer, and float. I half know
to follow you after a fight, half know to let you
go. The rented pontoon, tied to a sapling,
grinds its metal base against the pebbled shore.
Islands litter the waterscape, hilltops before
they dammed the river. Never cut, the forest
is still rooted below. The guidebook says
striped bass, bream, and freshwater jellyfish dart
through the canopy. I’m good at thinking
of these other things—the drone of motorboats,
the whir and zip of brooch-sized dragonflies.
It’s mating season for them. After that
comes death. We are weeks from our first anniversary,
weeks from moving into a house we’ll hate,
weeks from all the other weeks we can’t
anticipate. You return in the form of a head
bobbing up through the water’s glare. Near me
again, you keep your jaw clenched, and I take
your hand, but not too quick. In spite of myself,
I want to kiss your shoulders, already over-pink,
exposed. Every day we learn how hard a marriage is.
I balance my foot on the stub-end of a drowned tree
that stretches its blanched trunk who knows how far
down, and you take hold of my raft. We don’t speak.
There’s a metaphor here, perhaps, but we’re still
too awe-struck at what we’ve done to know.

We have a mind for expert rage.

Our body melts like silt along
the riverbank.  In dreams, to Ma,
we speak like rivulets of rain.
To Pa, we say there's ice upon
the lake.  We see the petals from
the dogwood falling on the shoal,
the old dog rotting in the yard.
Our friends are gone.

                                       Our body melts
                                       like silt along the riverbank.

We fucked behind the church, and felt
the love of God, and saw the Lord
of Hosts and all his angel choir
in the clouds, we swore.  In the high
grass matted from our weight and sweat,
we knew the threat of chigger bites,
the fear of ticks.  Our name we can't
remember now.

                                       Our body melts
                                       like silt along the riverbank.

We are the victim of a flood.
We ask too much of the world, and
of ourselves, thinking time will fall
for us like a bird, like a drunk
in the street.  Our ear to the mud,
we hear the ripples seeping from
the creek.  We want to be the one
waters sing to.

                                       Our body melts
                                       like silt along the riverbank.

In my dream about death, I come upon a hill,
silhouetted, and draw back behind the darkening
of a sheltered niche. There, upright in rows
of wooden chairs, the dead, their bodies still,
stare forward like children at school. Sitting
near the front, a teacher I’d once had, in a pose
from a Puritan portrait: his hair cropped,
conservative, in strands the color of ash;
his hands are folded loosely in his lap.
The surviving sun polishes a map
of light upon the grass, the sky unlashed
like leaves. Another flash drops,
brindled, across his face. He does not look
at me, but unfolds his hands and tugs gently
at my sleeve, confesses no one can remit
his crimes—mine also; that death, as from a book,
had torn the pages of years; that this memento mori
was not his life as he had left it.

I knew it made me prized, helpless; that losing it
would make me bleed. Because the desires of boys
angered my father, so did I — though desire 

seemed unconnected to the way they would, in a pack,
stand in a driveway and call out invitations. 

If I could pass and seem unshaken, 
they would shout at my back, You bitch! 

This long afternoon on the mountain in Winslow
Ellen and I drink tea, look out her back window,
and wait for a purebred colt to be born. 

The Arabian mare has lost her mucus plug, 
and there will be no other sign: prey animals 
have their babies fast, to walk away before the blood 
attracts a predator. 
                              I could not have known 
my father wanted to deliver me unharmed;

I would not have trusted anyone to see 

that something growing inside me wanted out,
wanted to be shaking and raw, wet and new.

As surely as architects fall in love
with angles and lines     I come to you

adjusting my buttons and lapel     fascinated 
by the hover of your dress

as though you floated into the room
a jellyfish     a single bulb

She's not on the same field     of play
they'd all whispered to me

yet I lean forward     closer to you
and away from my secured counsel

As you speak     whole cities blossom
within my chest     a new age

out of the slow bone and flesh existence
and here ideas are     rivering through

As surely as highways pulse between 
major metropolises     sex is a subtext

I imagine sliding down each ravine
and ripple     within your dress

the touch of your hand     changes 
an avenue of traffic lights     to green lust

With you I dream of new equations
how y might multiply     with x

a new proof     effervescing beneath our
formalities     I don't care who's watching

I come to you wanting to build structures 
together     not to gaze dumbly into your eyes

I have taken up residence in the bear’s
black body; the bear’s heart has devoured
mine. I (all my thumping) am diminished.
And the bear grows bigger; his seething face
has absorbed all the day’s light, his clawed paws
are as turbulent as electricity at night.
Heart, the sunflowers have been extinguished
by hurled rays, and I am dead to the day.
They told me I would discover morning,
but here it is always night, though the walls
be red and flowing (blood moves,
genome-smart but knowing not of itself,
all its bodies sequenced and thwarted
though paginated, booked, and shelved).
The bear refuses to read the pages I was.
Spits me out. The blinded blinds move
like flattened smiles in air’s carried currents.
Crows pick out, lay down words between
light’s molten lines. Never forget you!
Never forget your thronged face, they cry.
The bear is silent, his viral eyes red-hot.

how can i tell you

what i have to if you can't hold a pair of scissors 
with two hands / if you can't reach the string to the bulb 
in the pantry

            how can i show you my palms
            
they are unwashed / they are still 
striped with marker & your eyes are looking too far

                  listen i remember everything
                  
you keep your crayons in the liquor cabinet so i have to ask 
& the foot pedal on the sewing table butts back & burns 
knees on carpet

            your face cracks beside dyed eggs 
            and summons its doppelganger in the mirror / white as the sink

you stuffed my palms with chocolate while the backs of your hands 
            flaked like onion skin and for gods sake

            i'd empty my basket of everything if i could

Past houses, past pickers and bone-cleaners, 
	rats and carrion birds, alley cats clawing 

out fish heads from the trash, the smoke 
	rose, a black river shivering. It rose 

past Churubusco and Wawasee, Goose Lake 
	and Big Cedar, past the steer calf 

grinding its bud-teeth, and the dogs 
	that stopped barking to sniff the air.

As it traveled, it carried the boy 
	who started it all, flames climbing 

his sleeve to his collar to the baseball cap 
	dazzling now on his head. It carried 

his screams past the gutted warehouse, 
	past Max's Metal, Iron & Scrap. It rose 

into combines, filling the dead machines. 
	One hair at a time, it rose with his waxen 

face, eyes and skin spilling into weather, 
	fields, crops, the peach trees withering, 

fruit darkened, maggot at the root. 
	It rose where nothing else could: 

into attic crevices, into dreams of people 
	sleeping in their beds. It blackened 

the steps of the Baptist Church 
	where later the congregation would pray 

for the match struck just to watch it flare 
	in the darkness, for the way a body is lifted 

smoking from the grass, for the trees —
	how they flickered outside the window —

for all that would be remembered: 
	the dirt road's grieving, the harvest time, 

the sewing of the seeds, for the season 
	they knew would follow through Autumn's 

blazing maples, through the poplar and ash.

You’re not all dead yet but soon will be.
Truth is, it’s hard for me to muster
all the hate I used to have.
I used to think you made me
lonely and I could hurt you
with all the love in my life.
I burned. I wanted to smoke you.
Longer dead than alive now,
that’s where you’ll all be, man —
Might as well wear feathers.
I was trying to figure
where the fault lied,
but my secret: I wanted it all.
No reason for you to have
all the good stuff.
Did you live good lives?
Did you do good work plumber,
bus driver, refinery worker?
Have lotsa babies, get the right
husband? Ever find the good
drugs? Lotta different kinds . . .
I’d take them again if I could.
See, here you get to see
possibilities. I coulda died
seventeen times before that hotel room.
If that one didn’t get me I had fifty-
six more waiting. I see them like stars,
constellations of all my deaths.
You’ll get to see yours soon enough.
The hardest thing for me here?
I don’t get to sing.
You? You won’t get to do
whatever shit you liked to do.

Better days are the ones misspent as this
where instead of what I’m supposed to do
I write these words or better and implore
you in a hush to fuck me like I’ve just
come home from a war to which tomorrow
I return. Worse and more frequent are the days
of endless solitaire and magazines
instead of the work that has to be but
not yet, just not yet, and I, like you, know
it would be better to be done with it
and have what time remains for what I love,
for the words and respites from war, perfect
al fresco cappuccinos between, brimming
with froth. The sun and strolls unencumbered,
the garden we tend still to promise ourselves,
the cooking of what pleases, the laughter
among friends at the little hells we raise,
but—there is always this but like regret
never worthy of a story, the but of
the lists piled insidious before us,
capable of worming like the spiritual
slither of an opiate malaise—those
powers with which we are left, good only
for staring at computer screens, scrolling
our way across their ether to the next
window this weariness demands. This
is why we drink and snort and smoke, gamble
and cavort our ways into the stupors
that possess and transform us into those
we do not know, the interminable dread
of dying into what we are supposed
to do, of convincing ourselves that what
we are ineffectually committed to
supposing makes us worthy of our lives.


I don't believe in beauty: my lover

beside me
  beautiful: my father often

a liar: I don't believe

you: my father always

I love you: father
          I am always saying

father: you have never been

here in this house:
           mother beside her lover

sleeping, brother and his often-lover

    radiator hiss or is it whisper?

asleep in the room next door.

Here as in everywhere: father

I am always calling you. Here

it is Christmas Eve: I don't believe:

    lights-in-snow

Actually snowing.

I felt the roof of my head break and clatter
to the floor. I felt the particles dance
in the empty and electric air, turning around in circles
like plastic bags caught in a draft.
I thought the river would swallow me whole,
and the seagulls would never stop sailing away.
Now the deer bones rattle on the bare wall.
The night winds rest and clouds
advance on clouds. Days fall back
inside themselves like water.
Now the river takes its color from the weeds
and my friends are half asleep
in their anticipated lives, dreaming in the vain styles
of their age, painting their childhoods
over their eyes, walking the ribbons
of highways like crows. Now my mind
moves back to my father’s Easter sermon,
walking alone in the dark garden,
lighting the trashcans on Division Street
on fire, watching the fat police lumber
to the flames. And my thirteenth birthday,
setting off flares in the train-yard, scraping my name
on the rust-lined door. What became
of those abbreviated years? Now they slump
inside these passing days like sand.
Now your face is hard to look at
when you sleep. Your words become like putty
in my ear. Now the cold hours wake me
in the night, the oak leaves fall and linger
in the wind, the swallows leave the shadow for the bridge,
and the carp float dead in the metal grates below.

This rapt, bandit-eyed mother,
scorpion-diner and foe to cobras,
is not a marauder, but rather
the obverse: upright and slightly simian
on her miniature mongoose legs.
Love is like the sole lookout,
the one who reconnoiters the desert
to keep her clan unharmed. Dear totem,
she telegraphs her cry across the wasteland
if any slinking or winged thing nears,
although her clamant alarm
gives her away. Love’s swift and costly here,
and she, banisher of loneliness,
leans in close — dainty nose grazing ear —
to groom another’s fur just so.

We are approaching the marshweed and sycamore, the gnarled low
trees and cypress.    For weeks the boat has rocked us, a nauseous
lullaby. The days have slipped through our bodies with the sound of
sea swells, the rain and its humid-talk.      The land opens before us:
the first point of green.       Here is the beginning of a house: lumber
ships untether their long pale beams. Here is the mouth of the river,
its arterial flow.             We are approaching the lowlands, the docks.
We watch the shoreline near: a man waves his arms in the air.     For
weeks we have imagined what we will come to, what land will claim
us.            For weeks, we have talked of gold streets and haystacks,
pockets heavy with coins.     We never imagined so much water, the
stench of bodies led away                          in chains.  The mosquito-
darkened sky. We watch the town open and open.  The first glint of
light, smoke. Soon we are standing on the shore and the heat stuns
us.              We watch a man lead away another man by his shackled
neck until we cannot see him.  So many bodies.  A woman stands in
the coal-dusk, waving goodbye.       Her skin soot-bright in the dark
rising tide.  How much we wanted this: the sky’s blue bowl, our lives
stripped clean.      White oak.      Magnolia bark.      The docked ship.

To pick that glint-edged glamour,
lacquered body, lustrous odalisque,
strung flower. Imagine skipping
my fingers like Dorothy
down its long fretted neck,
enchanted path, inevitable Oz,
the O of sound spinning wild
from that midnight pit. Big obsidian
lung sighing, Billie Holiday’s
sheened hip if a hip could sing
and hers could. Every pore
pitch perfect. Notes embossed
on the underside of skin. Even
nostrils, an interior syrup,
run through with primordial
song. I crave this instrument
with cut-away puzzle, missing
curlicue and plug-in potentials.
The way I crave salvation,
a head-long plunge
into amplified abyss, a certain
grunge such beauty requires.
Three squares humiliation
and a stomach for the fall.
Patience, patience. My singing
improves with every hard knock
plucked. Into these arms, Takamine,
my dream true come — strapped on,
tuned up, Lover Man, locomotive,
on your dark-strummed rails
we’re forever born to run.

After the burial, when we broke down
the estate into child’s portions, to each
a broom, a ledger, the shuffle and design
of things we carried out onto the porch,
I opened what was once a closet full
of music, the vinyl now long displaced
by books, sixty or more, each a medical
companion, a difficult friend, page after page
flagged with the ragged slips of paper.
The stuff of faith, dire gospels, scores
of hymns with just one note, over and over,
just one note and a thousand horrors.
Doubtless they would argue in secret,
these pages soiled at the corners, the mind’s
terrific passages shocked with highlight,
glossed with scratches in a mother’s hand.
They made her the scholar of herself,
not of what she was, but of what she
could be, what she feared before the shelf
with its little study lamp, her body
glowing, lost to hours of waking sleep.
So dim, her books, she saw no end, only
the long dark well of questions, however deep
she bowed her head, anxious to believe.

We spliced genes from different species to create the ultimate killer.
I’m not just being hysterical. I’m doing the best that I can.
The bastards fly. People are dead. We’re on the modified B plan.
You’ve got to get to the mainland and tell them what you know.
The things I told you about are here and they’ve killed people.
We spliced genes from different species to create the ultimate killer.
This is what I wanted to show you to convince you these things exist.
Four canisters of piranha eggs sank but only three were found.
The bastards fly. People are dead. We’re on the modified B plan.
I’ve seen them. Like the flying fish you see in the bays around here.
When they come back I want you to call me on channel six.
We spliced genes from different species to create the ultimate killer.
It could live in all environments. I’m not supposed to be here.
People on the island aren’t qualified enough. I’ve seen them.
The bastards fly. People are dead. We’re on the modified B plan.
Tonight dinner is a gift from the sea. We’ve got to tell someone right now.
What they are, where they come from and how long ago they arrived.
We spliced genes from different species to create the ultimate killer.
The bastards fly. People are dead. We’re on the modified B plan.

I promise him bitterness, salt, 
                                         the tastes of all my dead, gold and wax, 
the roots of trees. Against me, he is                                               
                                            scaffolding, linen, bicep and thigh, all
newness: private liturgy of high school hunger,
                                                snow collecting on his parents’ car.

I've just observed Hanukah, the consecrated
                                                                 fuel that burned on faith, 
young enough to believe in the miracle 
                                                  that’s mine alone: a forsaken fuse
and the hands that light it, 
                                                         the labor of soldiers and battle 
and cold, then the flame. He finds me
                                                  in handfuls — first hair, then skin,
then cries, then silence, his torso
                                                           redressed, tying his sneakers.

“You'd be better at this,” he says, 
                             at touching so quickly, efficient and practiced, 
“if you stopped thinking so much.”  
                                    But I have the worries of my great-aunts, 
their consonant names. 
                                                       After he leaves, the snow melts 
to puddles, the engine of my mouth
                                                               runs on the fumes of God.

A round projector pulses light
Across the ceiling like a strobe,
A little star itself at night
And during the day a little globe
Beside our chairs. The stars look near
Enough to touch because they are—
A welcome change. When they appear,
I try to count them, star by star,
Just as Abraham must have done,
Imagining his promised line.
If there’s a star for everyone,
I’d like to think he counted mine,
Implausible as it may seem.
We settle back and contemplate
The equally unlikely scheme
Of stardust orchestrating fate,
Then stagger from the matinee
Like Plato climbing from his cave
Into the strangeness of today
Left waiting outside in the wave
Of heat arisen from our star,
As space and time now interweave
To find us standing where we are,
The hardest notion to believe.

Our bodies are lower than the nettles.
Our campsite is illegal and our chests have carved
soft outlines into mountain dust. We hear
the river, but haven’t yet found a way
down. Between breezes there are sounds
like wounded animals, moans and chirps
without translation. It is the forest
devouring itself: scorched timber’s last cracks.
We will not be here to see the dead, half-fallen
trees become peat. There will always be snow
on the cornices, a gully cut by the river
we cannot reach; but we hear its clean roar,
its rapids shallow enough for wading and deep
enough for drowning. Blackened spruces list.
A pick-up stirs gravel, roars into the ridge.
Night is quieter. There’s no way to know
from where our next light will come —
if we should look to heaven or to earth — so
I choose to be aware of the closeness,
thin boundary between mountain-shadow
and sea-salt starfield. It seems impossible meteors
fly silent, charring our atmosphere like pencil scratches
marking distance in an atlas, but most do:
flash and white streak, a map of what was once
heard, of what disappears so others can return.

The bat
turned up like an artifact
of our early days,
the time one zipped
into your kitchenless hovel
& you hopped from leg to leg
your coat a white flag
as it flapped along the ceiling.
Now there’s a boy —
& he’s got a whole trove
of darkness & dreads-to-be.
Thus you quash the panic
that bids you run! that warns rabies!
that wonders if it’s big enough
to carry off the cat —
when it finds a perch
above the back door, you show
our boy how it hangs
upside down, explain
that the bat, like any of us,
just wants a warm bed.
You cup it
in gloved hands, as close
as you’ve ever been to the bare nose
of a big brown bat, while he
props open the door,
& together you countdown
then release
the wriggling rocket.

It’s been ten years
since I first read those ancient
books. Ten years pass
in this car, too, and another
ten in the walk past the cherry
blossoms murdering the yard.
It wasn’t your devotions
that kept me waiting
with the engine running. Listening
to The Iliad and then
The Odyssey. Letting the stick
shift sulk. Always a fight
with you before the long
drive home. It is early now,
and late too. Outside
the universe is made
of ache and almost
does not know to care
if I have wronged
you. Was it you
the sirens were
singing for?
The sirens unlocking
the door. The sirens waiting
to flick the light switch
with my thumb. And from
inside the room, inside
the dark inside the under
bloom, the house is still
taking dictation
from the rain.
I am already asleep,
I am asleep still, though
I pace and worry
the windows
from the blinds. Like you
I am lost
now that I have
nowhere left
to lose myself —
Clouds open doors, I do not drown
and you do not fall through rain clouds
to the earth.
At least we sleep
and purify ourselves
ten years more.
At most we kiss like anchors, drag
towards the bottom of the ocean floor.

It wakes him up — the glow of his shirt
hanging in the bedroom closet,
the light leaking from beneath a door
that doesn’t quite want to close.
He is always thinking of a girl at such times,
the uneaten peach of her, the wetness
of where he might bite. The same light
follows him on midnight walks, a glare
that prevents him from enjoying
even the sharpest stars. Come morning
he takes down the shirt and buttons
around himself the familiar agony.
He knows it cannot be put out: The meadow
will blaze up if he rolls in the breeze
of its many fingers. The bouquet he picks
will droop and crisp before he can
make his way to her. Every night,
coming home alone, suffused with wine,
he is orbited by moths that flutter
and die beneath the million stars he has
never seen. He smells faintly of destruction,
the way a burnt-down house asserts itself
after even a misting of rain.

I’m telling you,
I used to live in the wind.
I ate its fruit.
I can still feel its juice on my face.
It makes me sick to believe
I am as mortal as you. Can you know
what it means to be held
prisoner by the Earth? We caught and murdered
all the gulls in the sky, we apprenticed ourselves
to the light of the sun. We stole hives
from their hot perches for wax. It’s true—
the Gods will give you
everything, but they make you work.
You have to think like a God.
You have to become a God.
How can I make you understand?
My father died with all his heart
hidden in the clouds.
Look—go put a hundred candles in a pot.
Bring me all your pillows and blankets.
I will make you such wings,
you can fly right through their marble halls.
You could drink immortality from the spigot,
bring some back for your son. No,
of course they couldn’t kill you, idiot.
You will be one of them.

All night the willow sweeps,
but the creek never runs
any cleaner: black water
slaps past spattered rocks;
caught in the snag
one plastic bottle bobs
like the red-tailed hawk
harassed by grackles;
feathers, straw, broken shell
fleck the draggled grass.
All night the eyes rove
under their lids, searching
sheens and shadows, but you
never come any closer.

After I’m got, I never want to get.
They hit the buzzer, then they lock me in
and top me with a come-on like a threat.
I never want to get unless I’ve got
no money for the getting, and no spot
to put my body while the doing’s done.
I only want to get until I’m got.
They hit the buzzer, then they lock me in.

This is not your death. From under a plastic surgical cap 
         you see them gently lift the heart

from her chest. Place it into a shallow basin; wash it
         with care but this unsettles you. Like tenderly bathing

a child, they carry on cleaning the organ 
         and ignore you. 

Today they came for you at dawn, sirens
         calling out into the morning, ripping your windows in

tortured repetition while a medic
         swings open two white doors, this room, this hall

made for your inadequate body. There are only
         two things to do in an operating room: meet the eye-line 

of your surgeon and try to hold it, or, imagine
         a naked woman smoothing back

the splintered ends of your exposed valves. 
         This is not your death but a prelude, clinked out

on the stainless steel table where someone lays
         down a clamp, a knife, where your silence

agrees to die without you.

I took my place among the men
and lessoned to their conversation —
their talk of clews and halliards
and all their catalogues and lists
of ropes and running gear and sails
slablines spankers brail and outhall —
then I showed them magic lantern slides
of kangaroos and horses on the plains.
The ranging foam is bitter as it’s bright
it measures out the world it stretches back
to where it never did begin or always
it’s beginning telling time without intending —
our sail is this bright gnomon casting shadows
on the tumbling furniture of the sea.

In the beginning, none of us could tell rock
from bone. Some claim the desert was once a sea,
and the statue we found facedown in the sand
was a god who hardened as the waters dried.
Others say raiders stole it from an imperial city
but buried it when they discovered its curse.
Each morning we welcome bodies
from under the giant and reassemble them
in postures of praise. The colossus daily releases
the fossilized disciples beneath it, but the revelation
of stone is slow. Our mallets grow worn, our dowels
dull. The earth falls away, and still it hides
its face from us. We sleep on its back, dance
on its neck, and in sandstorms we crawl beneath
its hands and pray the wind won’t take us.
We measure the width of its shoulders, take the radius
of its bald heels, wind ropes around its shoulders,
winch it to a wheel, but none of us turns the handle
to raise it. What if we recognize the face? What if
the world doesn’t end here? Everything will come true —
the flood, the famine, the miracle.

All those who can have turned their windows dark.
Nobody wants to look into the sleepless gaze
of the house where things ran out. I mean to say,
the things that carried him. Or so they said,
who witnessed all that noise, a tea-colored moon
in its biggest, roundest form, a pregnant belly,
and the valley fog gone wandering up the road.
The sound they heard was like a sow, gleeful,
just tucked into corn. The facts, though; I was after those.
They ran and hid. He was wearing green,
they said. A frog-headed bathrobe
and one striped sock. I wondered if they
shook the kid. Or if he wandered off,
though the mother said he could not lift the latch.
She showed me through the gall-swept, widdered room
where I began to believe. What makes shadows
that don’t leave when the living do?
And on the floor beside the bed,
a scrubby stick, two yellow leaves pinned on
like jaundiced eyes. Unblinking, starred.
She couldn’t bear to throw it out.
Evidence, I said. She numbly stroked
the dry face of the wood.
It stared up at the corner of the room.
A hint of breeze. The curtains stirred.

Say Volvo, say gearshift and straddle, say
we rubbed to plums our chafing rash for days
after parking at the rest stops of Tulia,
of highway fuzz and drizzling windows, drool you
spilt, drools you didn’t; say Nirvana, Kurt
Cobain, our pissed-off crooner, say your skirt
just wouldn’t cover; say shy, say one finger
hooked in a Levi’s waistband, hipbones, bringer
of tented boxers; say Strawberry Hill,
Boone’s, George’s Liquor Shack, hot, purple spills
where Mad Dog 20/20 couldn’t wait
any longer and leapt to where the straight
canyons of our opened throats closed; say Mars,
God of the yellowed hickie marks,
say proof for locker room philosophers,
midnights spent inside a rearview mirror
to hide our acne caves in infinite
digressions; say lace bras so intricate
that even now I wake up thumbing over
my pillow, hoping I can somehow cover
my lack of deftness with a greasy kiss,
a small of the back massage, the steady hiss
of friction, denim gloved and burning wires
inside pale skin we took for granted; say fire,
and mean you smoke sometimes in the back of cars,
scratching holes into your jeans with a choir
of fingernails, ignoring their entropic scars.

My skin crinkles like cellophane. It disintegrates
in the sun. There is nowhere to run to, but I still run.
Every sunrise is a birth or a trick of the Earth’s rotation.
Every sunset is an opening into darkness or without alternative.
If I dreamt I set a field on fire, was it a field of plastic?
This green smoke settles on the skin and burns like ice, like stone.
In space no days pass, and so we never age. We mellow. We steep.
We grow stronger and stronger in our small cup of steel.
Then we die without warning, without goodbye, as nature intended.
As nature intended, we fall to the earth in flames, heaven-pushed
by jealous gods and wreathed in the glory of satellites. They expected
us to die, but we became our own saints. They gave us fire,
and from fire everything depended. O immortal plastic!
Here is a drought-starved town. Here is a dry field. Here is a match.

Eight women practice the music
of their bodies: white dresses
raised to show ankles, a suggestion
of pale calves, stockings. Behind them,
the mirrored wall repeats their gardenia-
blossomed hair, the way they lean
their hips into the piano player,
touch him with their floral-sweat
scent. He is young, background,
an ear, a coat, a few fingers floating
above the keys. The mirror too high
to hold anything but an idea of dark
hair, eyebrows, forehead. Each sound
he names, the sharps and flats, each
a woman dancing, a woman
turning toward the camera, her voice
a scale repeating itself into the flash-
bright walls, the gesture of his fingers
lifted before the first sound comes out.

In the dark of the theater, there are more fuck yous
than hallelujahs. I came in from the heat to escape
the essential questions — to leave my body and climb into
the white hot cocoon of an atom bomb. I want the thick, kick-drum
of a sonic boom to shift my guts from left to right and all the potential
murderers to shine, briefly, like a matchstick flicked from a book.
I know outside, the sun steams the sodas left in the cars
into a sticky tar, and above, the helicopters shred the air
into chronic whats, keeping time with their traffic watch,
but here, there’s AC, a plot, and the genius of
metaphysics as simple as a shotgun. Here, the cool
scribble of a fan and the tacky floor and the audio
constellating above the heads of the other movie goers,
loving us like no other machine could.
I hear the old people talking in the dark with their cares,
large and anonymous. Cue the music.
Every body aware of the image coming to the screen.
Cue the credits and our seven dollar hope
for the destruction of the world. Cue the density
of our bodies in the seats. Our claustrophobic hearts.
Our throats. Hold us, dear oblivion.

Though there’s no boat the rain
waits among the waves
the way every bridge faces the ocean

then leaps into rock once water
used to tides and the stench
from a small stone wearing out

smoldering, half cinders, half
as if it was bathing her cheeks
over and over in this shallow path

remembered only as your shadow
holding down a single splash
— nothing drifts off, all these years

heading nearer to the bottom, sifting
beneath her lips for coastline
for seabirds then arms and feet and kisses.


Little pig. You hug the ground, wide nostrils
chasing down some phantom scent. You even
-toed ungulate, you thick-skinned swine. What

would your mother think of you now, knee deep
in slop and hoofing for children, for treats? Little
pig. She gave you breath, short legs, a heavy flank

for the wild. For the instinct that explodes inside
you like a star. To run, to run. Feel your strong
tusks splitting through soft gum. Don’t you know

the ground glints with bones? You can have it all.
Little pig, raise your head. If you’re going to wear
those wings, you must believe you can fly.

While playing tennis, I never think of death.
Instead, I notice the clouds like a white shag rug

when I toss the ball up high for the serve,
my face filling with sky and neon green fuzz,

and then that wonderful thwack
as I smash matter against matter

with the body’s happy violence.
Game over, my opponent leaves for work,

and there’s nothing as glorious as an empty tennis court
surrounded by walnut trees on a morning in October.

So why does sadness flow
like bees and honey through my chest,

and I suppose that’s too poetic,
but brace yourself for more literary horror:

tears fall, and I’m sure you’ll groan when I revise
and tell you the little valleys beneath my eyes

are wet, or perhaps I should get literal and precisely
name them: wrinkles. Don’t worry, the seizure of feeling

has passed, and I won’t mention autumn
or longing like the breeze lifting

the edges of the clouds and rolling them up
to disappear into infinity’s storage unit.

I won’t say a thing about the V of geese rising
above the chain-link fence, their calls

sounding exactly like nuns keening, and not a whisper
will I breathe about my hunger for God.

I will go do my errands and pretend living
doesn’t sometimes rip my heart like a backhand shot

down the line, or too often seem like dandelion dust
scattering over the beautiful, mortal tennis court.

After, we sprawl. Our arms looped,
my foot against your calf, your hand
on my thigh, a completed circuit,
uncomplicated. As we drift, your fingers
start the nerve spasm of sleep,
morse code tap as you passage,
a message I do not know
how to decipher. I let your dispatch
play through me, chains of letters
that tell everything
you haven’t said, so many words
strung together — and I can’t
make sense of them.
I am sinking too, into a night
where we turn and settle —
our communiqués in the form of pulse
and slow breath. Before sleep
takes me, I imagine a cable to you,
each word well-chosen, costly…
one of us will leave
I will remember my body
ached for you like no other stop

Our morning is the movement of a wound,
the trace of heartbeat I stranded under your shirt.

Afternoon, the pages of a novel sticking.
Its chapters speak step by step of attrition,

a guidebook for a bleak beatitude.
Anaphora for an afternoon:

when we rode to the country,
when we sucked rocks at the riverbed,

when a familiar gloom
creeped in under our happiness.

The dire sun curled against my limbs
and dead aspens rose like ribcages

in the mountains. Face it —
you leak dissipation on every book you pray over.

The bus stop guards the carcass
of an elementary school,

its walls and wiring gutted out.
We wait in the white dark of morning.

Often I wonder what happened
to lost buttons as well as husbands.
We are in love and then not and then
our coats hang open.

Today, I won’t go anywhere.
I will untie myself.
Tomorrow, my life will be over,
so I need to practice.

The light on my hands looks real,
and so does my skin with its gold hairs
like any soft animal.
The body is a museum of dreams and trinkets
and hatchets and unsent letters.

I’m concerned about coffins. There are many of them
disrupting the moss.

What if you could snap
your fingers and disappear?
What if you couldn’t snap
yourself back?
It would be okay
during committee meetings
when I hear the word “productivity.”

You can’t think too much about who you are
because you’re not that person.
You’re more like a lamp. On, off. On, off.
I like to be on but then I get tired
and want someone who doesn’t think too much
about who he is to stroke my arm hairs.
This Friday, my father will be eighty-seven.
He wants socks and spaghetti.
You and I both know the trouble we’ve seen.
Here, let me button your coat.

Sit. You're making too much noise.
			  	                         Bad boy.
Think about it: what's it going to look like,
you in my room, in just your underwear,
on an all-girls' floor in the freshman dorm?
I think you'd want to think about that fact.
I'll take that gag off, if you can sit still.
Okay, it's up to you. You know those cuffs
would hurt a lot less if you could just relax.
Remember, you're the one who put them on.
You put them on. And then you just passed out,
like you were dead. I tried waking you, even
pried your lids up but your eyes were white,
which scared me 'cause I thought you might be dead.
I've never seen a person so . . . zoned out.
Sometimes, I try to imagine that I'm dead,
as if I weren't here, as if I was
invisible and I could walk around
with everything still going on without me.
What difference would it make if I were gone?
Like zero difference, you know what I mean?
It's okay with me. It's true. But nice of you
to try to disagree.
		                 You're a sweetie.

I'm always blown away by people's kindness;
no, really, it just always knocks me out,
when someone drops the edginess we use
to keep away invaders, and, let's face it,
they're everywhere you go — the crosstown bus,
the grocery store, joggers in Central Park,
especially them, so smug, so master-race.
That's why I can't believe we ever met.
Not you and me. I mean this guy I loved.
I didn't really plan it, didn't ask for it,
you know, and that's how come I knew I loved him.
That's how it comes to you, not when you're looking,
but when your head is turned the other way.
I loved him. And I also loved his dog.
My dog loved his dog. That's the way we met,
at the dog run.

		             Actually, there were two near me:
a bigger run — much fancier but farther —
and, underneath the bridge, the scrappy one.
I started at the nicer one, you know,
walked down the extra blocks, because I thought,
since there were more dogs there, the better chance
of finding one that Lulu'd want to play with.
The nicer one had lots of dogs and space,
with little islands made of piled-up rocks.
But it was crap. The dogs there all were dead.
I mean they just seemed kind of dazed, like robots,
as if the life had just drained out of them —
like zombie dogs, Night of the Living Dogs —
or maybe they were all on Ritalin,
you know, the way they give that now to kids?
Meanwhile, the people there — the regulars —
they didn't notice. All they did was gossip,
blah-blah-blah, blah-blah, blah-blah, blah-blah,
talking about the way the neighborhood
had gone to hell and how they'd grown up there,
about their fancy breeders. Yak-yak-yak.
The dogs were sweet. Mostly they just looked stunned.
No one played with them or threw a ball.
People got annoyed when dogs would play,
but why else are they there — to rub and chase
and roll and hump each other in the dirt?
Lulu they just hated; she loved to run.
She'd tried to get the other dogs to chase her
by nipping at them; no, it wasn't biting.
Nipping. You'd put your finger in her mouth,
and she'd just hold it there between her teeth,
possess it, so you couldn't take it back,
but never even hurting you, never, you see?
(Just grunt to let me know that you can hear me.)
But to them she was a wolf: blood-thirsty, feral,
and everyone would whisper when she came.

	                          Then Lulu got a pigeon.
It wasn't her fault. I was standing right outside
the metal gate, where everyone could see us.
Lulu was a huntress; she hunted everything,
mice and squirrels, and earthworms she'd dig up.
But what she wanted most of all were pigeons.
Like those cartoons: the ones in which the dog's
pupils turn to drumsticks. She would pounce
at them, completely driven, every muscle
in her body, every hair on fire to catch
that bird, and not just catch it, eat it, too.
I've never seen her looking happier
than in that moment, when her choke collar
zipped tight like a big fish taking a hook,
and her leaping at it, airborne, twisting around
to catch it in her teeth.
			               The people freaked.
I started screaming, pulling on the leash,
but she had it in her mouth, between her paws.
When I reached in to free the thing, she growled,
and I came up with bloody hands and wrists.
It wasn't mine. Though I wondered if it was,
if she'd bitten me. But she would never do that.
Not even in the ecstasy of it.
That's another way that dogs are different.
They're hugely civilized, more so than we are.
So, that was it for the fancy uptown run.
We wound up at the dingy run in winter,
where the wind rips off the river, mostly empty,
where Lulu met Reynaldo, a scruffy schnauzer.
They ran until their tongues flapped down their chins.
Then Rey-Rey's owner started making small talk —
just casual, like stories from the paper,
training tricks, dog stories — like you do.   

I waited on the days he didn't come.
It felt first like a little irritation,
so that I didn't notice it. But then
I actually ached for him when he was gone.
I told myself that Lulu missed Reynaldo,
but then one morning in the freezing rain
I saw him as we were coming along the river
towards the run, and Lulu started pulling
on her choke chain — she nearly pulled my arm off.
For two whole blocks she strained, just acting nuts.
She pulled the leash free of my hand and ran.
And as I stood there in the sleet I knew
that I had missed him so incredibly
I almost started crying. And the dogs,
leapt up to catch each other in their paws,
like ballroom dancers circling the floor,
upright, on hind legs, balanced arm in arm.
I felt like that was us, but not imagined it,
actually felt — as we stood there silently,
unmoving, watching, side-by-side —
that we were pressing up against each other,
swaying into the matted whorls of fur,
my teeth clamped on his skin, saliva flying.
I think I came. My legs let go a little.

I'm going to take these off, but understand
that once you leave this room you won't say anything.
Unless you want your father and the cops
to see these pictures on the internet:
you look asleep, it's true, but how to explain it?
Sometimes I wonder if it isn't possible
that loves we have in our minds are the real ones,
the ones that matter to us most of all,
the ones that we take with us to the grave.
I guess I'm sorry that it won't be you
I'm supposed to love.
		                     Now let me free your mouth.

Standing in this current, trying
to thread a 4X tippet through the eye
of this Woven Stone I’ve chosen over
a Princess, missing and missing
the eye, sweating, finally through,
and you, tonight,
the secret of rivers,
that long neck of yours panting
in the lamplight coming at that high,
long angle from the hallway to the dark
where I cast a shadow on you
and you don’t know it.

A set of twins is born a sort of pun,
By wit half-author’d — unintended double;
Flocks of dull pens therefore, abortive son,
May brood, and scratch, and peck, and for their trouble
Leave not a peep, in laboring to explain
The hole that’s torn when half the meaning’s lost.
I think the womb knows no such singular pain
When twice abandon’d. Thine imperfect ghost
Shows everywhere: in mine own mirror’d face,
And (in another way) behind thy mother’s;
Clearest and weirdest in that watery trace
Which mocks thy birthmate, stranded since her brother’s
Sole self adrift — disjoint from earth and heaven —
Struck out, left one behind. Thou wert eleven.

Reports on the radio & news stories: nothing we believed,
	& weeks since I saw you, your plane then on its flight across
the country, when we said next time those weeks would
	never pass. They were horrific & walked slowly down our street,
& still I thought: some prank, before their guns spit webs
	of pink & bodies turned to cocoons, before the man bolted
& didn’t make it alive, lifeless & bouncing near the truck
	that sped away, before I wanted to scream for them
to find you, since I knew then I could not be saved. But I waited
	in the dark, my face hidden in the black, & watched
as they vacuumed & collected, piles & piles on rainbow sleds,
	& listened for a knock, feet busting down the door.
But nothing came. I was there for hours, fell asleep until dawn —
	party streamers & confetti still littering the streets.

Cherry blossoms are over; there are no bears or cats or dogs among the roses.
There are three nests in my two apple trees, and now the robins are shrieking.
It is time to move north, back to the proper table. It worries me, a minute’s
dreadful blackout, at times a torment. There is luxury in putting off, but only
in boring solitude is agony absorbed. One should stay severely alone, not
wander down to that dream-town or have funny conversations with two
Scandanavians who find something haunting about my hairdresser. A woman
needs the mud, the deadness, the quiet, to hear the imagination roar with
possibilities. I shackle myself to silence, to all the rawness of learning,
practice stillness. The heart beats twice a day when the train goes through.

Mother he is
A gentleman of honor he is
A builder of ships
My hands have gone
Coarse, upholstered in
Orchard, mending, churn
My corset has
Collapsed, spider heap
I freckle, I lengthen, I watch
Other wives, the sweep
Of their skirts, their flocking
I am compassless, astir,
A map trembling
Mother I’ve grown
Taller I’ve let down my hems
I am fruit-stained
Mornings, my harvest: golden
persimmon, berries, pomegranate
Bleeding they’ve named
Their apples ‘Anna’
There are legends there are
Saints at night
He reaches for me, breathes
Windlass, ballast, mast he talks
In his sleep, make your bones
A home for my love I am stair rail
I am threshold he goes through me
I am window undulating glass
I am certain
The hills crawl nearer
In the night their roll and swell
Mother I am well

A woman’s face in the wood-grain —
in the dust — of the fan-blade

above the bed.

Half asleep I see her:
shoulder-length hair,

bullet eyes, dimed mouth —
dimpleless — and think

of equestrian shows, the manicured —

mannequined — faces and lawns,
or the race track there by the river:

their hooves, the thunder
of them through the dirt,

their short-breathed beauty,

and then of you, my wife —
our search in search of searching:

the babies fast asleep,
us spooned on our sides,

the TV, muted, plays some movie

of dreams or nightmares,
and we count together

the whirls of the fan,
each breeze

the lick of another year.

Not that the dead care
what day we remember,

if we touch a silent match
to history and watch

it pull against the wick,
the flame a past that wakes

again and again, a man
who can’t quite understand

where he is. Or who.
What we cannot know

we give a date, a place,
the missing part of us

we see now everywhere,
though who’s to say it’s there

until the candle makes
it so, until this smoke

signs the atmosphere.
Earth turns and so turns over

some dull and weary shovel
that cannot grieve them all.

Death too is growing old.
And strangely it’s the child

who talks to things that burn,
waiting for an answer.

It’s the trance of those
who sit motionless

in dying rooms and stare
into the candle’s star,

thinking it’s their story
now, their body’s body,

their dim sight year by year
passing through the fire.

On the news, war tumbles on.
Protestors fall in the street.
A child comes home

to find her mother,
father, and babysitter dead.
A mother and baby

are diagnosed together.
A sophomore girl is gunned down,
by mistake, in an elevator.

I switch off the television
and step outside. What does it take
to see what darkness gives?

Tonight, it crosses my mind
how gone you are, and stars,
if stars say anything, say Otherwise.


Like ushers, telephone-wire crows convene slowly.
Night’s a book of hours into which we lean slowly.

Tent and campfire abandoned, the log smokes its last.
Moonlight mixed with gin drips from a canteen slowly.

What doesn’t break us, conspires to kill. Waiting. Words.
Ink bleeding into a wind that turns mean slowly.

The flame jogs woodenly, struggling to catch. Blood, too,
is a heavy breather that serves its queen slowly.

Guitar strings run the length of my arm like six roads.
Cut the strings! Let these lines learn to keen slowly.

Into the blank margins, the Laugh Guru laughs, as
if the heart could maroon its routine slowly.

Vesper smoke dissolves in an illusion of ease.
Evening invented it. Let night come clean slowly.

The question is, of course, how could one not
Think of Romeo and Juliet (as cliched as that
May sound) — with you, high atop an orange ladder,

And all the potted ferns in bloom, or whatever they were,
Though what could it matter, seeing that they were
All fake. I’m sorry, I didn’t get your name. Your assistance
Was beautiful, and, yes, I found the caulk

Needed to patch the ruined wall, the wall I ruined
Trying to hang my Audrey Hepburn still.
Who calls photos “stills” anymore? People must

Think that antiquated, like saying eros when
You mean desire. I’m sorry, I didn’t get your name,
Though I suppose it’s good to have a place
To pat and smooth with a spade, a place to leave,

A place to return to. And no, I wasn’t certain
Of your return policy, but who’s really sure
About anything? What could go wrong? And besides,

I try not to return purchases, even if I’m unhappy
With them. I’m sorry I didn’t get your name
But believe it was as beautiful as the swatch of
Robin’s egg or swatch of apricot I pocketed,

Because it’s good to leave with something, isn’t it?
Time-card punched and apron slipped, like
Snake-husk, over a hook. I should talk you down

From that ladder. Say here, take my hand. I know
All too well how the store must feel, emptied.
After everyone has left, and its letters still burn.
Take my hand. What could possibly go wrong?

So many automobiles. It must be Friday night.
These are the golden eyes of catatonia of the valley.
Of. They are the lights of of. Their procession
is a thread of yellow ore
across one bridge, across another
confluence of rivers,
the ones that sometimes leave their beds
            and leave the shambled houses bare.
Well, even to belong in this congested state,
you have to spend a little bourbon on your nerves.
                        They keep their low-beams on.
            It's part of of, a subset of belong.

Switching gears, to Slaughterhouse Rd.
            or Garden Hwy., or up to the junction,
or out to the boat ramp at cottonwood Star Bend.
Everyone's a little wet in the vee tonight,
            they're all getting sticky on the bucket seats.
In their humid zones, there are humid smells.
                        They stopped for eats.
Will everyone be fed this good in heaven?
Hey there, cowboy. Here's your Whopper.
All roads lead first to Burger King it seems.
Or Hal's Grubstake, home of the dudeburger.
This is one of those dreams that cause sleep-eating
            in which, as we float across a tiny bridge,
our bodies, patty and bun, converge
and all we got to do is put the mustard on.
The condiments of of can't stop your heart.

Of intimacy that flourished here, an outlaw,
just as the outlaws themselves had flourished
            in the slapstick goldrush days, and men
who came from China without wives, and boys
who bundled together in the Okie jalopies, girls
finding their way together through the pass, and others
            leaving Mexico or Vietnam behind
could reinvent the space they occupied.

Of teens, as teens must do, eating the potato nuggets
of cupidity, scheming them onto that hunting road
of dirt, whereupon the greatest intimacy
                        of of and in and through occurs.
Of all the random shots one young man takes,
            of hit-and-run trade, the hidden features
of men with boogie-woogie on their minds. Their cups
of catsup and other dipping sauces creating little o's
of transparency in their suck-me-off jeans.
Of horrible missteps with fucked up chums.
                        Of low desire. Of powerful urges.
Of release by one's own adulterous hand.
Of and of and of the feeling.
Of somebody else should drive.

Push Push in the Bush is the title of a dance hit,
            but it's just as easily a country song.
Out there, in the dark, they have found each other
like lightning bugs, despite the pesticides, despite
the blights that hit a town's periphery and stay.
There is a luminescence of all things.
            Of all things, which are of a place.
The place where they begin. Therefore, belong.

If enough of us could land among the rest.
If this reflected gleam — drift, waft, sullen
wind — would wait for the next gust
before leaning headlong into the heap
that used to be the garden,
we’d join with each slush & flake, melt
into pools that tomorrow’d be a perfect glare
ice union for run-&-slide, slip-&-fly.
If figure skates.
If mittens. March would crunch dry
under tracks, sell its subzero Midwestern truth
for a late-model carol. And when the squall
forgets its origin (so long since anything
but frozen kaleidoscopes),
when schools run out of snow
days, we’ll hit you stiff, calamity of whiteout
thicker than a sky full of marshmallows,
storm within a storm, & you’ll sleep
one more night with your boots on,
shiver yourself warm under polarfleece
& patchwork, breathe in quick
through your numb nose, & you’ll love
the dumb, early dark harder than ever.

What we heard about thirst was true.
Everywhere, water. Everywhere, salt.
And we drank it. We learned to love
our crumpling bones. Each sunspot
on our skin deserved a christening.
Distance gifted the world a shimmer.
Time passed, perhaps. We grew wolfish.
Spears of birdcall. Unthinkable birds.
We searched for the isle of women.
We searched for our dead fathers.
We searched for the hardware store.
We were used to solitude. Some of us
had worked the mills, where skylights cracked
and loaned us stars. We learned to relish
the ownership of hours. Our sheets
acceded to the torpor. If you must,
call it sickness — the sea colonized us.
Below muslin, our heartbeats thrilled,
lazy as laps. Breezes licked our faces flat.
If we wept, we wept soundless as sand.
What wave would betray our trust?

You joined me, last night, in the bargaining bed,
in the deep reasonableness of dreams,
and much of what could be said (it should be said)
was not, but midnight saw the major themes

touched on, at least — as family and friends meanwhile
slipped through the door, and sat by us, and peered
with excellent bedside manner and small smile,
then rose and crept out; finally the room cleared —

and there were strange adjustments: head to foot
we lay, then back to back, then face to face.
Shifting and shifting. Till the stars were moot,
and a sense reached of things proceeding apace.

It must be a day in winter
in the painting where the bulls are fighting.
The two bulls hurl breaths of steam
that occupy the distance.
One is white, the other ginger.
I step closer —
the water and light are working everywhere.
Sweat drips like glittering wool along their backs
and from their testicles that sling
like pendulums below their bellies.

Bulls fight because they are bulls, my father explains,
shrugging his shoulders.
Without argument, I believe him —
he raised me to trust him this way,
just as his father trained the family’s bulls
to fight in fenced meadows.

Sometimes the bulls wandered into the hills,
fucking the neighbors’ cows before they were sold.
Then they would return to the village,
lowing as they followed their new masters
as though to graze or to die, no one would know.
The villagers spoke of the afterlife
as one would speak of bargaining: a bad person
turned into a horse, a bad horse into a monkey,
a bad monkey into a worm,
a good worm into a cow.

It is difficult to keep track of the animals
and the figures in the gallery, even though they stand still.
My father has already moved
to a painting with a lion clamping its jaws
on the back of a horse.

In the morning I will teach you once again to play
a song on the viola d’amore. Under your chin the six
strings shivering the luck of gypsies. The fingerboard
can be a neck, can be an arm extended. In place of a scroll,
you will find Eros carved and blindfolded as a mutinist
made to walk the plank. Every winter I undress quickly,
I let my bare feet meet the floorboards if only for time
long enough to touch the dust on it. I have not had many
dreams. There remains the one where, in a field of
perpetual knots — catshanks and bowlines growing
like wildflowers — a fire and its hands does not burn them,
but instead unties each in unison. I wear the apron
of a luthier. You have a bit of flour in the turn of your ear
and when the sun rises, it peels into an onion.
Oh Captain! My Captain! There is evil in my thigh
for you. My liver, the beveled muscles of my hand.
I will feed you the sugar from its jar. If the wooden
spoon is scabrous, I am the one who whittled it. But know
this: I will gladly pick the splinters from your tongue.

Say sepulcher and then we will make love —
our body’s balance broken by a touch,
a tremor slight enough to raise the dead.
Call me strange for the comfort I find
in any coffin’s chance to forever rest.
Allow me to die slowly in your hospital,
even from afar. This is my guitar:
blue, purple, red, the elephant’s kneebone
making music it won’t ever forget.
Five wooden Buddhas sit beside our bed.
One dressed in beads from this year’s Mardi Gras.
Undressing means we will open Heaven’s gate.
Your nakedness is my cosmic headdress,
which I wear on our starry, tongue-fueled flights
through the cosmos, fatigued to phosphorous —
white-hot and burning bright the God we call to.
There’s something to be said for how you come
and go, particle, wave, the icy slope
without beginning or end. Say it again.
Say how the lightness of being in love,
comes with a paper bed,
and matches.

Oh, March. All the ice cracking at once
like a banquet of spreading veins. Our poor
square house sinking another quarter inch,
the foundation we were warned about
playing right into the home inspector’s claims.
Oh, fractures. Oh flooding oh fissures oh snaps.
But even after he delivered his report,
the cry we mustered was: But we love it!
We have to have it! And so each year, the house
takes us down a little lower. Each year
we find ourselves a little closer to the dirt,
that yard a veritable garden of soggy dog shit
once the snow melts.
But some plucky sprout of green
is pressing on, forcing its way out of the ground,
all impetus and pure will. And our neighbor
raises a hand when we leave for work in the morning.
What do you think — is it spring yet? Just call it what it is.
Instead of trying to mend them, just let broken
fences stay broken. Magnificently wrecked.

When I wanted you bird, you bared.
Unzipped and high, you grasped
the bedpost and begged,
Isn’t this all for truth?
I ran through the snow
and you were there.
You said let’s love like the lotus
but how does the lotus love?
The storm licked us
wet. I wanted a lovemonger.
You were a warmonger, a stingy
color, a west. When I say
I’m going east, you say screw me
in half. Darling, this isn’t violence.
You are more than deliberate.
The wind blows me this way.
I am figuring you out.

Another house fire. Another ruined suit.
	Another pile of ash. Another day ending in
		combustion instead of sleep. Another unholy

smoke alarm clang and sprinklers
	opening their emotional eyes, bursting
		tears as if I could care for anything

except destruction. Another symbol of
	renewal. Another damage deposit I won’t
		be getting back. Another taste of sulfur,

rotten eggs blossoming on the tongue
	like dying stars. Another suit of feathers
		I’ve outgrown. Another flammable

moment excited by its own gasoline
	and drunk on its power to vanquish. Fuel
		for the bed, another resignation from this

torture of form, a blessing in the lionlike
	roar of fire like hunger’s call. Another
		contract shredding into bits — my body

and me, the bursting forth of the only
	part of me that cannot burn: my will to live
		tossing a book of matches over my shoulder

as I leave the husk of my body behind
	like a locust plugging its transparent skin
		into the bark of a tree. The acrid scent

of burning in the nose. Another reconstruction.
	Another first page. Another story beginning
		with pain and ending with another kind of pain.

1.
You came to put up with
the buxom peonies
Helga kept bringing.
First you asked them to stop
the prednisone, next the valium,
finally you waved away
even the laxatives
your bowel had so long given over to.
The white nun of morphine
tended you prayerlessly,
while all I could do
was spoon-feed you fewer
ice chips, tuck
the last gorgeous medicines
under your tongue.
2.
After they come and take you,
the day is simple: the shade being raised,
room emptied, conversational
tones of voice in the hallway,
bathroom scrubbed echo-clean,
sky uninhabitably blue, no birds
moving across it, then one, then many,
while even the hospice Monday
grows busy with sheet-changing,
jokes getting told, time in the throes
of being ignored,
therapy dogs and friends
settling in for an hour or two,
hoping they’ll know
when to go.

My eyes read my eyelids when I dream
the long straight ache of miles below.
It’s exhausting, the great chain of being

alive, bed to the floor, floor to the planet.
The heart beats its pillow like a path.
Some nights I walk forever that way,

unsure of what it is I walk, if what
they say is true, that the world as we know it
stands on the back of an elephant

who stands on a turtle, and under him
another, and so on down the endless stairs.
What is it that speaks before it speaks.

That thing you cannot find the words for,
it falls away the moment that you find them.
Some days you hear it singing as it falls.

What does it explain if I believe
language is the mother of its language.
Every voice a child, a little stranger,

born of flesh and the hole inside it.
If you holler in this well, you hear
it reply in the form of a question.

The limits of my language are the beginnings
of my world. Wait and see, says the world.
And see, and see, the tunnel of the eye.

Just as they always said. The flashing. The slowing down.
	My big brother, five years old, smile charming as the antichrist.
My father eating pork and beans straight from the can.
	There I am in a ripped plaid shirt. Mouth full of teenage snark.

A smashed deer twitching on the pavement. My mother crying.
	My great-grandfather’s gravestone in the front yard.
A Confederate flag flying over the fire station.
	An old woman riding a horse. Cars lined up behind her.

There’s my leg. A bloody bone sticking out. Mud on the end of it.
	The cliffs at Billy Goat’s Bluff, Alabama. Hang-gliders jumping off.
There’s a big foreign city with me in the middle of it. Prague, maybe.
	A tractor and my grandpa lying dead beside it on the ground.

School buses full of kids in army uniforms.
	There’s me holding the hand of a pretty girl who looks unhappy.
An electric organ. Loud noise. A preacher shouting over it.
	Clustered holly bushes with hornets’ nests inside.

A dusk-lit forest ravine. Leaves soft and thick as a mattress.
	There I am in summertime shoving honeysuckle blossoms down my diaper.
There I am in the grocery store with a gallon of two-percent
	and now the bullet chewing meat and bone and now me stupid. Smiling.

We curled in the dark gymnasium corner, breath
making plumes of the dust. No one heard
our bodies pressing, sweating through our clothes.
Onstage, a man whispered into a microphone. Listen,
he said, for what is here. The Lord is with us.
A sparrow thrashed in the ductwork. An industrial fan
heaved against its frame.
				We’d met on a rooftop
that morning, passing shingles out in long, black banners,
ten-penny nails dangling from our stern lips
like shrapnel. But as she reached inside my jeans
and my penis hardened across her palm, she stroked
me with the gentleness of prayer.
				I heard my blood,
the gym lights flickered, heat impaled me like a spear.
Far from the love we were taught, ours was a half-gasp
and her voice. Don’t move. They’ll see us if we open our eyes.

When your bed is too well-made
to be any kind of invitation, we spill
ourselves on the kitchen floor,
my hairy torso your mop, though
cleanliness is last on our minds — first
comes the music of the throat, percussive
bones, skin taut to the neck, the wood.
The liturgy comes with parishioners,
a circle of olive pits & cigarette
butts from the pew of your ashtray.
The cold tile holds a black mass, creasing
demonology down my back.
You say you desire me more than the sun
desires the moon. You recite Li Po,
describing the dense crescent
of my skull. The curdled milk
of my cuticles.
		But I am not the ghost
you think I am. I am flesh & you are
my fixation — penitent, & I hope, merciful.
You sing wo ai ni, tucked between my
thighs, the air thick with hair. You think
this is love, but it gets lost in translation.
I whisper what you really meant to say —
I harm you. I harm you. I harm you.

When you died, I felt like kissing
a pencil and breaking it into pieces
eating it stuffed inside a spring roll
with enough ginger to make my nose snot
and it wasn’t because I knew you or coveted
your leathers: it was because you collected
forks and read Tolstoy on the toilet
seat in Paris, because you loved guinea
pigs and smiled on the Anna Sui
runway when you weren’t supposed to,
and for that I, too, like to fork myself —
you, who buy the pants off a homeless
man and wear them, who pretend
you are a monster with your paillettes
on macramé, your face paler than the flesh
of a nashi pear. What was this wish for the hour
when no one sees her face on the spoon?
Say hi to your warmest destination: not sauna,
nor tropics, nor lovers — it was the heat source
in the furs — capybara furs, flame-retardant
furs, furs knives can’t cut, furs that trapped
oxygen, human body, and you, swimming
now, out at sea in your midnight flowers,
Angora rabbits, where the monsters
stay lovely every fall and spring.


Steaming, longer boys would grab
our trunks and yank them down to size
us up. You had to find a corner
quick and keep one hand locked tight
around your junk while pulling up,
inch by stubborn inch, while jocks
roared cockeyedly.
			Thank god
they never saw that flap of skin
sandwiched between two fingers,
a secret trying to slip the gate
of flesh and bone, hoping to
expose my wholeness to the world
when holiness was based on severance
endured — divorce, abuse — as if
that little bit of skin were clipped
and pinned against each sprouting chest,
a merit badge, a drooping bloom
that signified the essence of a man.

So when my college buddy calls
to ask me whether he should cut
his newborn, I equivocate
despite the recent trends. Before
I tell him Keep him whole, my hand
creeps down and traces where the knife
might easily have slipped between
the cells and made a man of me.

Wet pink shock of a sliced-open
peach, pit hard between our teeth,
 reached in a liquid, honest hurry.
Peach in the fingers of a certain lover’s hand.
Peach juice sliding down the wrist of a man
with assertive hungers. Peach, bringer
of rapture: the climax, but not
the fall. Peach sky rising up and up, free
of consequence. Impossible, but for
our chase of it. Peach in the crisper drawer,
softening. We hear stories of the pastor
and his book, so certain of fire, his biblical
calculus. Peach hot, sugared in an oven.
The mouth of red around the brain-
shaped, dumbstruck stone. Peach the very taste
of sin. Peach that sends the crows circling,
rapture here and gone. Peach God, rapt for carrion,
turning above us in the heavens, waiting for
us, ripening, to satisfy ourselves;
come to him pitted, come to him
finished, made rotten by
your sweet time in his sun.

Dear Madame —

I address you with a tongue calloused
and lumbering. Imagine the skein of my hair,
humble and falling, neck ravaged.
Based on your favored advice,

I have passed some days burning
the locked boxes my suitors sent me.
The firelight refracted by the fever flush,
sweat on my brow and collarbone.

There is a feral oath in my throat,
dear Lady, I confess it.
I have pilfered many ounces of blood
from my heart and placed them in the vial.

In the fire, the garnet fluid boils,
holy and unholy, still. I have no prayers,
but my bruised veins pulse beneath
slack skin, pale and thin muscle cover.

Madame, will you answer only this?
The voice that steals along these walls
and calls me to the flame, is it you speaking?
It is a sweet and viscous sound, like the port

I sip each night to bring me sleeping.
I await your reply. Do not be hurried.
There is tinder enough to keep the fire
and plenty of red meat to replenish the heart.

What you have seen is true. I was there. The city wrestled. The radio said this could be the big one, but who knew how to believe it? We gathered. I held on to my mother’s hand. I held on to my mother holding her mother’s hand. I didn’t dream this. Terrible noise. Terrible hollering. I slept through the hollering. Terrible wind-against-earth. I woke up. You might as well go back, my grandmother said. You done slept through all of it. I woke up. She was laughing. Oh, you should’ve seen it! It was morning. No sooner did he put head to pillow, Uncle Vernon shot up, hollering, ‘The roof! Damn storm done ate the roof!’ I didn’t dream this. There was a storm. Then there wasn’t. The day after came like a hammer through glass. The sky shook off his clothes and was brilliant. I tell you it was necessary: violence had to preface such beauty. The radio said stay inside, the levees are weak, and the crime–but what could contain my fire? I explored. I saw the down trees (they were beautiful), the down power lines (beautiful), and broken glass. I saw the life I once had rise from me like a tiny balloon. In the distance, the Dome. Bright. White as a burning eye. It had the permanency of a mountain—Ararat, where Noah landed. My God, I whispered. The radio said there is no god.

I held my breath a long time before I let the drowning take over.
And then I was stood up, was put upon.

Larynx like a great cup wrapped in muscle
held to the light.

Jesus yip and howl.
Pre-Janis, pre-James Brown.

More pop than anything.
Beatle-esque, Mersey Beat.

The preacher’s hands still snorkeling my mouth.
White gown heavy and gelatinous with holy tap water.

It would take a long time before the howl
would cure

into something rawer, more sexual.
Wilson Pickett’s Midnight Hour, Sam and Dave,

The Four Tops.
Motown poverty gloving my white boy’s hands

like a beautiful suede
as I pawed

whoever I was with back then
in the back of my father’s aqua Mustang

and got pawed back.
The organs of voice and respiration—

the catamaran of the lungs
when we curled up and pretended to sleep,

the mediastina,
the cargoed hearts—

dormant for a while in the mystery of skin
and Jesus

until the hermit (whose land this was, this back road)
crashed through the trees.

In her face lit by dash light I saw the moon
of my becoming

take its second shape as I fish-tailed out
of a pile of spitting gravel,

hermit with a shotgun like a cross-beam
and a pumping fist.

We’d stolen something from him we couldn’t name
and so we hit the highway.

Sucked our breath.
Radio-offed his rage.

She lifted her head to laugh, revealed for an instant
her muscular throat.

Scent of her skin on my skin,
I brought my fingers to my face

and let the coolness breathe.
Then rocked the car and pushed ahead into the valley of her singing.

Most animals will disguise a wound.
	Not you.

When I undressed you I discovered
a portrait of your ex

tattooed across your back. Her auburn hair
painted as waves of flame, her name

a petroglyph in the lithic skin
on your shoulder blade. Men

hunt in straight lines, arrow-like.
Women set nets, deceitful lines laced by hook and eye.

It’s a fox hunt in full cry,
horses and their scarlet-coated riders

with a pack of hounds in full pursuit.
In any courtship, there is the pursuer

and the pursued. Then the final curtain
when both draw their guns.

I searched for you through the battlefield’s smoke
and found you in ruins. The ghost

of my hands threaded through your black hair
mixed with blood and branches.

I couldn’t recognize which hunter I was.
There are no mirrors

in war. I thought I was Achilles.
Then, Hector.

I was two enemies at once.

This is the season I learn
foothold, to swing the slender blade

of self into loose soil, gain fragile purchase,
be sapling, be sail. From mismatched fabric

I have sewn these three: son, daughter, daughter.
Now linens roil on the line. I am steeped

in kitchen in crib. Hallway, stairway, the pitch
unforgiving, the loaned treasure of years

scatters into scree. I hear it falling. The children
trespass in the woods of my body, my heart

blisters, weeps. They sing their songs, honeyed
notes, belaying down window-glass steamed

in winter. They take ill. The inmost room
is called ‘the keep.’ This is the season

I learn a wild patience, be anchor
be oak, basin and bed, steady and steady

again. To keep my chambered secret: This
is not all I am. I know how

to fasten myself to headwall,
how to abseil, which means to render

a controlled descent down
a vertical surface, webbed in rope.

The lucky girls do not have to remember
their bodies. They walk to the open-air market
each morning to buy a croissant and the Times.
In the newspaper they read about women sent
like brown paper packages to a civilized country
to lie down in grease and men’s spit, their legs
propped open. There is a menu of services.
They are tattooed with what they owe. The lucky girls
are all reading Jane Eyre. They watch expensive cable
to see women in togas learn how to fuck. It is
another century. The starlet’s heavy breasts heave up
against her chin so that she throws her head back
in pleasure. In Spain, a woman in red pleather boots
leans into a car. The lucky girls clutch their maps, pretty
as painted sugar bowls. They murmur, where do we go after this.

Near the end, even asleep, you held
a book of Bruegel’s paintings,
a finger inserted to mark a favorite print
of people caught in a breath,
the death to come, hidden.
Your suffering imagined theirs.
Didn’t the skating children begin to cough
and drop away like loose buttons?
And the green sky, didn’t it always
hang like a block of ice above
the endless plots of snow?
Who wouldn’t think of hunger,
the mill wheel frozen, the flour gone,
the empty woods.
Yet the old woke and gathered sticks.
Hunters returned and village magpies
thickened their feathers for the night.
Fire, blankets, bodies
must have been what they imagined,
how before sleep a woman took
her child’s foot, unwrapped the leather,
peeled off the warmth-preserving hay.
We looked again at Hunters in the Snow—
the fire to the left brightening the inn,
its wind-blown sign hanging
by a single hinge.

In the morning there are waddling clouds
& the neighborhood women come out
with their babies to discuss the dreams
of their husbands. Crippled chimney bricks
are falling off his house. He of the wink
& walnut-crushing hands. He of the night without
dreams. Smoke causes a rustle in the bushes
of his sublimated will. He of salt & flannel.
A keen hunger has usurped him.
The Amish carpenters are framing a barn
on the horizon. Meanwhile, in a factory
that never closes my father throws bags of salt
onto a conveyor belt & when he breaks
he pries his feet from steel-toed boots
& soaks them in the lake. He watches
the woodcutters in the morning mud.
They’ve got an idea & now it’s made
of wood. His life paid for me to learn
his loneliness is built of a Marxist disconnection.
These kinds of men have families who survive
without them. The raven lost in the flood.
What man doesn’t want the earth for himself?
Even its antiquarian sunsets. Even its parasites
& mud. The whistle blows & a new shift starts
the slow hours on a clock he didn’t invent.
The belts bring & take, the engines grind the light
& spit back the evening, & outside the hours
don’t know how to stop.

And this is how we danced: with our mothers’
white dresses spilling from our feet, late August

turning our hands dark red. And this is how we loved:
a fifth of vodka and an afternoon in the attic, your fingers

sweeping though my hair—my hair a wildfire.
We covered our ears and your father’s tantrum turned

into heartbeats. When our lips touched the day closed
into a coffin. In the museum of the heart

there are two headless people building a burning house.
There was always the shotgun above the fireplace.

Always another hour to kill—only to beg some god
to give it back. If not the attic, the car. If not the car,

the dream. If not the boy, his clothes. If not alive,
put down the phone. Because the year is a distance

we’ve traveled in circles. Which is to say: this is how
we danced: alone in sleeping bodies. Which is to say:

This is how we loved: a knife on the tongue turning
into a tongue.

When I was five,
I thought I could live,
if I had to,
in a fort made of sticks
in the snow.

I used to bite my lip
because I was curious
about pain.
My cousins used to tell me

I was scrawny
and weird.
My cousins
with their lip gloss

and uncomfortable desires.
When people kiss you,
they told me,
they put their voices
in your head. They said

on the other
side of the moon
is nothing,
and when you walk

past houses after dark,
run, or you’ll catch
their nightmares
like a cold.

My son asks
about Pakistan, my son asks
about microprocessors
and sex, he asks about Peter Pan
and cease fires and hard ships
that shark the Atlantic and when
we will stop loving
each other and whether
the cats know their names. My son
asks me for the time,
the past perfect which I can’t find
in my pocketbook, the stick of gum
his grandmother gave him
before she entered the ground upstate
in sudden June, the joke she drank
the last night he saw her, the stem
of her glass clear, her arms
wanting his body’s goodbye
and his body turning away.
He asks about Satan, the wrong end
of the movie, if spinach
for dinner then what
for dessert. He crawls into
my bed at six thirty
with gauze and a newspaper. He wants me
to bury the lead. He wants the cats
to live forever but
stop running for good
down morning halls. He wants eggs,
juice and eggs and he will never
stop asking:
even when his plate is white
with grief and galactic heat
he’ll be calling
me from the lobby
in his gray suit to ask
if volcanoes were furry and closed their eyes
before they were born
and I will say yes, yes,
and other lies the dead tell.

People came to him—in the streets, in the alleys.
	Always, his appetite had been huge, his capacity for
Flesh clung to him like sunlight coats wheat fields,
	Taking others into himself. Now he had them
Knowing its home, its resting place, its canvas.
	By the hundreds, boys and men brought in
They would greet him with kisses. Friends wrote
	On stretchers: shredded arms, exposed brain matter;
Of how beautiful he was bathing, of his proud form;
	Some saved by an hour with the saw. On their lips,
How it moved and flexed; they lost, within his sight,
	Sometimes a whimper for Christ or mother, sometimes
All shame. And he in turn would tongue
	Bloodied spittle. Most surgeries were amputations.
Their bodies onto leaves of paper, spilling
	The pus was drawn into roll on roll of cotton.
Rivers of ink through the soft belly of evening,
	His work was to cleanse, to comfort these ruins
Touching, exquisitely, himself and those nearby
	Dying in the wake of the cut: dysentery, infection.
Until his seed splashed onto the page in long lines,
	Many simply wished to dictate a letter home.
Nothing like any poetry that had been seen before
	He would write the words they could no longer form
A psalm drawn from dirt and kernel,
	With their hands. His own tongue curled up and dropped,
From sweat and wood smoke, from the root.
	A shriveling sinew in a filthy pile of gauze.


For you I drink a cup of wind, taste two fingers of salt.
For you I do not bathe & grease builds back of my ears & tangles my lank hair, the vagabond whiskers on my nose.
For you pine duff, blueberry, wild mint, a fawn’s slender hoof & fetlock.
For you I chew weeds & rain-rotten sticks, drag my bare feet through dew-soaked grass.
For you I refuse the advances of the mountain.
For you I curse & stomp rocks, each thwomp & ring winging up shin & spine, rattling the very jaw socket.
For you I wander open-mouthed under the cloud-shot sky & do not watch where it is I am going & with a wet pop turn my ankle & fall & scrape my hands & knees to the wet quick.
For you stump & limp.
For you abrasion, bruised bone, little driblets of blood.
For you six days of sun & seven days of silence, warm water from a tin cup.
For you I wander out again & step through a scruffy slope of meadow, the lewd unfurling of ferns, dewy & vaginal field of purple-flowered moss, & on down to the lake, lilies like scoops of butter corking on the wind-cut water.
At moonset I wake & rise & piss a great arc out the front door & leap from the steps, & up the hill I run, the lean god of absence gnashing my devotion, & a fishbelly wind scours my skin & my eyes leak light & my sick heart judders in its pocket of gristle & rib, & each winging rib & each slick joint & juddering leg bone for you, for you this road & road dust & lip salt & the salt-hungry tongue, & this breath & this breath & breath.

When a man loves a woman,
he is asked: Soup or salad?
And though he has trained
his whole life for this,
the man will inquire
about the soup of the day
like the black angel of dichotomies.
Days can’t survive here,
the waiter replies.
We’re slumming it around the rough
and tumble hood of a black hole.
Or more precisely, adds another waiter
polishing some silver,
we’re trapped inside
an artist’s rendition of a black hole.
Thus the stilted elephants
crushing bystanders.
Thus the dada hitching posts protruding
from your rapidly expanding wings.
And by this point,
the soup is cold
and sliding toward the void.
Massive abysses coalesce above the fans
absorbing bouquets of hyacinths.
Maybe, suggests the artist,
who up to this point
has remained silent,
the soup nebula
is colliding with the salad belt
bounding its brothy ellipses.
This collision is forming varied
whole-wheat and kale anomalies.
Maybe, suggests the man,
we are all just victims of one another
in one fashion or another.
Then the cops bust in
and begin blackjacking everyone.
Shattered plates litter the floor.
How hard it has been
to love like this.

The season of married men. The fall
I couldn’t get enough of them. Their expensive watches
and long weekday lunches. The cold cliche
of a wedding band against my cock. I cried
all over town. Met a successful writer
and let him fuck me bareback in a stairwell
because he was a successful writer. Sorry Mom.
Once he ate me out in a famous lesbian poet’s apartment.
I thought: This is the best moment of my life.
Later I’d sleep with men more famous than him
and each time think: This is it. What I was born for.

Today I made another poet cry without meaning to,
with purpose. He’s famous. I’m Nobody, I thought,
why not? Every night I ask myself: How many more
people know your name than knew it yesterday?
Some months I spend so long looking in the mirror
I forget to leave the house. This is how long it takes to tell
how bad I am.

Today, snow gloved the trees like a city of hands.
We shoveled to find the end of the world, shaking junipers

until their powdery pollen flickered
and fell on our heads. We dug out a canyon, a lacuna.

Entered the sky through a door of dirt-gristled snow
and the clock said there were hours.

The floor of the earth told secrets
so we put our ears to the manuscript of dirt and listened
as the lips of the world read us their sources.

I heard you whisper thanks
to my millions of cells. In an extended silence, you kissed me

in the oddest places: my right hip, above my fractured
coccyx, on my heels—
the parts of my body that go unnoticed.

Heaven can be generous. It gave us space to push
so I pushed against you and heard

what was not audible: bird tracks against white
and white moonlight:
the trance of memory, body, double-edged need.

We returned to light stroke and spread and leaned in;
inside we hardly knew what we’d left.
We rested in the method of finding our way
one limb at a time. The day tolerated our searching.

Insulated with dilating dark, we soaked
in each other as snow existed in another dimension.
After a while, when we saw only straight again,
we emerged with the capacity for endurance.
Snow stacked over us a little taller.

That’s what happened: we were sweeping ice
from the footprints
when we fell into something crystalline: a sort of perfection.

Depends on what dwindles         (it all it all)           depends on the 
assemblage how we move each other       (we are people we are 
strangers)          I don't want to know what that means. Some acts 
extinguish the dream                   (suitcases and shadow-plats and 
trotting eyes in heads)          Beauty comes before we are familiar 
with it and less after              (delight in anything that can move us 
from our spaces)                   sorely depending on light's fury. Your 
body is a place       (sometimes a thousand places)       depending 
on how it's sold, bought. I could love a man         who never loved 
me back so long as he has a map                 (maps last a long time 
longer than we're lasting)            The future is political           (it is a 
naked girl)             we wait to let it thrill us but it never comes. The 
dream is a free machine       (the lever is one-winged)        if we fly 
out we will dwindle.          And for all that glowed and all we knew 
then             (we wanted each word to contain fading)             from 
across the cement we illuminate our history just     to see where it 
starts (and where it went).

I feel home in my throat,
in the black night with bats,
the imperfect tense:
when an action which begins in the past
is interrupted and remains incomplete
I wrap myself with a dry towel
It’s the surface I love What I can see
Perfect light What I can touch
A river that fears reversal
A train that has not yet stopped
My son is stronger than he weighs,
like a fish
Both concave and flexed
And we buy bread we know we don’t need
We fly a kite down the smooth abdomen
of a valley
Narrators, lost tales, ghost-tellers

If I held textbook
posture, knelt bedside, I swore
you’d come to me.
I waited for a kneejerk warmth. I waited
for your knack for hearing silences.
I closed my eyes and clasped my hands,
tried to keep my tourniquet grip
around your glass-cut arm.
I tried to think of saving others.
I pictured what the pitch black
took from me: dim light
scratched around the shut door
by the brush handle of the next room.
When I turned on the flashlight,
my lashes latticed every squinty thing
but you. When wind suddenly
swindled the bush of all its nestlers
near my window, you weren’t
hiding there either.
You’re too hard to find,
so find me. Or
wash over me, or drown me
in your floodlight, syringe me,
chloroform me, do to me what you do
to those brought up right, raised
to know your every part, every night.
They could feel the small radial
tick of your wrist.
That’s the thing: I’ve been grounded
in my one body.
I could never find the eye
in the gnarl of wood, or see
snow putting the oak tree
into slow-nodding dotage.
How, then, can I find you
or the white invisible shirts
that hang from the windows
of lives stuck roadside, waiting
to be not given up on?
Where, if not in the dark?
Were you here all along,
lit and awake? A pebble
patient in the sieve?

The wind is having its way with the house tonight,
with the windows.
It’s finally possible
to undress myself like a Corinthian.
I remove the crickets from my pillow,
place the clock,
face down, put my collar stays in a leather box.
It’s my turn to suffer. The stovepipe
gnaws into the room like an emperor
who’s lost his voice,
and you’re at it again,
doing laps in the ambulance
out on the frozen lake.
Everything seems like something you’d say to me
in a small town, under sitka,
leeward side of a sandbar,
to keep me breathing like a little beast,
skein of brant
breaking heavy,
some cut-loose kindling.
Neither of us has been perfect.
I carry a fistful of pebbles.
You threaten to swallow them down
when I’m not watching, lost in a squall
of chrysanthemums
and the weird. Truth happens too often.
Place the globe back in orbit–I was mistaken.
If you do not come closer,
we will not need our umbrage.
It is not snow that covers us,
nor spooks, nor wind, just as
this isn’t a shadow
(say stranger), or the carrying off of one animal for another.

Lord, I am the last person you’d want
to camp with. The reason I left after Communion:
there’s no place as vicious as a church
parking lot after High Mass lets out. Pain is a kind
of prayer, but so is a lack of salt. Lord, there it is
again. That silence which is not silence at the edge
of the island at the edge of nothing, seducing me. Me
gnashing my teeth. Me lashed to the body like a mizzen
mast. Lord, I’m all for pillow talk, but some of us need
to go to work in the morning, some prefer an absence
of light, and some have begun to cram our ears with cotton.
Most days I feel like everything I do is a variation
of picking cotton: pulling on my trousers, taking off
my trousers, going to buy new trousers. Lord, I worry
I don’t pray enough and other times too much
to you and not the Holy Spirit in all of its alien
nature. Here in the pews, the bite of cilice on thigh
is like a lick of fire magiked into a manacle, or else,
duller now, like a variation on the Indian burns
my brothers twisted into me in the back seat
of the minivan. The incense that is burning tangles
with the light such that when I squint mine eyes
there is an apparition of something vaguely
ghost-like. I’m pretty sure that’s not the preferred
method of getting there, but there is little about me
I have ever preferred: not my taste for chopped liver
nor my ability to eavesdrop on angels. They say examine
your zipper, by which they mean they envy the flesh.
Today was another day where beauty came at me
briefly, like those moments in class where the kid
to my left nods his head knowingly. He wants everyone
to know that he knows what the persons-in-charge
are talking about. I get it. And Lord, if I knew you were
there, listening, there would be no solace in any of this.

After the seasonal fires filled our lungs,
we washed the linens. The neighbor’s cat lingered
on our windowsill, looking in. We couldn’t
get rid of him, no matter the poison. By that time,
we’d known for months. The grass 
had been singed by the soil, the worms
lay shriveled in the dirt. We waited 
all night near the window for crickets, didn’t hear
the possum digging its way in
through the foundation of our house.
It curled into a ball behind the dryer to die.
Days later, the sidewalk was glistening black,
covered with the crickets’ silent bodies.
You carried me to the car and began
driving. When the urge came
to push, I hesitated, but couldn’t resist
the burning. The moon sat quietly above
the ribs of the earth. Somewhere, tides were rising.

First, the webs between his fingers found him
on the wrong side, then it was the scales
running up his arms. Then the unitard
his mother sewed. But he could swim and that
saved him, he could float like oil.
Every noon hour in the locker room
he put on Lycra before the rest banged
through the door and began wind-milling
towels. How long could he keep all this
hidden? His concave chest, his legs
fluttering through the pool, his ears buried
in the water’s roar. When he pulled out
ahead of the rest and took the medal, a chain
around his neck, no one cared he dressed
in the dark, that he kept his bedroom door
locked and slipped out to the lake alone.
In the days before the green skin, the gills
like grill marks along his throat, the cutting,
his arms ticked in crosses. The jig up, the lake
a magnet, a large target he squares himself to.

At nine, my father couldn’t stop
placing a shotgun near the temple
of his grandfather, who couldn’t stop
pulling switches from birch trees,
nor unbuckling the unbloomed hips of my aunts,
who now cover their couches in plastic.
Potpourri coats my aunts like wool,
their lips damp in a fever hum of Amens.
By eleven, my father knows the shape of moonshine
in a grown man’s mouth,
cannot remove the rot
that roots my aunts
at the trunk of their grandfather.
Sundays my aunts dress like roses,
wear smiles hard as Baptist pews.
They do their best to catch the spirit,
though he has a sprinter’s legs.

Watching my mother tweeze a tick from her vulva,
its body like a tumid berry drupelet vised within
the dermal pleats, inflaming them florid—
I first knew I was other, and in my otherness, felt more
for myself than I’d yet. I was ten. Separate yet tender.
Mind, nerve. On the closed commode, she eyed
the nudnik swimming in place against her and beaked
at it, spreading herself, the muumuu gathered at her bosom.
I refused to move from the cold edge of the tub,
soaking cotton in rubbing alcohol as she instructed,
though I was frightened—by her
woolly gulf and what wouldn’t let go, empathy born
swift to toothe into my softness, the sympathetic verve
that first beget the endless plump & suck of I know.

I robbed the ceramicist of his clay    so I could make a hundred pinched 
brown cows and call myself mother.     When you don't know what your 
life wants,      take the plains to the mountains and listen to the echo of 
peaks knocking against the sky.         It will tell you things.         In other 
countries, this might be the start of a war.         Here, it is the last act of 
intimacy before our borders become electric.      When I dream about a 
boy growing in my belly,  I call him stupid and learn how not to love him
before he makes a sunset out of his independence from my hole. I was 
taught to steal whatever I could to make myself happy  so I stole every 
life preserver not caring about what it means to drown.      On the farm, 
the pigs sniff each other   until they don't know the difference between 
the sweet and the dead.   My secret is that I am a fingerprint.    I do not 
know how to fall in love without it being criminal.        The fence around 
the yard is a brief paragraph on how to own everything.    If this were a 
coloring book,   the black crayon would try its damndest to darken only 
what is truly dark.      In real life, the colors ask paintings which parts of 
them are the symbols of sadness.          The painting freezes in its own 
headlights.        Like us it is guilty of not having anything more to prove.

When Phaeton rode his father’s snorting horses
the earth bore flame. One end opens towards hell
the other closes on heaven. One of the men
I am nurses his rage with bottles of toxin. He cannot
hold his flame’s center between both far ends.
Clench-jawed, he bores through women to reach
the worm inside himself. Mother told me
to listen to the Lord when I pray. I said
I do, but he does not speak. Not the earth
nor the tribes he scorched but Phaeton himself
I pity. The man pries a crucifix from the church
so Jesus won’t remind him he must die
to be reborn. And sometimes both far ends
close and I grip nothing as hard as something
I should let go. Like the man. Mother said
Hell is on the inside, that the Lord does not speak
because he listens. And that is what you hear.

It’s the Aegean, windless, rustling
between blackness and light. The boat
carries us to the rock shore. Rock
against wood, you cling to me
ask me to drown you out here,
the death-melt where salt and sky touch. Limbs
are for trees, not bodies, I tell you. Stay
here with me. Stay.
The rocking of bodies
pressed together like prayer hands
all bruise and red skin etchings.
This is not the last time we die.
The terrarium we’re kept in 
shines, diorama of beach glass and soil,
shells of dead animals dampening,
wounded skin is the purple of sky
on your wedding day. 
He, in the distance, beams a green light:
If by water, or marriage, I leave you.
Beneath the boat, waves take back what they once
yearned for: Your dress of skin
hulling me with its green luster,
I watch you
walk the path of beach skulls.

Red matchstick I thumb alive and send
ahead of me through the dark little emissary, 
little locket of light that lets the eye wick
to the cellar’s walls, the green line of mineral 
where flood rises up waist-high. Groundwater 
seethes through cracks in the mortar, laces 
between stones, their flat smooth faces 
already buried. All night I ferry
buckets to the surface. All night my fingers 
seam together and I climb, my sleeping
like one long flight of stairs, my bucket
like a mouth that won’t drown. In the end, 
I envied the bucket. The way all things 
that are empty want to be filled.

While our governor jogs just down the road
with a pistol for coyotes, I like the outdoors
for the decorated meadowlark on the fence post
above three horse cripplers teaching me valor
in patience across the cirrus-strewn morning.
Sleep low needy needy moving, he tells me.
I have lost my wallet I know not where and may
yet find it, God willing and thieves be damned.
In a world of hurry’s fistfuls, the thorn of money
obstructing nearly every ordinary path like mesquite
shoots waiting for a snag of feather, fur or flesh,
I’d like to bushwhack the clumpy field a mile
and, at worst, make a bird change direction.
I can appreciate the science of a parking lot
from here. In his famous way, death outlives us,
he thinks. Our governor, he must think of me
what deer think of the cows, compatriots of the pasture,
one group swifter perhaps though not a little daft below
the corn feeder, or what anyone thinks driving by
the Boston Terrier Museum, Floydada, TX.
Yet what can I do when God votes for me? I must
love the governor, my enemy who fails education.
The opposite of war is eating, so I will now cook
my dinner while he stews and know he is nearly
my father, and both of us suffer, one perversely,
the frail imaginings of a country king.

And felines and cat-like
you stalk shadows, unraveling
everything in the house tonight:
bustier lace, dark nipples
of rain, their plum curves
pressed to the window
as the curl of something feral
flirts under the curtain. You’re
naked, the bed, our boat
and bent over my body’s glass,
the moon through the slats
makes milk of its surface,
your tongue to the waves
cast deep as you rise
and the willow groans outside
in a stiff wind. I had no idea
how far down I was,
what igneous caves ran,
flaming orange
in my Barrier Reef, my underworld,
my Mauna Kea,
until you showed me
the mountain head, the raw stone
glowing, my buried gold
giving up its hottest
story—bronze posse
of feminine feet released,
running wild—high grass
and the whole wide land
at once, oh God,
rippling, rippling, rippling.

I could’ve been anyone when they found me, nook infant
ecstatic below your ice age. Look at me. I am gorgeous.
I dreamed there was such a scene as in a kitchen, a vague mother
bent over the sink devastated and safe. I keep waking up
in someone else’s bed: awake inside a wolf’s panting throat
is how I understand hunger. My loneliness is bikeable,
it is as though I have always worn a red cloak in the woods.
Teach me sorry. Teach me the trees. German darkness.
I worship the townhouses I so ritually leave, the waifish necks
of your citizens, and how there is only one word for snow finally.
Lights stay on in too many locked houses. A squanderer
builds his kingdom into the ground. We forget to breathe
when we are instructed breath is continual. What I want touch to be
scatters flies in a neighboring basement, is as bountiful as tweed
in November. Mud husbands me to this terrible ordeal of burial.
But ruins bore me, I hate their gawked failure. Look to your own ugly sky.

He goes to her. He goes and so does my hair
the way he likes it. It falls, feather-like, arrow-
ready at my feet. They call me a bird,
but I rust: a dropped key, forgotten
scissors. I make my own forest and coax
thorns, moths, and metal to swarm in my hairnest.
The sky is a door in a sky. I wait
for messages sent by suspended ribbons,
which are the arteries of devotion.
Here are my monkeys and bears, here is
my new face. I go deeper into the trees
when he runs to her. My mouth is full
of watermelon. Its sweetness gone out
like a veladora. I am the horse that runs.

Enough times now I’ve dropped the blade of love
in the lake, thumb scrambling moon on the surface
to find again the hilt, and catch there. It’s very dark here,
and my palms come up slashed faintly with language
I can’t read until I’ve made the fire. Then I see it
all: summer mornings spanning out impossibly
the shape your nude back left in the dust on the table
how an angel wades into water to keep his wings dry
and that name, like the light of the moon on a coyote’s coat.
Someone’s hand still hovers above the holstered butt
of midnight. Little rivulets through red clay forming
a continent of blood. How I crossed the plains for you,
for your clothes like cottonwoods, for this cliff
of squint. Men die in just a little less air than this,
a little less breath. I get a feeling that comes out of the clouds
on a ghost with veins and reins to wrap its hands.
I know what I’m entitled to, it’s this vision I keep past stars
of a cowboy name. At times it whistles through the canyons.

In Princeton the leaves change like bells. Squirrels
pass untouchable girls. Stalking the greens
at night. Worth something. Running in lightning
storms, peeling paint from balusters along
the Victorian porch. Sipping vodka
neat, cooking meat over charcoal. Watching
the unified mind of the swallows come
careering out of the twilight into
our backyard maple tree. I tend to be
solitary. Dinner parties, I prefer
to stay away. This is you speaking though
it might as well be me. I’ve spent my life
with war reporters, and I’ll count myself
foremost in this group: everyone’s a mess
of insecurities, looking for self
-esteem through risk. A hangar-sized Whole Foods
beside a glinting field of Priuses,
while you’re off in Kandahar or is it
Baghdad, Paul? I’m sick of being lied to,
so I simply take it as a challenge
to find the truth. My father cursing me,
There are things you do not know. My mother
not turning her mausolean face to say
goodbye. Picking up our lives at the end
of summer, I swear I heard a demon
hiss, Don’t leave us, please. If something’s risky
and we probably shouldn’t do it I’ll say,
Don’t worry about me, I’m already
dead. The blind mob is calling, You poor man,
who are you?

When Plato lay sick beside a window
overlooking the hush of the Aegean,
he thought, somewhere lies a great shadow
to end all shadows, a paradigm of ruin
as the one dead thing that is no thing
in particular, that is the face below
a face, the bone-white light inside the living.
And it seemed like medicine, to know
there is inside each terror a name for terror,
inside each cough a ghost, a principle.
What he would not give for a drop of water.
And a beautiful boy appeared, a disciple,
who cradled his head and held the cup just near
enough. Just as he liked it. So cold, so cruel.

The lake freezes, the lake closes its eyes
and a minor paralysis comes upon us.
From the knees, I stand in landfall, landfill.
Above, vultures continue their business in the heavens.
Toads wipe their eyes in pure funeral.
What changes is not the weather.
What changes is barely there, like a stocking
hanging over a bathtub, drying in clean air.
I spent all night shaking out a sleepy leg.
In the morning, the consequences are heavy.
You fall out of bed, pure boxed gravity.

We found ourselves in the kitchen again.
Slant-hipped, elbow bent,
your hands resting on the counter.
Even though you didn’t say it, I knew
you were thinking of Japan.
The water between us already:
Like the time you took me by the throat
and pushed. And the moment the light
disappeared from your body. And when I realized
the cause of my want was something
more shallow than I’ll ever admit.
The next morning I found a lump in my breast,
turned over, then dreamt of a lily that told me
the day I would die, and the lily became a jar
of impossible things and fell, blushing.
The next time I woke—you stirred, not quite gone.

I was there.
The fan trembled.
The plant trembled.
The rented room became one faint undulation.
Great Aunt Mary said, “I think we should we should go.”
Outside, the sun reigned.
The sand was as usual. Striped umbrellas.
Women in tankinis, their happy and unhappy bodies,
walking along, and the ocean liners far off, all unshaken.
Later we bought a six pack and a bag of groceries.
Did you feel it? a stranger in line asked.
The National Cathedral, a place I have visited only twice,
lost three pinnacles off its central tower.
What else? Nothing else, or this:
the bees come, the apples.
In September my son writes an essay called “Brave Boy,”
and the teacher calls his handwriting sloppy.
The vagabond stands on the green island,
and the light changes.
Why do the bees sound so happy this year?
Why are the houses all awake,
shining lights even in daylight?
The anti-confessional prodigal daughter
goes about her business, filing papers, buying groceries.
When I stand in the white glow of the refrigeration zone
in Paradise Liquors it’s the names I love:
Flying Dog, Resurrection, Woody Creek.
It’s not all about high alcohol content.
Shock Top, Raging Bitch, Blue Moon.
Something for the afternoon, when the children
mine for virtual diamonds.
How do I get a pickaxe?
Press B.
The bees come. The apples.

We drove the honey road, a seller at each
curve with dark jars on shelves aslant, dark
sticky jars with lids screwed down, an afterthought.
The same six jars, same three shelves for miles
the same dense honey from centuries of bees
with furrowed brows, luscious dark of all the eyes,
veil dark until the angled sun cut amber through the glass
and we stopped and tasted slow thick beads of it
glowing down our throats. Next field over
the woman hefting marble on her back, Apollo’s
steps now the foundation of her hut, the jar
wrapped in paper in our trunk and then, remember
Konya? Walking backward in a hallway filled
with strangers all in reverse, we faced the holy
man’s remains until we left the filigree of his tomb,
shuffled out heels first, barefoot and there
was the carpet with tulips upside down, some colors
still breathing, springing back beneath our feet —
indigo preserves its wool, where walnuts’ brown
oxidizes, rots to the foundation so the woven
landscape changes over decades, growing
wastes of dust amidst stubbled fields of blue.

Hélène Grimaud transforms Chopin into wild
percussive hammers, the piano her anvil,
my feminine Hephaestus. When not playing,
she maintains a conservatory for wolves.
With Alawa and Zephyr in my pack, I’m sure
I’d feel the same as Hélène playing Polonaise in A,
pushing each chord into a bright military
howl. I see eyes spark within the sound,
a stain of red and yellow. She tracks
the final diminuendo: the world’s
end. The night’s end. She and I know
at best, self can only be self
and wolves are never tame.
I’ve played those same notes alone
wishing I could play them for you,
my ring finger stretching to fill
the alpha male of Chopin’s work. He
wrote for bigger hands, and mine ache.
We are a pack of two, Grimaud and I,
scavenging these grand staff fences
for what is classical, what is evolving;
the polished whorls and loops of our
fingertips marking the keys with our final
coda: I’m here. I’m here. I’m here, like you.


I
In the tight-knit dark, in a foreign tongue,
beside the shower of perfectly synchronized sprinklers
elegantly cultivating their concrete corners,
II
the orderly signed me out. Sunlight
then shelved the world. I made my way down
to receive it: its beautiful figure lifted the flesh
III
off the bone. My bone. I had witnessed it:
I had counted up the marrow with money & clothes.
I wrote, “to my son, I give my eyes”
IV
but I never had one. Not before
I entered this place, & now I am pushed
to the street alone. The world withstands much,
V
like all they tell me. From the laboratory,
they call. From the morgue, they call. They say
they are happy for me. But the
VI
pale man in black scrubs pushes me faster
than the others. Faster than he can handle.
When it’s over, it’s easier than
VII
I ever remembered it.

I want to believe
we’re all in it
together. But this
is America. Here,
we’re ready to light
each other’s hair
on fire. If the world
were on fire,
at least we’d all be in it
together, except for
the bears
floating by on boats
of ice. The deer
were in it together,
if it means forest
fire, or smoke.
Here, there should be
a gold ring
that makes it clear
the subject
is love. Here,
a line about birds.
But I am done
with the small bodies
that hold together
a pair of wings.
All the wings
are in this together,
a vast conspiracy
of flapping, like gravity
wasn’t the one
thing holding us
in place.

While you were away, I walked along a path
cut short by a sharp, thorny bush. Several
swollen red berries set back in the curved branches
as if into eye sockets. The red-eyed creature it became
was intertwined and tangled with itself, but I could still see
the houses behind it on the hill. From that distance, the houses
were small enough to fit only parts of my body: an eye
or the tip of a cheek bone. I thought back to when I wished I could climb
into that blue, wooden dollhouse I had, wanting to live
that other life. Desiring to walk up those small steps
to the bedroom upstairs, to slip the length of myself
between those tiny floral sheets. I would reach my little girl bones
in through the back of the house, held on with hinges,
spreading the winged doors wide open like a body cut
and torn back for me. If you were here
I would enter you now—my grown bones
making their way toward you,
my whole body could fit into you.

Summer David. Coastal David. My David of the bag
of weed in the garage. The greasy hair, the Myer’s &
OJ. David without a middle name, David of initials,
the A., which, while on a small beach in Mexico–
mother joked–stood for Arturo. David of the rolling
r’s, the hatred of California, David who stole his
mother’s car and spent a night in jail. Photographer
of nude women not my mother. David of always
running out of gas. My David of the river, god of
oars, the raft its own country and I, princess of deer
and their diseases on the shore. Awestruck David.
Of always mispronouncing Sartre. Sci-fi David, man
with the smile like a slit in the tent. River otters
fed from his hand, David of water creatures. Who
showed me the recoiling of a sea anemone, slightest
prodding. David of failed kidneys. Of affliction,
midnight walker, gesturing out to the driveway,
the ditch trail, waterfall gravid with rain. Please.
The moss-covered rocks. David, the unsteady gait.
David. The hawk flying down to the wrist. Bones
visible through skin, my David. Of translucence. David
untouched. I still don’t know what to do with his hands.

When I said forever I meant vector
from redwing to pullet. I meant quarantine
from a wonderfully complex disease.
When I said yes to the farm I meant fresh
eggs and a stranger’s work. Every promise
a birdlife of receipts for pastry flour
and a house full of empty rooms. Face
to face, I think I loved you. What did you
expect? My hands can rest but they’d rather
be out in the middle of the river, entering
a swift current, alone with the trout. I think
I said this once. When I said it I meant
taxidermy may preserve the body, but it
can never keep the animal still long enough.

I don’t want to live in the time of the lumbering dinosaurs.
Not even the quick, feathered ones whose discovery
revised out of existence the plodding walnut brained
behemoths I colored with crayons. Why did I memorize
the Latin names—why thunder lizard at all?
Once there was the animatronic neck of the sad mother
discovering her ravaged nest with a terrible slowness.
It took almost an hour for the loss to reach her.
Mammals are the ones that steal, again and again.
First they are rats and then they grow larger and then
they walk upright. This stays the same.
The measured mother is replaced with a swifter model,
and it is inaccurate, scientifically, for humans
to ride dinosaurs, saddled or otherwise,
even if one wears a bikini made of skins
or sports an impressive tan. With faith, however,
all things are possible, and so in the Creationist museum
humans and dinosaurs live together, but not well.
There are many battles until the Lord comes.
It seems like an exciting time. In this world,
we make do with the maps of paths not taken,
extra organs, a smidge of tail, but with our nerves—
those pathways of astonishing speed—we feel pain
not just in the moment it begins, but before, and ever after.

My ancient, my coxswain, my caddy.
I want everything: my bed etched
with the fleur-de-lis, a kingdom,
God’s praise and a lesson. A sign.
The Greeks eyed their boats
and went to hell. With your help.
With your help, I would as well
but am still, waiting for proof —
for the Luna caterpillar, a surprise, green
as new moss growing
on a temple gong,
for an apple left perfect in the path —
red mouth of discord mewling
at the marriage gate,
for some fucking angel to arrive and say
lo, to wing in soft, to offer
a lily for luck. I am asking,
by God, for anything.

Let’s say you were ready / for bed in your brown-rimmed glasses with your black yoga pants & your loose green sweatshirt. For you I would shovel / the driveway in the dark, the unsolvable ice under the curdled snow, & I would scrape / your windshield & warm your car. I am trying so hard to explain myself. I am trying so hard to avoid words / like love as if they were long clouds ruining safe flights over America’s midriff. I am trying / not to put you in the usual gardens. The important thing is you / were always quiet about matters like this, always willing to let certain phenomenon be / observed only. I’m fond of the scar on your ass where they took that mole. There are times I put your shirts away just to feel / how light you are.

No rebellions from the sea of late, you write. You must be pleased to see it calm, the gray Atlantic, which yearly moves the slender strip of your island a little east, a little west. Across the continent the whale known as the loneliest leviathan on earth roams northward to Kodiak and the Aleutians, singing as much to the silver-furred grizzly kings and to the blue spruce as to its own kind. I can hardly stand to think of it – that solitary keen in the ocean’s dusk. Too high for anyone to hear but a headphone-clad oceanographer in NOAA’s quiet, coastal observatory. (That is, you must know, my favorite of all acronyms.) There are those who suggest the 52 Hertz whale is deaf. Mostly deaf people have suggested this. (Dear Cetologists: have you considered the possibility the whale is singing into silence, into a trembling in his own bones?) Your letter describes a little paper bag full of last year’s white poplar leaves, like plaster chiselings. Pelicans ruling thrones of old pilings. A sable horse by the frosted pond. Your cats inspecting the valleys between one another’s claws. I’d gather them, if I could, sing in their language. I’ll pen this letter on a single olive leaf. I’ll tell you what I saw today: flecked sparrows in the winter brush, cobble-eyed, close enough to touch.

I never really understood what Superman was doing in there.
How did a glass box with a book on a chain help him
remain anonymous? Maybe he liked taking his clothes off
next to our names. Of course, he never got naked.
He had his suit on all the time, underneath the mild mannered one;
cape hidden, its dangling fringe from time to time tickling
the unseen like the lover he never had time for.
The thing is, he was pretending to be human.
His costume was acting like us. And so much of us
involves nonsense that feels good. The delicate positioning
of coins in your fingers and the sounds of them rattling
down in that metal. Remember how in the middle of everything
the phone could ring and ring symbolizing loneliness?
I wonder if he ever faked an emergency, just to call Lois.
I wonder if he ever stood in there feeling untraceable,
loving only the weight of her repeated hellos.

And this is how the scarlet macaw alights
at my kitchen window, National Bird
of Honduras—swooping in from a hot, wet
country most murderous. Squawking
like an engorged organ, a four-chambered heart,
squealing like a nerve pinched till it palsies
one side of a face, tomato dripping from lunch’s lips.
Squeaking over the measuring cups, the silverware,
this pumping, two-story muscle, with busy, brainless
burst; of a long plunge into a long-ago mouth,
where the tongues are littered with lilting harmless lies,
where the gums say lust, where the gizzard’s spritzed
to a brink-ish bliss, this bullhorn blossom belting out
a cardinal’s worth of sorrow, capacity to blurt. Most
crimson capillary of brake-lit streets, cocktail party
maraschino cherry seizure, all the neon up and down
Rainier: OPEN, BOSS, BUD. Beasty bloom, rasp of blush,
monkey’s rump, signature and siren, semaphoric salute.
It was all so 26,000 light years away, fuzzy like a crime scene,
then that aortic accuracy: overly-lipsticked, 50+ in ruby-
sequined heels, halo frayed, trumpets erect, come
strutting like some middle-aged lush going under
to be severed. Murder on the Marmoleum, all this pedaled,
sanguine evidence, this other-side-of-the-universe daughter
perplexed — asking why and how, asking will I be next.

The many demonstrations of grief
grief of the body laid upon
a couch laid in a coffin lined
with gunpowder babies are not
burned but buried we leave the rich
left in the house parched gods
paintedfor the occasion
a man in red handles the bone box
while the hired mourners’ grief controlled just
as pouring water on the ground is
a solemn gesture the men’s hair done up
a la femme makes the deception complete why
would a man who might sit choose to walk
instead
before the war the spirits
were princes who hadn’t killed
now they’re generals with what power
to obscure the bell’s din or the weary
motion of a harvest lost or tame
the waxy lotus with its hidden tangles
may we only eat what we haven’t
killed the birds all begin to look
the same like things the dead fear

Fleetwood Mac is old but they have a big
announcement coming up live at the top of the hour
after this quick break and your local weather
and I think a lot of young women
associate themselves with Stevie Nicks
because they, too, would constantly like
a spectral box fan to be blowing
through their haircuts while their heads
radiate luminous plasma that interferes
with drive-time radio signals and Magnetic North.
Yes, it’s not good wanting to be something else,
cajoling a new image from the butterfly-quiet street,
being someone decent enough to carry thrift-store
Mason jars full of pickles in a first-baseman’s mitt
to a shut-in neighbor even with a hangover,
but we gather terror with ourselves,
our post-reflection shudders pushing the goose feather
balanced rocky on your nude shoulder to the floor.
Back when flannel grew on trees, in the land of buzz cuts,
I grew my hair longer than a hotel bible.
In the Midwest, lag time’s a levee,
so while I tucked strands behind my ears,
Brooklyn gave itself horizontal fringe
like a Brutus-stabbed dictator and now I’m bald
and constantly being mistaken for somebody else
but like a social class clown, I go with it until I can’t,
the slang of the mandatory blowing up inside me.

Cranes slip loud passing
Through me their honks
Preceding them
Overhead into / Another life
 
From which they never
Left briefly to / Pass through and over
Mine friend you’ve been
Gone a long time
 
how // Many which oth-
er animals / Make noises so a
Noise so its own its
Noise seems made up
 
For the occasion / Of the animal
Whom life speaks jealous-
ly jealously live
Their voices whom life
 
Speaks jealously

The summer the Bolognesi went crazy
for the spritz with orange Aperol,
I stuck to chilled and sweating Prosecco
though switched to Sangiovese
and later couldn’t refuse a little red fizzy
(one tries to stay hydrated)
in a second floor flat in Casalecchio
where we three poets had been invited
for a full-blown home-cooked supper
by Mina, Italian grandmother,
who had been warming up the apartment
all day, and what I got to compliment
that perfect 100 degree heat we wallowed in,
Fahrenheit our God, water the religion,
and our Italian host seeming nearly heroic
when she brought it iceless, stoic,
to us seated at the table next to the little kitchen
with the big stove where water boiled, rabid
for the fettuccini while a ragu of wild rabbit
simmered, and only one window of three
was open but no breeze graced us anyway
so our shirts hung like wet laundry
the Italians hang out their windows
(Oh, if someone could have only
hung me out a window), what I got
was a wild boar tortellini
drowned in a salty chicken broth
for starters and then the steaming fettuccine
and saltless bread to soak up the last of the sauce,
and when the gelato finally came
even that added fat to the heat and warmed
our tongues with vanilla liqueur and cream
so thick no ice crystal could hope to form,
of course with grappa and nocino following it all,
and/or limoncello (who could recall?)
thinking the burn up our nasal passages
and down our throats might distract us
while the golden hillside wheatfields drying
bleached under the last of the purifying
Emilia-Romagna sun declining
by, we prayed, degrees
that evening, and the figs in the trees
and the grapes green and waxing clearer
were just beginning to fatten at the height
of summer on the longest day of the year.


We’ll go alone into the darkest part.
The sky’s wet rust, the camellia maze a ruin.
Why should it stop us that our eyes are gone?
This is love’s year, and week, and day. A chart
is ink, and ink soon smears. Black wind. The route
all streaks and steams. In these caves, one star makes noon.
We’ll go alone into the darkest part.
The sky’s wet rust, the camellia maze a ruin.
With our pink paws, we’ll shovel mounds of silt
to tunnel to the shrine of Qingcheng Shan.
Past the long bridge, bleak by the plummy moon,
we’ll drink the waterfalls. I’ll rub your heart.
We’ll go alone into the darkest part.

She used the stadium. I would have
chosen the bridge. We’re not even
Division One. Our tailgate crowds
are mostly enthusiastic about beer.
Sunlight in the trees. Sunlight
in the trees. I thought these
feelings would be blonder,
quieter, like that virus
that doesn’t kill you but kills in you
what tells you to wake up.
All the good and bad souls who
size me up judge a different woman
than the one you used to know:
two-room apartment with a view of cold
as imagined by lack of snow,
nut and honey cookies from the baker
for three weeks only to entice the spring
and later year-round because we can’t wait
for anything anymore so we forget what
the sweetness was supposed to mean.

No end to the river’s rituals
of passage, the ablutions of believers
knee-deep in the green
scent and glacial runoff of the Ganges,
the cool connective tissue of a people 
washing down their backs.
What is a body if not a thing of water,
what a river if not a pilgrim who wanders
south to the open sea.
Monks come and go as tributaries do
whose names remain behind them as they pass,
and we look to the boat
ablaze against the slate of the surface,
against the mirrored image where it floats.
We look to the ripple
of the sail and the glare that pulls it,
to the stench and the glory, the russet 
current fouled with soot,
hung from heaven by a braid of smoke.
We look to the man on fire who is two 
men now, one who rises,
one who sinks: in time they separate.
In time we look because we cannot look
away, clothed in white
as is the custom. These boats go somewhere.
Stars feed the crematorium of dawn.
These still horizons call
to someone, something, a name we were given,
a song we heard, though where, we cannot say,
only a tiny ember
now and then, here a melody, there a word.

We float the rubber lifeboat down the cul-de-sacs.
Through the backyards of prefabs and ramblers
where the tops of small trees beckon
like oil-blackened hands. We are looking
for animals. Dogs and cats and other pets left behind
because leaving them behind was the rule
during the evacuation. For hours there is nothing.
Silence and the sculling of a plastic paddle.
The far-off gas station sunken past the pumps.
The hundred-year flood covering everything
three feet deep. When we find Clausen’s dog
it is not where we were told to look. Not curled
on his roof. Not barking from the glassless window
of his attic. When we find Clausen’s dog it is tied
to a cinderblock with a choke-chain leash,
an ear flap lapping softly at the surface.
The choke-chain cinches down through loose
neck-flesh to the visible bone. A minnow hovers
in the eye hole. When we find Clausen’s dog
the colorless fur clumps like a stubble of bunchgrass
receding from the furrowed plains of the rib cage.
The bobbing sidemeat nibbled by perch.
Chunks glaumed away by turtles.
When we find Clausen’s dog the bone-paws drag
the bottom like lures, jerking forward
on the same wrist-hinge as the living paws
of a sleeping dog, whimpering, trying to run
inside a dream.

I was deep in dream.
You were proposing again.
This time, in the dark
and I was sitting down.
I opened a box and there were
three rings. An engagement one,
one for the wedding, and one
for what I didn’t learn.
I didn’t like the wedding
one. The band, thick as two
knuckles and white.
I asked if we could still
take it back. I didn’t think
I was married to you before.
I couldn’t tell that your face
was the sea or the ocean,
water pushing off from land,
from dark. Your eyes shut
in your hand in a different part
of town. There couldn’t be anything
to recognize anymore. Maybe
a hand, a shadow. No, the silhouette.

Today in Pest’s open air markets there is a sale on holy
water and scapulars, hand-carved chess pieces, and Oriental
spoons whose sole task is to approximate the luxurious
sprawl of the Danube. There are swords upon which I’d throw
myself were it the time and place to throw myself
upon vanity, and fresh fruits. Think of a hitchhiker’s passport
to heaven. But there is a holier water distilled from the tap
and used to clear the ciborium of divinity that she poured
into the mulch insulating the dogwood. What is devotion
more than loyalty to that alternate power truly and ably
able to wound us; worship that it seeks to soak into the roots
of a precious tree. For all my talk of tied-down guns and dying
with my boots on, the way I play Augustus McCrae giving all
of himself to the gangrene to spite his rotting legs, the voices
in which I say A man isn’t a man if he doesn’t have the faculties
with which to kick a pig—for all of that, you have seen me absolutely
ugly as I listen to my father preempt his dying wish in which
he wishes I become a priest: baling bread, smearing ashes, falling
in love with a crisp cassock and phrases like Latens Deitas-—
and you have borne it. My Pillar of Autumn. My Tower
of the Off-Ivory. You said to me yesterday a second time
wounded lover, who else would love you? And no one would.
And I know I do not yet understand this morning’s market
where I’ll guess wrongly under which shell lies the pea.

His absence makes me out of mind. Out, heart—fucked limb.
There’s no hole I haven’t licked
or liked or longed for of his. Unplug, he says, meaning our affair
and what it should do, how the thread
should shudder out. I shrug. Absence: the fondness,
the foundering. A choke of fickle light.

I have lost all hope on keeping
the bathroom sink clean of fur. But then
I think of how lonely it is to be clean.
The way I was before you were
is a federally funded phrase that anyone
in a relationship can use so many words
blahblahblah to say just one: love or something
of the Two Bulls Fire still burning
but contained. Look how the wind lassos
the smoke through the pines. The way water falls
from helicopters as if the clouds listened
and filled with the fury that we prayed for
in the only language we know: to beg.
You hang your ranger hat on the elk shed
by the door. Suspend your blue suspenders
like a life long pledge over the back of a chair,
rub the darkness around your eyes. Paw
open to my hand then the button on my jeans.
So desperately we long for thumbs.

There is a ghost in the machine of my body. The haunting
happens like this: I loll on the bed, open-mouthed,
acting dead. My husband asks, Are you dead
again? My gallbladder this time. If removed,
the ghost would return to inhabit my pancreas.
My lung swells with the ghost. It haunts and goes
deeper when I breathe. The ghost likes the smell
of trumpets and clapping. Today I am dead
on the kitchen floor. Are you dead?
Sometimes I say Yes, of course I’m dead. Other times he steps
around my dead body, opening cupboards, putting away the plates.

This is my striving
for other chances to break
you at the hips. Lust
is admirable. But there’s a flood
about you. You notice
I’ve secured the heart
on wire racks to watch it beat
like a bell. I noticed
the damn cry, mid-afternoon.
The window bothered with streak
and shine. I’m sorry. I tried to swim
the throat of you. That only causes bruises.
That startles the horses—
my own violence
flashes like thunder
and quakes on the walls.

The wooden parts are known as furniture,
as though a rifle were a room and the stock
a place to set a bowl and pull a chair
up to; or a bedside stand to hold a clock
that we’ll watch flashing through the afternoon
as we lie sleepless, set apart from time;
or the bed itself, from which, though our cocoon
of blankets smothers us, we will not climb.
Because we can’t. Because the bed is not
a bed at all, but a rifle, or part of one,
and not the part that kills—the bolt hand-wrought,
the barrel blued and glinting in the sun—
but rather it’s the lovely part we hold
against our cheek. Once the sap-soaked heart
of a walnut tree—now polished, stained, and cold—
it is a tool, a terror, a work of art.

Flight of the marsh queen, winter
branching from her head
topsy over the starhatch.
Glaze and grit, the oatgrass
carries the hunter’s
moon cross the meadow,
the oatgrass bluesy and eternal.
Come round, Come whether-or-not.
The fog rises from the ground,
so much moth-light and brine,
comforting and strange
as waking in an underwater photo.
Is it foxlogic? Fireweed?
On what foreign terms
do I keep arriving
hours past midnight
in this lucid province?
Blackwing, little wind,
how will it be to say
brightly into the thrum
I beat I beat
my water drum?

No Pygmalion found me
floating above the saloon
tethered to nothing but the love of men
that little red string
a nerve ending
that loops on your wrist like a bangle
I was a veritable opium den
a lust unction a pleasure banshee 
a cipher a bedpost
Truth is
I replicated myself nightly 
like a needle hitting a record
I escaped in a Venus husk
with a strong profile 
like Cleopatra on a coin
I swaddled her in muslin
placed corsets on my hair eyes thighs and feet
Once inside I was like a key
under a tchotchke
a two-way mirror 
a swiveling bookcase
But I can do one better
I’ll divide into my goats and sheep
and distill into a soiled dove
and a makeshift matron
neat as a pair of salt and pepper shakers
named like a fork in the road

On garam masala afternoons I catch your rhythm in the kitchen and we burn into something tender. An eddy of joy. A shiver.
Blur of hips, we swing the circles of a reckless world.
Taut again. Loose, loose.
At night, we tumble into something better that crinkles like wire-strung happiness. Rain sliding on a corrugated roof.
Forever. Temporary. We stay either way.

We met among ruins. I was so much the dog, in Athens, on the grass
panting for you. In Segovia you pushed my cheek against the aqueduct
until it bled. Darling, we are such sweet modern machines when
our parts are working. Someday we won’t fall so apart, or need
our blood. I’ll project you onto a screen and feel exactly nostalgic.
Your scent will be textable, too-much. The damage I could do
with just a button. When the planets collide in their pinball trajectories,
when the panic of geese breaks up the sky like a brick through
the window, how can I not think we’re doomed. If there is a future
and I exist in it, if I built a dwelling with my own devices and
moved there alone, what then of the body. Would, at night,
it call out fevered to be the mule to some man’s lead. Would it be
yours. Or an historical site you’ll visit, with another body to press
against it, like all our atoms will someday be pressing against
each other. What hope! So give me all at once an ending
to look forward to. I want that, the groundwork, the bathtub full
of water, which, like us, is nothing without oxygen. I am nothing
much for you. I own four acres of star-thistled land in California.
It’s the perfect place to wait out an earthquake. No street names.
The water is potable. There is no one else for miles around.
They say Rome wasn’t built in a day, but wasn’t one day it fallen.

Don’t, you wicked one.
I ache all over
running from you.
I learned the spell 
against your longing
as a child—all women do:
I learned to want
the permanent man, not some 
blond god passing through,
to feel the gut-punch of shame 
against the lust, because it’s what
good women do,
go plant that shame
in the forest. Let the sunlight 
rocket through.

I remember the woods
cold in sodden boots
wet snow to my knees
dusk settling like ash
when I see the deer
still as broken glass
the smoke of its life
rising from its nose
in a skeletal necklace
It is always then
I feel the heft
weighting the end
of my rising arm —
a crossbow
cranked taut
bolt notched
in its shaft
The dark eye
of the deer
drinks the last
of the light
as the weapon
draws level
with its buried
heart and I
feel the ache
of the hissing
bolt pierce
its bone cage
as the deer bursts
into half a leap
and crumples
to darken
the snow

I have bad thoughts, bad. But I am good to you, in my thoughts.
Without impulse, without imp of the perverse,
when you see to me, another world opens its weightless hands,
a dead land where I eat, sleep, savor the strange
because of you, innkeeper, tender, serving man.
You know what to do when I notch knife over fork,
when to come for what I lay aside.
What do I say? You speak for me, it is your pleasure.
For some little while, you make me your empress
and I am your thrall, you bring what I ask.
And I recline alone in the places you set, bright gust of your sweat
riding the back of yesterday’s cologne, with the thought of your hands
working their dead charm around my neck —
to clear the dishes, to unscrew the lights —
serving me, and under the table, I smile with my legs.

I too would pass out
alongside those in the operating room
who in spite of all
they witness cannot take the severing of limbs,
the saw, the bite, the fall
of bone from bone, so difficult to think about
let alone see there
where the nurse I know swears an invisible
spectrum floods the place,
from the extremity a radiance expelled,
or freed perhaps, released
the way deep sleep releases its lust, its luster.
It takes a surgeon’s steel
to withstand, he says, a skin tougher than mine
will ever be, a trust
in the horrible mercy of impermanence,
the flesh like flecks of rust
spun out of the cut. There is no sterile needle
or prayer to bind the flow
of images, the effulgence of the phantom 
limb that blushes through
the bandage. What you witness fills the tomb
of the eye, and you
cannot kill it and keep the host alive. How
does he cope, I wonder,
when he lays his wallet on the nightstand,
when the sparks of night
rain fall around his cup of steam, around the hand
and the meat it cuts,
the mouth it waters, the opening of the wound.

2.
Paradise will never come
to Iraqi men,
forced to kneel on rice
for hours, their eyes hooded
like falcons. I have
known something
of darkness, but never this.
I don’t think it leaves us,
but what do I know
of blindness? I know
this: the bullet needs
a body to exist.
I know this: the knife knows blood
wants out.
4.
The bullet
shot by an Iraqi soldier
will never pierce my heart.
For a slug to enter
my chest, it must first
travel halfway,
half a quarter, an eighth –
ad infinitum – which means
pain is an illusion.
A bullet’s movement is measured
by infinite divisions,
which means algebra
must fail before I can
bleed, which means
the red I see is misbelief:
nothing can leave
my body, if nothing breaks
my skin. The sea is still the sea,
no matter how much salt
the dead need
to spin their halos.

How easy to be left for damsel. When a girl
can lie unseen in a forest for days, on a bed
of thick needles and not get pricked. Hold
time in place under her tongue, hold the last
flower of air in her chest to see what will happen —
what will bloom and wilt. When a girl can dream
and not be frightened of the years ahead of her
yet to be lived, alone in myrtle and moss.
When she can see the animal’s teeth for its shine
and not for the bite, the hurt it leaves on her.
The crows mournful at the mouth of the cave
she reads as a sign of leaving: the world empty
of her. She of clipped wings, glistening with drama,
so pretty to look at, so stiff with misuse.

I loved old cabinets built for radios
back then, and so we stopped to look at one
with four rimmed glasses and an old decanter
set on the top. I stood in a slant of sun,
and looked it over long and hard — I swear —
as though it were the very height of grandeur,
but backed away. “Not working, I suppose,”
you sighed. I didn’t answer, didn’t care
you missed the point. Of course it wasn’t new:
I liked it better broken, wanted it more
because it was abandoned and obsolete —
I wanted nothing as it was before,
nothing that the world had kept complete.
I held time’s heavy damage in my hand
because it was a way to understand
what we had promised when we said, “I do.”

Two sisters walking. One
was molested by their father.
You wonder which is which,
if the one walking faster
spends her life fleeing a house on fire
only she can sense, if the one
with arms crossed over her chest
as if winter lived on in her body?
The shorter hem, or would it be the longer,
trying too late to hide? If the one
with no children or the one with four.
The one who startles when approached
from behind, or the one who laughs
with a hand pressed to her mouth,
afraid the ash will escape.
Both stiffen for the embrace.
Both stare at the shadow behind a man.
Is it the prettier one or the less talkative?
Asking these questions makes you realize
you must think like their father.
You must go back in time and decide
which child is more precious
and what precious means.
You must decide, when forming
the glass shards into laurels,
which child you may crown
without bloodying
your own hands.

From this day forth, let it be understood: as one
of God’s most graceful innovations, you—
dear horse—are entitled to certain provisions
under the law. Granted, this law is one
I just made up, but those who acknowledge
its validity will adhere to the following rule:
One does not, under any circumstance, say “fuck you”
to a horse. It matters not who rode in on
the aforementioned steed. It matters not
what kind of jackassery said rider has committed.
We shall not allow even the tangential “fuck you”
to be cast upon this virtuous and sophisticated being,
such as the fuck-you-by-association commonly
phrased as: Fuck you and the horse you rode in on.
No, dear horse, you are proof that one does not
have the luxury of choosing the burden one carries.
Fate makes an animal of us all, and rides us
through the village at sunrise where we are judged.
But we designed those villages. We built them
from our worst ideas and kept expanding until
each enclave was equipped with genetically modified
pigeons and flammable tap water. The human hand
can reach from one ruined thing to the next. It can
level cities and wave goodbye and run its fingers
through your mane, and when I find you, I will
whisper: You would’ve done a better job with this place.
Unfortunately, horses don’t have any say in governance.
Except once. It’s said that the emperor Caligula
nominated his horse, Incitatus, as a Roman Consul.
We should also note: Caligula’s reign was brief.
37-41 AD. Then he was slain.

I slide open vast extending drawers,
admire a butter curler,
crab cracker, wine corks
scattered like stars above the salad spinner.
In my sister’s kitchen I finger the miniature nutmeg grater,
the pizza wheel, the whisk —
spread out the French spoons —
used to baste Moroccan chicken, stir the melon bisque.
O to be an instrument of the culinary arts.
To live among them as mandolin,
as mint-green ice cream scoop —
I’d spend my last days in conversation
with the colander, the copper-bottomed pots
clanging above us like moons of Venus and Mars.
Let the appliances apply what they know —
light up, dive in, peel, wheel, and chop —
Hallelujah for the slotted spoon, the funnel, the sieve —
Let me labor like her thermos,
red and gold, which pours away what is hot
with the same equanimity as what is cold.

Our favorite pastime is predicting our end:
how it will happen, and when,
and whether anyone will study it after,
reconstruct the timeline
in order to analyze what the signs were
and if we chose to see them.
We did. We were always
terrified. If we couldn’t
prevent our ruin, at least we could envision it,
and this might
steep our fears in grace, and this might
make us ready:
cumulus clouds through which we hurtle
headfirst then flipping;
trees, impossible to say what species,
only upturned faces
bearing witness to our gaining speed,
to the airplane from which
we were pushed without parachutes,
how it banks west and is gone.

Is it spring in Philadelphia yet?
I’m still waiting for the river to unfreeze.
The buds must be poking up in the garden now.
I put so many seeds in the soil I have no idea what to expect.
Were you in the lab all day?
Do the cats have enough water?
It seems like every day the snow melts,
Then freezes, then melts,
Then it snows all over again.
You’re getting spring first.
I’ve never been this far north this time of year.
I came here to see what would happen.
I buried myself in the snow,
Listening for something.
It’s breathing quietly.
I miss you. Don’t forget to take out the compost
On Thursday. What are you making for dinner?
I thought I would discover something here.
The earth is so still.
Someone said they saw an otter
Scuttling across the frozen river
But I missed it. I think I figured
Out one thing: that quivering
Feeling in my heart comes straight
From the earth’s mantle.
And there are no metaphors.
I’m sitting here waiting in the plain snow.

You might fly above
brick & glass buildings forever,
or disappear like tea dust
& never sink under
thinking what does this
have to do with me?
If a comet falls from the sky
onto earthly fortune
coldly rendered.
If action is confession.
These are just bare images
I tossed out.
Reading about distant eternity,
I saw ice light up a concept,
much color of work,
museums of melody, teeth
adhering to time.
Make a little space
because death’s a parade.
Don’t hate the way it loves you.

It’d been so long since we’d touched, you thought I must’ve found God. I caught you in the dark watching a video: a piano on the curb letting itself be touched and touched, singing for any finger that asked. It only survived one night before men with sledgehammers shattered it to tinder, took away each metal part that sang. Each time I caught you watching this–your face glowing in the darkness of our bedroom–you told me you were learning acceptance. After all, this is the world we live in: men can be broken and made whole again. Woman with all her faults remains dismembered: body and body parts forever being torn to pieces. I understand why you wouldn’t wish to risk that, you said, leaving space in bed between us, but growing increasingly jealous of thunder because it alone could rouse me in the night. This is the God you imagined for me: a storm I had no choice but to wake for. Maybe our God is the same. In my head, he has dark hair and olive skin and is far from soft when he bites a crucifix on the back of my neck.

In one, my brother’s in the gutter,
literally, face up almost floating along
second street after a hard rain, the clouds
finally clearing, the clean stars directing
traffic, his indelibly dirty palm planted
around a forty, which, in this life,
is all he ever drank.
In another, my brother isn’t wrecked.
He owns a head shop on California’s forgiving coast.
He has a beard, the tattoo of his nickname
retouched to add a vine of morning glories
for his wife, Glory, who watches home movies
of when he, we, were kids. What’s important
is that he isn’t dead in all of them. String Theory
suggests there are unlimited universes
exploding every second on top of each other,
each one different, a single action reversed,
rearranged, vastly, to slightly different.
He still dies in some, in many, but so do I.
He shoots me and then himself,
and we both disperse, keep running
in so many other directions that it doesn’t matter
how bad it hurts. He’s just an asshole
most of the time. I’ve even stopped talking to him,
cut off all communication after he stole my car,
stole my wedding ring for heroin,
whatever he’s done. I have no brother,
I say to my friends at dinner parties.
Which is a privilege given
only to those who have them to disown.
I straighten my high-collared dress,
think of him out there, somewhere,
anywhere, but where this life keeps him now.
I stare out the window at my face half-hidden,
half reflected in the glass and the shifting ring of light
left on at the end of the walk.

The capsules made adipose cells go rogue.
Side effect: stones. The slow work of pebbles inside a chest
piling to a peak high enough
for hindsight to pantomime shouts from.
Ten years turned boys into men, and men’s ribs
into mountain ranges. I, too, remember the tablets handed to us
well enough to translate my breath into commandments,
to lick the wind with a tongue made of latexed fingertips
on which clouds and gauze taste the same.
Even if a madman’s body’s native hormone is rain,
he must ready any seeds sown within him
for brushfires and at least a decade
of canyon dust. But I come from a tribe of boys
out of whom the moon refused to pull tides.
To keep from drowning in our mouths, we only needed
to lower our faces into the sea which looked least like a mirror
and breathe. I never believed I was of the Earth
even after my body grew to resemble it,
that the brain of someone who believes stones can be rewritten
is a glacier, sentience another way of melting.
I don’t believe in a chemical recipe for sleep
even as I discover the groves of my own body
don’t wake me.

We leave
our boots to lean against the trailhead.
Our coats and gloves, folded neatly, 
will line the nests of birds
and the jays will learn her name 
before they hatch. Your faithlessness will hymn
the hemlock groves
come springtime. You agree to burn
the map with blue-black fingers. You agree to feed
the matches to the fire. Your knife
is abandoned after we undress 
our first rabbit
and learn again why we were given
teeth. We become what your first wife
always said we were: animals
on all fours, forgetting our names. 
We become
what I always knew us to be.
I revise my old mistakes and surrender.
There has always been a howl in the dark 
well of your throat 
— the rush of some black water, 
waiting for starvation.

My wrists
in handcuffs 
at the waist.
Hands, 
dark birds
stoned down.
My shoulders stooped
the near-width
of the coffin-bound.
Behind me
piles of hay 
curtain off
the ragged contours 
of the white-washed
town. A crowd 
has come
to watch.
How well
we understand.
Its place
among the fallow fields
at noon. 
Stand.
Clasp your hands
behind your back.
Or keep 
the coiled German Shepherd
taut.
Amor fati,
I’ll love you not.
Though the body
becomes cage
and the tractor’s muddy tracks
so like a noose
sweep toward
my neck.

As a young girl, I guide a saw through soft stalks
my tender Maple, my glistening stump
As a young boy, I blot myself out with daddy’s books
a map of me on twenty-six
Our block grew ragged–the sag of unkempt
lawns. The soiled sounds of houses.
As a young girl I would listen
a swarm of flies inside
As a young boy I would watch
white story of the tongue
We confused the bleach and the vinegar:
the ants crawl in the ants crawl out the ants
As a young girl I hemmed and hawed.
As a young boy I shilly-shallied.
We thought there were tubers
inside! All white piles and kindness.
As a young boy I took out the trash
and watched it leak tears for me.
As a young girl I pressed my tongue to grass
–the doors in me disappeared.

The jellyfish
glide without the matter
of bone, brains, heart. They flick
and do not know pain.
We measure, find them, and they
do not understand us. They bloom
and deflate like crinoline
space stations. This is silence
or worship. When we dive,
we want more than the ritual
of science. Surely the jellyfish
are the moons, the femme fatales
of the sea, these stingers, these
medusae that coil, dazzle,
and drift from our hands
and cameras.

Although some mortals call it beautiful,
Really the same
Thing happens every game:
The rival squads line up; the dull
Tweet of the referee initiates
The match–free kicks,
Stray passes, through-balls, tricks
And turns. Soon, our interest abates.
Up here, in the wings, it looks almost depraved:
Such preparation
For some longed-for elation,
Though chance, after chance, after chance, is saved.
It’s sad: with every shot-in-the-dark on goal,
A momentary heartening of the soul.

Let me be an Egyptian vessel.
Let me be a son of Horus, let me be Hapi of the baboon head.
Let me hold your lungs tight in limestone, let me be of some use
to you in the afterworld, let me hold what you need to breathe again.
Let me live in a time where the heart held memories, where the brain
was pulled out, needless, where the empty skull was washed out
with frankincense and palm wine, where the dead lay unburdened by the mind.
Let me be there for your judgment, let me fasten the wooden ladder tight
so you can make your way further to the stars. Let me love you simply,
like the baboon loves the rising sun and calls and calls, loud and lungful,
long arms held up in the heat to praise, chattering into morning for your return.

Death rattles her name in its throat. If her
clawfoot bathtub is full of captured pigeons,
her hair knots from sheer lack of rain. Pull
pain up the spiral staircase, take down fringed,
frayed shawls from the wardrobe’s dim musk.
Death dreads not dust on a mirror–Polish it,
polish it, not one speck should show–Death whets
its tooth when she looks in shallows and sees
depths, no mirror, no eyes with a child’s sad wisdom,
losing a game. The more she abides in the body,
the more her body is not. Death hears pigeons
coaxing, cooing, a cough like last, labored breath.
My doves, what are we? Cloak of the moon and bone-
winds of stars. And light–we know not from aught.

The whole messy thing
unravels like a horse
belly, split open
and spilled. A wasp
nest, gristled angels,
it’s strange, how scared
I am–quick write
down, Ferris wheel.
Write down, ceiling
of bees. Carefully mark
the lover pulseless
in the middle of a very long,
high road we never see
the end of–my throat
falls right out of my body.
A moth’s wings before
the dust knocked off.

I remember your clavicle pressed like a blade
under your skin, the moon
pooling in your cheeks’ hollows. You wanted
to be buried in the green dress
you always wore with pearls. We’d sit outside your back
door, watching bats swing over the lake.
Once you were like a weather vane twisting
at the edge of a field as you watched tornados spin
toward your house, your mother asleep on the couch.
I suppose you couldn’t tell me you wanted
her dead. But now you’re gone like she is.
I listen for your voice in the church
inside me, where a priest’s hands outline the shape
of a death. Yes, he believes vertebrae have ghosts.
This luminous pew, where a bird can earn a spot
in paradise–but I’m told the earth
can’t perform the miracle of giving you back.
I know the music your bone shards
make in the urn. You could be an old woman
shaking fish skeletons to conjure the dead.
You could be this fish skeleton.
I should know when a body need not be resurrected–
when the ways we said our names between us,
quietly near the azaleas, trying not to startle
robins (now, now they’re singing on your spine),
stop being music I can hear in my mind,
but become something other: how I scatter
the notes, adagio, pianissimo, and what answers
as the wind ladles white feathers into the lake.

You were in the world and. More
slowly now I am
so fasted now so. Long
it’s been without
you, if you ever read this
you were what. I was dreaming of
this welt, to know
it before. It comes like love
I loved your
empty spaces,
saved them a little
like. The sea
it’s dying, believe me,
long ago today
I was. Fond of saying time is
just wandering away, love,
you heard me once say
I am the lost shiny thing
you were. Designed for
this decade, jumped hoops to get me
and picture it, got through
but not this I’m not through
and. I will not miss this big sadness or.
How I heard your body break into such.
Fragments toward what. Bewilder meant.

In the night-spun clearing we were spent, star-burst wide
and lending our skin to the sun’s failing heat.
Where your hand sat my clavicle met, unbending.
Where are your arrows to pull this bow-bone taut
till timid, till cracked so night could crawl its way inside?
Was a sharpness where you weighted yourself against me.
Was a blind spot in my body’s breakage, where tightness
was soldiered away, spread well-winged and with blade.
~
A dream in my night broke my sleep.
I only remember waking to streetlights
through the window, a dull yellow
washing over everything. My darkness
a lighter shade of itself. On my bare chest,
light masked the door to the dream.

They are still there, the dark woods from the dream,
While everything they symbolize is gone,
While the wireless speakers unwind their tidy theme,
And the tiki torches stutter on the lawn,
While the dishwasher rattles dishes left in the sink,
And the dog worries his tiny rubber man,
And the blinking clocks aren’t certain what to think,
And the fruit fly circles back to where it began,
And the interest keeps the credit cards awake,
Collecting in a server states apart,
And the siren cries out for a stranger’s sake,
And the smartphone mutes its obsolescent heart,
While the box fan turns a bedroomful of breath,
And the network brings the software up to date,
And the skim milk dies a timely, painless death,
And the woods, the woods you’ve dreamed about, they wait.

So I guess it won't be a bullet
becoming a little moon — brightwarm in me one night.
Thank God. I can go quietly. The doctor will explain death
& I’ll go practice.
In the catalogue of ways to kill a black boy, find me
buried between the pages stuck together
with red sweet stick. Ironic, predictable. Look at me.
I’m not the kind of black man who dies on the news.
I’m the kind that grows thinner & thinner & thinner
until light outweighs us, & we become it, family
gathered around my barely body telling me to go
toward myself.

all the women pregnant it seems
to me in a hollowed out
shadow carved Tennessee farmland
hippie buses and vans our hair
in long braids feathers
woven into them and we all
resist white fluorescence
sterile forceps needles
so I decide to learn it
myself and I do read
old texts study grainy
photographs mostly the babies
come out all right on their own
until I have guided thousands
into these close rooms windows
open to summer or open
to winter to cicadas
or snow a sameness to it
after all the crowning glistening
whorl of hair beneath
the fontanelle iridescent
pulse a well-eye
one that will close that is
already closing over time
I see the rarer cord-
strangled ones too early
or too late hidden twins
ones who come fists first
breeches stills but there is
the one singular one
born in the bread truck
his parents have driven
there they are living in it
broken down beside
a foundation they are
digging out of mud when I arrive
he is already coming I see
first his mouth so like his
mother’s sucking before
he breathes the rest of the head
appears I see no skull
just the brain exposed
before the rush of the rest
of him perfect I have read
about it this thing the book’s
Glossary defines as monster:
mutation saltation freak
so I take him from her
he breathes on his own I let him
he does not laugh
or cry for the one month he lives
though he does make a sound
other-worldly and after
he dies only after do the other
infants in the barn-like nursery
make it for a while echoing
something not quite language not quite
song un-syllabled that vowel that
does not rise or fall, bottomless
in that way, and what they
have learned from him is as though
from some place beyond
that only he among them could recall
become in the raw wake of him
something they must remember
and will in the telling
and retelling they are I am
for a while now
sure this sure of it

She hasn’t fallen into the coma
those nasty tabloids suggest
She’s alert and well and sitting up
in her bed at Cedars Sinai
I was walking on The Promenade
in the land of palm trees and Saint Monica
where sun and blue shade duke it out
working a path between bass clef and treble
and then I saw it: JONI MITCHELL IN A COMA!
And I said No! Not her! Maybe it’s true
she’s been a recluse for half the century
in her pink Bel-Air mansion
Our Lady of the Spanish Canyon
where she chain smokes and is paranoid of everybody
especially the invisible parasites
like colorful irritable fibers
she’s convinced bloody her skin
make her tear all her clothes off
and slither like a snake on ceramic tiles
Who wouldn’t believe aliens
were camping in your private parts
when there’s Paparazzi spying
from the Hydrangea everywhere you go?
There is no rain in California
and I have been to Hollywood parties
and done perfectly disgraceful things
But Joni Mitchell is not unconscious!
She is still here in the in-between
going up and down like her melodies
make us when the heart is shadows and light
and we are desperate to be forgiven
Oh Joni keep singing we need that nothing gray about you

Since we cannot meet in this world
we agree to meet in Anna Karenina, page 18
in the Garnett translation. While Vronsky
arrives in Krasnoe and hands the footman his hat,
while Tolstoy fusses over plausible details–
moldy arras? leaky samovar? snuffling stallion?
deafening crickets?–we slip into the boathouse
to undo pearl buttons with a shaky hand. Soon
startled swifts volley–will they hurt themselves
against the low rafters?–and a bittern cries.
Or are there loons in Russia? Are there butterflies
with eyes on their wings, this deep in the past?
All we can do is lie still and tremble.
We listen to the pulse like children
intent on a conch. We sense a licked finger
touching the page at the upper-right corner,
twilight buckles between us, and we turn,
since we cannot meet in this world.

The gist: The meteorologist pushes weather
from the westside. He’s the darling digger
of the cold front, Live from WKBN: the highest perch
remaining downtown. We want his temperature,
we want to feel his forehead, to measure it
in our mint-green kitchens at midnight with bar neon
pulsing down the block. The valley falls silent
when he works thunder across the counties —
Mahoning, Trumbull: what muscle. Oh what a thing
to watch for. These warming Friday nights
when even grandpas unbutton their work shirts
we park out behind his station and arch back against
the back bumper, a street of hydrangeas in our hair.
A lot of salty Chevys. A lot of lipgloss zombies.
Any second now he’ll exit, the second storm
is coming, but can’t he know we’ll wait all night? —
our hearts without accuracy, our money on
the side door, our eyes bullseyeing the sky.

The rain pounding on tin but not passing through it cannot conjure blue
rust in the way feeling can
–oxidizing an iris to slate gray, to storm cloud, to fog gathering
on the April morning 
when my father was born & cried out, mattering. In Burnet County
there were wildflowers then. 
I like to think: “little crucifixions.” He kissed my cheek until three–
four maybe–until tenderness 
missed its mark. Arrows he loosed forty-five yards away striking bullseye
targets were more measurable
than the space between us. The largest buck he ever saw he never shot
he was fond of saying. 
I slowly came to understand the distances we were both creating every time
he told me about Troy, 
Greece, Helen, & the ships sent for her. I want to hear his voice again & know
my Athens is interstellar 
as a comet’s orbit though my own failing vision will not permit me to trace
constellations or apologies yet.
What am I but weakness when the past tense claims me? Salt of the earth
to the earth returning 
or a spit-flecked prophet? Supernova, maybe? At the end of the world
I’ll hear his voice 
& our conversations will return him to me & those wildflowers.
The sun will swell 
to ten times its size, rise, & my father will draw back his bowstring again
without any effort.

As you walk
to your mammogram appointment
my listening hides inside your purse,
footfalls coming loud from the dashboard,
behind the backseats,
I’m surrounded by
the machinery of you moving forward
cross town.
I’m moving forward, too–
without speaking my odometer says 75,
and the voiceless cars along the highway say
let us hurry, let us cheat the minutes
before the minutes pick us clean.
That crunching–
I’m guessing
you’re trekking over gravel, plateau
or piedmont gravel, creek rock
I cannot tell. Some little stones some river
worried smooth.
If your blood was plugged
to an amplifier, blood as it races
then backtracks, it would sound like this.
And I would not sleep. I would swipe keys,
drive nowhere under the mantra of streetlights,
the wreckage of the universe,
and wonder how
long will you be around, and how long
will I be around to witness you being around.
The air crackles
while my speakers continue
broadcasting your steps, and I recognize that this
rhythmic sound belongs to the ocean–
Bang, hiss. Bang, hiss.
Our hearts always sing it.

My Darling Z, My Feverlily —
May I call you
Dearest, may I speak to you
as sweetheart, sugar lump, the honeyed
apple of my – When we first met
you were a gin-swilling art school darling.
When you leaned across the bar to order
I saw the milk-white flesh
below your collarbones, the freckles
shadowboxed by breasts and blouse.
Saw the careful way he wasn’t looking.
He did not love me then. I know. I was just
a body then, skeleton held
by whipstitch and slipknot, just synapse, firing
and firing. He was a boy, had fingers
that prodded and opened. Warm body
on the lawn, scapular on the bedstand.
I knew he’d love you better and by year’s end
I was right. He left
and I was I again —
a ridged and ridden hillside.
But pardon me. I speak too long
and sit too close. I spent a long year
in the earth, I made you
in my image. I have traveled back
to hear if only once
your voice, to see
the full-moon glint of your incisors.

My boy wants to dig to the other
side–Of what, I
ask.To where people are.
How come the moon some days is visible
in the afternoon?What refraction,
what luminosity. Miles down, what’s there
at the bottomof the Earth?
What’s there at the center?Some questions
with answers aren’t worth answering. His imagination
seized–is there a center? He thuds and thuds the dirt
with a spade. I think we’re close, he says. He looks
away, then back againto the dirt.
Does he know
his time is coming? Does he know, the minutes barbed
now, the day years from now when he realizes
there is no center–(or is there?)
I understand that sometimes by looking for something
we invent it:thus one definition
of truth, one version
of vision. I read that the desire to breathe
is our most primitive urge. How loyal we are to what
contains usthough we narrow
toward something finiteor vice versa.
Orange was a fruit before it was a color. When
we were kids, we found
a jawbone in the back-
yard. Explorers. Discoverers. The shoulders of giants, we thought
the Earth had opened her secrets to us,
and maybe she had. History, like poetry, knows nothing
of narrative but is charged with the now.
Everything we touch turns into a downspout. The tree parallel
to where my son digs dropped at my feet last fall
a sparrow’s nest, eggs still unhatched. The mother,
distraught or scared or–had never seen such a thing–
wait I can’t know what she
thought or even if she did.
Mourning, like desire, is light followed by fits of
astonishing darkness–one a hole you climb into,
the othera hole you fall into,
both, like the shadow a ladder casts against the side
of the house, never end, but extend forever. I ask
my son if he ever has nightmares. What’s a nightmare?
It’s a new kind of closeness, an empty house with a boy
in it. A bear drunk on fermented berries, precisely
how we marvel at his heft. What we get for caring.
A river near and far–the unsaid, close, closer. We
cannot musterwhat we’ve lost.
Sometimes I have nightmares with my eyes open.

Let’s be tourists. Let’s eat banana fritters wrapped in old homework, crouch
on red plastic stools under the banyan spiky with joss sticks. Let’s walk
to our lake, have a cà phê đá and count turtles. Our spoons’ll scrape and clink the condensed
milk chorus of men forever on lunch breaks. Let’s forget colonialism and believe
the compliments. Let’s not argue too much when they overcharge us.
During the underwater afternoon hours let’s speed
home through empty streets, take off our helmets, shoes, everything, wade
into cool bedroom darkness and explore our gecko pinks until the three-toddler
soccer game begins again in the alley. Let’s koala bear on the bike, crash
through the temple’s damp green breath, past Ho’s blank
field and blanker guards, blur flame trees with balloon men and tea ladies sprouting
from their roots, out to West Lake, let’s drink a beer and watch the bats
frenzy the coming dusk.

Palestine, the metaphor, says to me
not, I’ll not, Palestine the future country,
not Palestine the vehicle,
holy o most holy, I’ll not theater
the Palestine, not otherwise it, nor
tempest it green & black & red
& black & ash & black war,
I’ll not war, Palestine is not a war,
no six day victor come,
no seventh day, its waste of daffodils.

I’m not prepared for this.
I’ve come without a god, or life
insurance.
And now,
this chemical chemo-breath
is with me again,
sharp and pulling
the dead weight
of my body
like so much debris.
I’m eager to burn 
away the night sweat nunnery
of cure,
eager for the light
that pauses
at my hospital window and waits
for me. My thanks.
Outside, the sky 
is ablaze in life-support shades
of red and orange.
While inside,
a sun-stunned ribbon of seed
radiates.
A remedy? We’ll see,
my doctor says. 
The sun unhooks
from its thin-threaded horizon
like a body without country,
circling above, before dropping
below,
or maybe
that was the moon. Lovely, both.
From this threshold,
empty of fare-
wells,
it’s easy to confuse
day with night
and night with day,
as I watch and wait.
Tell me–
Is it early? What time? Too late?

1.
Mercury spilled from a dropped thermometer.
Its afternoons blaze like baby-fever.
Thinking of your lover’s hairy wrist,
you left that world on the front burner
until it boiled away. It sealed itself in mist.
Venus is a bead slipped from a necklace
I gave you when I hated myself for loving you.
At Motel Six in Paramus you taught me
why Venus is both morning and evening star.
Mars is iron, cold magma, pink air.
Whiff of methane from a childhood crush.
Its core is pencil shavings and eraser smudges:
in the Stelliferous Era I tried to write you
an explanation for grief and the bus to Queens.
Jupiter must work all its four billion years
at meaningless tasks: lining up for syzygy,
racing into perihelion, reining in its sixty moons,
spewing ammonia flumes and thousand-mile lightning bolts,
rotating its star-vast bulk in ten hours.
It isn’t living. It doesn’t care who is.
Saturn waits beyond the asteroid belt.
I gave it to you and you lost it in the wash.
Whenever I said “Saturn,” you changed the subject.
We called the dog “Saturn” and he ran away.
The rings are thinnest in the years of marriage
when we woke in a soaked bed remembering
how I paid the mortgage, then you, then no one.
Neptune is made of Lysol, Drano, and Black Flag roach killer.
Uranus lies 1,000,000,000 miles away.
We can talk politely again, about neutral topics,
corgis, fall foliage, hydrangeas, the Boston Bruins.
But there’s no catch in our throat, no dazzling grievance.
Pluto we postulated to correct a mistake,
a glitch in the transit, a degree of eccentricity.
Error led us to the entire system, to notice the day
we cannot look at, and each other, our faces
almost hidden by huge shiny pupils.
2.
Did you know a beam of light takes a year
to travel a mile on its journey
out of the core of the sun? When it surfaces
it zips away at 186,000 miles per second–
that is the law, the only law–
and fades in the Heliopause
but never dies, not even Outside
in that cupboard called the universe.
3.
In every language, the moon is almost all vowels.
Lovers crying, too thrilled to articulate a name.
4.
The amygdala is the mind’s mountain,
thalamus its smoldering core,
cortex its regolith and duracrust.
Light hits us, creates us,
and breaks into equations.
5.
Love me before we die.

You done landed on the wrong side of the country, amigo.
Done mess with the state you never mess with. Y’know,
I got an arsenal back home, I can convert your shiny disc
into one of them colanders, but I’m willing to settle this
mano-a-mano. Hell, I’ll let you take the first swing.
I betcha brawl like a schoolgirl, all wrists and spinning
pigtails. My father done taught me how to whip some.
Lessons, he called them. Taught me until I grown
as tall as he. Quit stalling. What’s wrong, you ain’t got
no manos? Got them weird octopus things? You might
very well be green, but right now yous yellow to me.
In these parts, there’s only one right color. Too many
illegals sneaking in along the border. I’d stop them
personally with a double-barreled if not for some dumb
law. None against taking down a UFO, I reckon.
Now you just sit there glowing. I’ll be back in a second.

The smack of the ball is a fantastic life-affirming
noise & the machine gives
me a strike when I only get a few pins
& another & another:
it’s so sexy when I win for once I watch for you
to pool skin cells in those holes
but you don’t: you anticipate the danger:
I would take up forensics;
return to investigate
to find your ball
& extract–
I see your steps reflect in shooting arrows when you go
up for your turn; I am sustainable–all germs & beer–
if I can watch you spotlighted by the discoing overhead:
The lanes are fresh sleek & bumper-less: cut me to the chase:
I wouldn’t have lifted off this dress–hurry,
I would have waited
for the part when I learn to lift 
your fingerprints from zippers
You frame me as the ball: spiraling
in wax;–I am its mass
weighed down & pressing
still hot from the mouth of the alley

She wandered the wilderness for hours calling her own name, even though it was the most popular from her birth year, based on a movie of a mermaid transformed into a woman struggling with her own identity. Perhaps the woman knew that the park bus tour was simply searching for the meaning of the true nature of being. Maybe the top of the world knows a thing or two about tickling the senses with anticipation. Quite possibly the notion of identity is worth searching for. The ticking clock was palpable toward nightfall. It was a metaphor for her career, love life, or family. It was a glacier sliding toward the bay or a bird warbling to an empty nest. It was a ring tone of her mother contacted by authorities, or simply that there is a limit to the time free from oneself. It is the understanding that as long was we try to name everything we cannot control the results: daughter, mother, mountain of ice rumbling a response.

Leave the bed unmade as a sum of our last duet.
The sheets twisting in serpentine seams. Between them
a no man’s land no mage or medium would wander–
too many omens in the smudgy shadows of their ranges.
Numbed and amused in our abandon, who seduced whom,
the blame unassigned, unassumed. No repenting here
near the site of our destructive lust–don’t die on any cliché,
do say the stupid words of some wanton heart.
Say the word gamble, even suggest damned.
I know I should go, make use of what’s left
of the night. You know, too, although you say stay.
The small lies and guilt slithering in our stomachs,
during this pre-twilight, that dread the new dawn,
dread the rough light so much colder than stone.

It sat downstairs on the air hockey table,
its shedding needled branches, its copper wire arms.
With care, our mother draped its false twigs in silver
garlands, two for a dollar on the clearance rack,
and the ornaments–her mother’s, long dead–
we cradled in our palms like baby Jesus might have
been held, our non-savior swathed in hay in the barn-crib, safe
and human. Before the two-foot tree,
we made our own, traced our hands on green construction paper,
cut out five-fingered fronds and taped them to the wall.
Our mother wept at its absurdity. But each December
he came for us, there were glittering gifts beneath
whatever false icon we had constructed, and I marveled at how
merciful this man-God could be, Santa Christ, Saint Jesus,
who had found our home and come before the altar
of the unbelieving, stood there in its wavering light,
and left for us chocolate, snow boots, everything we liked.

Already the first of the year has entered
the calm prayer of the lake and become
a part of it, his last essential song trapped
forever below the surface, blued syllables
slipped from the vessel of his body.
They remain though the rest of him was
raised, pale, a creature of half-land, half-water.
Spring and summer claim their share
of drunken boaters, careless fishermen.
But rarely this early in the year, this close
to shore. I know that bend of water, how shallow
it stands close to the bank. Only
the very drunk or unlucky, only one determined
not to rise would slide under and stay.
When I was fourteen, a minister who professed
a home-brewed faith of his own sent
blurred photos of himself walking on water
to a newspaper. When a covey
of reporters came to see the feat repeated,
the minister announced he could not
perform miracles in the face of such doubt.
He left the brown river untrod, returned
to his congregation whose prayers would
rise like floodwaters, unstopped by doubt.
Deep in the gummy mud that is the lake’s floor,
the last words of the drowned burrow
deeper than any prayer can reach, preserved
in water where no miracles come to pass.

A fox, I have heard, heeds
the vole moving
through the grass from
one hundred yards off,
hillocked ears open
to the current of sound.
I walk the cobbles & strain
my mark. For what stirrings
am I attuned? Rumble
of the corduroy roads, over
which worn wagons haul
whiskey, flour, sage, &, I pray,
cloth thicker than muslin.
Or the slow bricking in
of hinterland & hollow?
The mew of a child – mine,
yes, or the hushed ghosts
wandering field & prairie,
which gather at the river,
but are too light, too made
of moongust, to ride the runnel
to headwater or home.

say something about yourself
morning builds brick by brick
what night dismantles
 
say something about sorrow
then the markets were full
of police dogs
 
say something about cruelty
and the dogs were full
 
say something about yourself
: I had a doll named January First
: her eyes were marble blue
: tip her back & they would shut
: like an ode to hinges, openclose
: a backslash ode
: stop/go goodbye/hello
 
say something about beauty
I went into my inmost thought
where underwater cliffs
& mountains shadow
I collected flower lists, the list of berries
separating the poison ones from the sweet
a list of woodwinds
a red boat listing in the bay
 
say something about cruelty
no one cares whether or not you eat
 
say something about the voice-out-of-a-whirlwind
yours is a mortuary art
heart gets atomized
to e-a-r-t-h
in your vernacular
 
say something about the bride
there are pills for laughing
& for remembering
pills for staying awake
a bracelet that tracks your sleep
 
say something about lovers
my plum tree! my samurai!
my-o-my, speak easy, please
it’s a feeling in the torso
put your hand here—
some arrow pierced through
some sparrow


After a daughter
expires in the cold, she is more field
than body, more
root than bone. She lives
in the throat of the guilty–
she waits for morning
to crack itself open
before she starts to speak.
Dawn never comes, buds tired
& unopened. She is this kind
of daughter, soft in her
unknowingness. A mother
cannot understand–why
must beauty die every day,
and why can’t God make
what is rotten smell in the cold?
All this time a woman
erases herself from the night
like a moon. She is thankful
for her alibi, this invisible
layer of skin.

In a story, a girl is a tree / is a bird / is a wilderness
A girl wakes up underwater Nail by nail builds herself
the same wooden raft Eats the mulberries & the blackberries
set out for the trap & she gets away from him
somehow, the price always half-drowning, half-death.
Compromised by longing & looking for language
to note the differences in the map: the pointed spruces
tipped against the moon this time
& the water half lit, star-slid– but it makes no difference
in the telling. The story is familiar
& she has been told what she can expect from men.
Because the body is incorrect. The body is fragile
in tar & marline, skin written over with shame
like a register of witch-burning. So the body is stubborn:
spalted pith of one lung falters, lumbers open.
Air, dirt air. When fingers reach for fox sedge, claw
for rushes, the air rushes up to meet her grassward.
So the body is inventory– Shunt.
Clutch of hair like a root looping back on itself.
Her hair is juniper rope.
I’m asking: how can she get at the start of this place?
Blue river nameless, sky blank, pointless
code of moss–if she’s traveling north now,
true north north to what?
I can say my voice is a burned voice
but she doesn’t know the way back
after the pigeons have eaten the words
I dredged with flour & left to rise.

In every scenario, a bonfire rages
in the middle of some field where
sad girls sit on the laps of boys
and hunting dogs pick at chicken
bones. Summer hisses like a kitten
in our throats. Hay, newly-baled, dots
the grass–each one a golden tornado
tightened around its center. Embers
flick dangerously around our heads–
the halos have arrived. Our kingdom:
fire, throne, man. And heaven: a girl
with a mouth who knows how to use it.
I stand in the periphery, wonder, what
makes a world? What light ends it?
A girl kneels in the dirt, a boy’s hand
laced through her hair, pushing her
into him. It goes like this: praise
the shepherd, shame the sheep. Fire
spits into summer eternal. Someone
vomits in the bushes. Under this sky,
we all have big eyes–blank with light.

No e-mails can reach you.
No texts. Here, a smokestack
chokes up soot intermittently.
Cloud-makers, I once called them,
and what a world if that were true.
At the window I tap from
the interior and wait for the ghost
to write back. Only the willow,
starved for water, responds
by clicking a beaded branch
against the glass. At one end
of a parking lot, a Target bag
skims the pavement,
drifts before a thing whose stillness
I took to be a truck at rest,
moonlight on chrome,
its driver asleep across the seats.
How his mother, if she lives,
must worry. I wake and wait
for you to call at this lavender hour.
Nothing strange inside
your heartbeat, irregular as it was,
nothing but your blood’s drum,
your mysterious body
more mysterious now,
more foreign for being
outside of me. I thought
we were made of water,
one soul split in two,
but we are made of canyon,
a sky unpolluted by light
and thus filled with light,
a moon so full
it reveals the desert to be
in motion: a coyote stalking
a trickle of water,
a wren skipping nail to nail
on the arm of a cactus.

When you emerge along whatever curve
the day provides, you find a place
you’ve managed before in another type of life,
your spine settling into a familiar,
vertical way of learning.
Some children don’t ever grow old,
though time
inside a silo
may pass the same as time
inside a paper sack.
Your hands aren’t tied,
were never tied, in fact,
though envisioning an expanse
before it appears
would be like anticipating a law
before its enforcement begins.
Like an autumnal sky
maintaining its own language,
its own form of alphabet,
resistant to the beauty of language,
you stumble through speech
in sleep, severing ties
with your mother, filling the space
between the bed and the fan with music.

I slurp from the surface, then give back as a storm gives rain:
scattershot. My world: gather and divide. The world sent
to my address: invoice and valentine. When you pause
on my doorstep the old dog’s voice is sprightly and sharp. No need
to knock. I’m summoned by roars to precedence and presence. The vane
on my roof that spins in the wind prays
for me: scattergood. My roof is bare. My father’s family prays
in place of the spinning wind. As a storm gives rein
to forking fire. My branching cells. The thought of a murmurous vein
can make me blanch and plummet, so I resent
the thought. When there’s a needle I need,
I designate a driver and rest my head, and the hound that paws
my earthquaked brain awake is not the mutt that paws
the back door glass in search of praise
for returning from nowhere to go. Who doesn’t need
unreasonable treats? During Catherine the Great’s reign
new schools sprung up for girls and for mining silver. In 2009, the Saudi king sent
Michelle Obama a $132,000 diamond and ruby jewelry set, in vain
because she re-gifted them to the National Archives, who are not so vain
as to wear them in public. In Riyadh men pause
before speaking lest the king decree their tongues be cut. I’ve never sent
a woman a stone or a yoke. In Medina a woman prays,
hushes, loves per strict prescriptions or faces a rain
of hammers in the hands of her father’s family. I don’t need
to live in Saudi Arabia for my body to need
those hammerheads to turn buttercream. And they don’t. It’s a vain
campaign. It takes a while for a drizzle to drench, and no drop of rain
is shaped like a tear. My whole world is whole. When you pause
on my doorstep you could be from anywhere, so it’s best to praise
everywhere though I’m scared of machetes and the scent
of sulfur. My whole world is broke—not a red cent
to invest—and split-lipped and kneed
in its guts and dumped in shallows where the hammerhead preys.
I stay amazed. I’ve never lived under a weathervane
or been better than a guest under vaulted naves. I clap my paws
in the mud-moist field to feel myself sink into what the rain
has made and remade. What’s heaven sent without need
of heaven. What transmutes in the pause
between drops as the rain drains deeper than praise.

She wanders heavy-bellied, full of milk & knives.
Lowers the barrel of her body like this, forepaws soft & sure as motherwings against the infant earth.
When finally she takes flight, she falls to gnashing the neckmeat of deer, one last upwelling of arterial blood the very blush of certain bodies in the near heavens.
When mountains gather their snap & shatter, when down comes the wind & winterlong, even wolfbones leak their autumn grease, wolfeyes go lonesome & sallow, & for warmth every wolf snouts the yeasting fleshpockets of those they run with & love.
I’m telling you capped & nightgowned like that the story is not the wolf’s but ours, our fear not of being devoured but blinded, lied to, made complicit in our own undoing.
I’m telling you if he came through the bedsheets & afternoon light after you, then, yes, I’d do whatever wild, spine-breaking thing was in me to do.
I’m telling you if we ever on the next ridge see her loping down the scree, teats swinging, or in the fireblind night hear above the sough & slap of lakewater his dark bell of howl boom & ring, then children we will lean into one another, into our own itching hides, all the lengths of our glad, animal bones.

As expected, after the wedding, the house
became a cough we lived in, trembling
in the throat of that asthmatic spring.
The streets stacked and curved like fingers
on a grease-knuckled hand gripping
the waist of our Midwestern dream.
We went sun-blind inside just looking
at each other.
Death is not working—
but wanting—too hard. My father’s body
was little more than a paper bag by the day
he died and tumbled into a graveyard.
I could have died etching my name
into the glass eye of my cage—a bay
window painted with lace. The skyline
in its expanse was a farce played out each night.
Sometimes my reflection was the star
of the show. Sometimes, it was the child
clapping from her seat, so looking out
and looking in became the same thing.
Sometimes, it just rained for weeks.

It’s a misleading headline, as she never holds the scalpel
Just bobby pins her crown & rubs the shark’s ilium
Where muscles & pelvis attach.
Detached, it’s a shawl of bones.
Mostly she, JaCee, watches with an expression better suited
To her own autopsy, mouth agape, burgundy blotch near her
Ear. I’m all for Science Education, & have plenty of questions
Myself, for instance why do I hear water running in the walls
Of my bedroom all night long, in the pipes that heat this old place?
Is gas a liquid or is all the water from clouds overhead
Filtered through my house? Here it comes again, like a shower
In the grates. I’m afraid it’s flammable & might combust.
Outside my window is a regular knocking that after snow
Is accompanied by chunks of falling ice. But who is out there?
I can only think of Catherine & Heathcliff which isn’t
Very scientific. In the privacy of my possibly combustible home,
Resurrection is promoted on TV. I’m asked, “What if someone
You lost was returned?” A couple covered in flour
Or stardust clutch each other in a field;
The face of a woman who lost her son is elastic
With her widening mouth as if screaming needs more room.
It needs a lot of room, & then needs almost none,
Give it long enough, no one will even hear.

what did the suspect look like?
the sound a shadow makes breathing tallow & spume back
into its heaving barnacled body, deranged gospel of milk-teeth,
a votive candle extinguished in a flat glass of cola.
what was the suspect’s gender?
something like a brick buried in the walls of a library.
or maybe just the word – brick – buried in books: demolished
tower scattered amidst babel, a building hidden in a building.
what was the suspect’s race?
a beam of light
throws up its hands
& is skinned alive.
did the suspect have a weapon?
thank god we no longer carve the shape of our dead
general’s faces into mountains. thank god we’ve bred
wolves into dogs into dolls
thank god we’ve deformed wheat germ & corn
into new edible organism. don’t forget all the good
that can be done with a scythe.
what was the suspect wearing?
cotton, trapped in a bottle of rubbing alcohol, or caught on a length of chain fence,
or woven into the fabric of a bulk-pack of white t’s from the grocery. gets dirty
easy but for that one night, you’ve never seen anything cleaner in your life
what did the suspect say?
if you look at any animate object
under a microscope, you’ll see
it’s made of smaller screaming parts.
if you smash the microscope, take the blood
it makes of your hands & bathe your eyes. tell me
what you see, how simple & red the light.

Fields of junked cars. Fields of horses. Fields
of semi-trucks hollowed by time. It looks like
the reason you sailed beyond us, Nik. Riding
whatever was left in your veins. A ripple of heat
running out of the coals in the same way, spilling
the same dank spells on the air. The way smoke
finds your face when there’s no wind to blow it
away. The way bodies find other bodies impossible
not to touch. The way everything gets old, tired
of being what it is. And memory finds us constantly
changing the reasons—light pouring in through
the windows of death’s dark cathedral—infinity,
heroin, driftwood, ash. However you want to
explain it. The night I went back to the ballfields
in Dundas, standing alone in the emptiness there
(the marked yards, vacated bleachers) and took off
my shoes on the roof of your grave, as the flood-
lights went brighter, making that giant design more
complete, more lost in the purpose of duty. And
the reason these lyrics still stand in my mind, however
distorted by grief and time, by not understanding
the words. And the reason I’m wasting this weekend
without you, walking around on these backcountry
roads, going nowhere, watching the corn fires fade
to a heatwave, burn to a black carpet, to shriveled
hairs crushed to a fine nothing, a powdered ash,
a peeling of smoke rising up from my bootsoles.
Doing a little dance, stabbing a stick in the ground.

I’m a person who knows
what’s going on. See. I’ve already had
to drink everything in the house.
Vodka. Listerine. Lysol
as if it would scrub me out.
Nothing worked. The blender,
the bender, the box knife pressed
against my inner thigh, high on
the artery and I unterrified
flicked it. Let me back up.
I told you I am a man
who knows that a church
hunches in these woods. And I know
how to take my rifle up
and clench its haunch until
it’s mine. Then, children,
you clawed up, femoral, feral,
out of my muscle. Perhaps you know how
difficult it is to sever bone
without the right instrument.
At the meeting I sat in the back.
I chewed my teeth to pills.
And late, when everyone was gone,
I pried the floorboards up. I wanted
to show you what a man looks like inside.
I left pieces of myself under the pews.
First fingernails, then hair.
Then finger joints clipped off
with shears. Kidney spooned
soft into a jar. Black lobe
of lung tucked like a root
into the ground. I left myself
a constellation to be traced.
I wanted to keep myself
safe in this house. To show you
how one time in school
I laid myself down
on a piece of cardboard
for another child to outline me
with steady hands in marker,
and then carefully I stood up
and with my box knife
cut my body out.

What you read, read quietly.
If it rains, brother, it rains. If losing your place
when called to look up, notice what is also
there for us—hard buds at the glass
where the branches are hurled—
things that ask to flower again.
Should their calling awaken me or you.
Should we sleep right through
the middle of it. If woods are where
their calling is.
Should a deer stand also in a field
subject to frost and time and distance.
Should grace stand there also
with nothing to do.
How much we are told without understanding.
How loyal and lost the senses are.
For me there is you
in the way in the slipping dark. Brother
and ever more startling brother,
in every thought
before the words come back.

I have saved my pantomime of the sky for you. Let me lie with my head in your lap. I will sing the song of the trees in the cold wind, the way they rush up like flames, their leaves rippling. I want to show you everything you might have missed. With my fingers I will emulate moonlight resting on a field of violets. I am about as convincing as the child playing the sun in the school recital. But I have rain in my hair. This much is true. Let me bring it to you.

When the Cowboys cheerleader cheers
for a body it is her own in blue and silver
like a dove thrown into the sky fleeing gunshot
successfully, arcing her torso into a holy spirit.
Her athleticism is nearly unimportant.
She is the reason they make lipstick
into the shape of a bullet.

This should make me more worried than it does—you undressing
soft as a horse’s cheek, steaming like a stomach
filled with hot coals. When I move, I move penitent
as a viper, unbeholden to the laws of tact. I’m not sure
whose bottom lip is more pitiful—mine chewed nearly through
or yours quivering like a wasp. You’ve stepped
into speechlessness, though for so many years you carefully
collected languages. The word for fear in lapsed-Catholic:
Christ-haunted. The word for god in newly-in-love: yes.
How far can a mind wander before it’s simply gone? There’s rain
enough outside to soothe our lizard brains, which know
there are few predators in a storm. Impatience helps itself
to our rage. On the bed we cling to anger like sinking balloons trying
desperately to hold in air. I sigh. You wince. Despite our best efforts, mortality
marches us toward a cease-fire (at any moment, we could end up
crushed by a comet or poisoned alone in a castle). Dutifully
we move through the stations of contrition—your hand my belly,
my nose your scalp—until finally apologies spill
sticky out our mouths. We were both at fault. Our wounds
were superficial. We will work harder. Leaning over, you kiss my ear
and turn off the lamp on the nightstand, not noticing the big vase
where earlier, distracted, I’d dropped in a fistful of poppies petals-first.

The wolf in the trailer,
tired of drinking every meal, licked the last bowl
’til it was dry and fled into the darkened woods
because she couldn’t stand it here
(lamplight like snakes biting her eyes)
but soon returned because forest at daybreak fills
itself with such undimmability.
Panting with the kind of pain that makes
people forget which lie they told themselves,
she moves from chair to chair as if a ray
were chasing her (her feet crack scattered dishes like
they’re chipmunk bones). The paramedics, when
they force the door, will find her curled as if
in sideways prayer, head resting in a spot
of dawn so clear that they’ll mistake her fur
for hair. One man will crouch and touch two fingertips
below her ear to prove no sun beats there.

All night the wind’s been fiddling for the coup de grâce,
working out our best broad-head nails,
wending loop-de-loops through a million nils
on the chicken-coop’s gray face, piping La-Di-Da
through the gutters’ gluttonous mouths. Like sills
and spouts give a damn about granddad’s saw,
shovel, and shears, or that shit grandma went paw
over paw for, at the fifty yard-sales 
she measured her life with. This storm is hell
bent on de-roofing us yet—the high pressure front
swelling sashes, knelling the glass’s double-pane
with forking tongues of rain. There is no bell
like thunder’s ionic gnash. No refrain
but this one to answer the ubi sunt.

Twice they opened me
and twice, after sewing me shut,
they said the thread would dissolve,
they said my body would dissolve
the thread. But see how frugal
I’ve become, saving every stitch
for future alterations and repairs. 
Any woman with my blood
saves—is a saver. When given one
sheet of paper, my daughter
cuts out the heart she wants
and keeps the scraps for stars,
snowflakes, flowers. Twice
they cut babies from my body,
but the body remains. 
See how nothing is wasted.
The more they cut, the more I have.

The day after Christmas,
a late morning walk.
Otherworldly mist
over the foothills.
A family of geese, startlingly
beautiful when quiet.
Damp earth—when it’s damp
it feels like earth, not ground.
Black feathers,
black ruffled edges
of some kind of tarp
under the landscaping.
Most fossil fuel
does not come from dinosaurs
but sea plankton.
All of these “facts,” garbled
the first time by Jack
and now half-remembered,
surfacing at random.
(True randomness
is rare, though.)
Like pockets of air.

My son,
A man you knew twenty years ago
has died. His wife has cancer
and cannot travel home
for the funeral. You may remember
he took you camping once, water-skiing
on the Pearl River, far enough
from home to drink beer,
far enough to think I didn’t know.
This is the third time I’ve forwarded
an email like this to you
and I know each time you see
the subject line, you think
“Oh God” (the only time you still pray)
“it’s Dad or Grandma.” I know this.
I do it anyway.
Not out of meanness.
What would I change it to? All the news
I get of people you knew when you
were one of us is of their deaths,
or that they’ve left the church,
lost faith after so many years.
Like you. Like the grandson
of the man in this email
who sinned at an inconvenient time,
and will watch this funeral alone
amid the congregation.
Like you will, when you come home.

Shattered by heroin, Mal Waldron
listens to his own records
so he can remember his style.
The horns are lucid, Coltrane
in the bitterness of Don’t Explain,
Idries Suleiman noodling in dorian.
But the piano: who can understand it:
as if there were a template
it almost fits. He teaches
his elegant right hand to stumble.
He’ll play another forty years
to the same crowd of champagne flutes
and sardonic plainclothes, applause
will deafen him at the end,
the keys will grow old,
the idea will state itself,
the eviscerating joy will never return.

My son’s the baddest lad in Sunnyside, Queens.
My son roughed up not only honors kids but also
the honors teacher. My son still pulled an A.
My son hopped the turnstile to surf on the E-
train to Rego Park to Kew Gardens to Jamaica +
back. My son does not spit sunflower seeds.
My son spits sunflowers. My son spits suns.
My son has a firm secret handshake
named EARTHQUAKE that takes Flushing Creek
waves down the Atlantic to Neptune,
New Jersey. Turning spumes on fumes, my son
hawks fake gold spoons from womb to tomb
then schools his foes on who vs. whom.
At the spelling bee, his adversary Jimmy Roe
(all pomp) nailed psoriasis + sarcophagus
but fumbled a gimme: “sacrilege.” My son
stepped to the mic + spelled vivisepulture.
Vivisepulture (n.): the act of burying alive.
My son put Jimmy Roe in a viselike headlock,
then mock-vivisepulture position before releasing
the runner-up from his clutches. My son won
the spelling bee; he won bullying; he won empathy.
My son can spell awry, rhythm, + ukulele, + —
oh, most definitely — he can spell trouble.

the exit’s not marked    Post-
partum  Seasonal  Psychotic  or the often

merrier  Manic    not half the frolic     
of a holiday party   whole nights

drowning in punch lines   strong 
orchestra of laughter     to keep us from

crying 	    over the on-ramp’s
stubborn curl	   ribbon a red loop 

nuisance to tug     un-loose back 
at home  with the heat left on   

and your scarf like a noose   no one
diagnoses          generic danger

strangling us     on a normal
basis       unwrapping a new numb

not so formal    it won’t         come 
buckle 	     the small       of your back

a caress     snuck up and     un-
seat belting   out a welcome so     

concrete who      would not soften 
who could not	    	resist

First he was, then he wasn’t, now he is. Always
and forever. None of this Get back up and dust
those wings off, not like in The Godfather
when he’s told, “Can’t do it, Sally,” only to
show up a year later in The Don is Dead
and The Devil’s Daughter. Isn’t this just the way?
Everyone thinks we died when we’ve only
been languishing in a string of forgettable movies.
Tessio’s death was memorable for happening
quietly, off-screen. The horror of it
was the inevitability of it: the pageantry
of the six men surrounding him, pallbearers
shouldering him away in their solemn brown suits.
And isn’t that just the way? The worst
is not what comes, but what we can see coming,
the unfolding of the moment, whole lives
unspooled and slopped in a celluloid pool at our feet.
What kills us is Sal’s stoic desperation, the naked
dignity of his calm plea. We forget
his lack of faith, his weakness and betrayal.
We gaze into his sad Italian eyes, upon his long
Modigliani face, and we pity him the way
we pity Judas, the way we pity our own small
selfish selves, dying a little with each violence
we’ve committed until someone more ruthless
brings our suffering to an end.

I welcomed the woman.
I put a towel on my bed
and lay down. I told her
my burns were tender,
but what I meant was
I still haven’t decided
what my definition
of privacy is. I told her
I want to know more
about my legs,
but I meant to say
release them.
Please release them.
She held my kneecap
like a baby’s cheek.
She touched her cheek to mine,
the soft grind of skin,
as when I once rubbed
two light bulbs together.
She pressed me hard
into the mattress
until I slipped inside,
both above and beneath
a sheet of ice.
When she asked me how I liked it
I said I’m tired of feeling
punished. When she asked me
what I wanted, she answered
my silence with silence.

The first time I ever watched something die, its eyes
opened at the last lived moment, death’s first. A razor
between the two. The fledgling hawk’s pupil turned so black
I felt as though I had been blindfolded and led high up
a cliff, then pushed. I didn’t know dead eyes darken
or that watching them darken meant for the rest of my life
knowledge would carry with it a bottle of ink. Recently, everything
has been stained: stuffed toy bears, my daughter’s fresh hair,
the dream in which I wear long white gloves I cannot remove,
and a dreamed, wild pig playing as a dog might with my children.
They are chasing each other, laughing. This pig
I’m about to skin grunts, the children grunt too. Strange voices
of the unconscious. But my gloves are too tight, and I wake
before killing. The lives and deaths of others are everywhere.
I once wrote a confession down but erased it. I once wore
a paper crown that caught fire, and when the burning
scent of hair filled the room, memory’s open fume
evacuated my head to hover between mind and automation.
Afterwards, hair shorter, my mother putting away leftover
birthday cake, I wrote down a first truth, I caught fire the day
I turned twelve. My mother’s arms and a blanket saved me.
Under them, blindness and weight. When ash hits water it floats
for a long time before becoming the whale’s passenger,
and the whale before she swallows the ash is different
after she does. I wrote this today, our baby would have been
born soon. His eyes would have been blue. To know this. It changes nothing.

Oblivion is liberating.
Our names pissed into piles of coal ash.
The curtains move but there is nothing to move them.
You are gone. I am sure.
On time a train wails toward Pittsburgh, except you do not hear it. Never will again.
There will be no procession. No Adventists on their steps, shaking their heads
in compassion and disdain, no flower wreaths to wrap a room in a perfumed lie.
Our years chew a black tunnel through the mountain.
In this moment of finding you, I do not miss you, which is why I remain
in the absence spun by your denouement.
Curled like a toppled gargoyle.
I wish I could settle on which tense you belong to.
As if it would settle things, cover them like a shroud.
Once as boys we found a snakeskin hanging in the barn rafters and wondered.
Tell me, do pieces of us also get caught on our way to heaven.
A torn t-shirt dangling from your ceiling fan like a cuticle.
No neighbors have risen to their labor yet. Are still citizens of the warm sleep.
Go. Trespass again.
We between the tree line and the valley and the distant smokestack’s aircraft warning beacon beaming red like a check engine light against the dashboard of stars.
You are still here. Each second of late-winter dark is a feather stitching the wings of your ghost.
The coal is almost gone, and soon the mountain tops, and fresh water, after which
this will be the cellar of how many centuries, locked away?
Snow wrapping the hills like caul fat.
Cattle on the hills, drops of soot.
The sky is blind and open for the snow.
In the doorframe of your gray, suffocated lips, I place one final cigarette, ember like a diode on an unset clock, bright in timeless dark.
A paralyzed firefly, a faulty flare.
An offering for the world that promises to take you. It must.
Or else this is not a world.

John Henry is every black man. John Henry is every black man trying to breathe. John Henry is every black man willing to jump in front of a train to keep his job. John Henry is every black man who spent his life on the lookout for the man when he should have been on the lookout for the machine. John Henry is every black man with bleeding hands. John Henry is every black man who made white folks sing sad songs about how hard it is to be white and watch black folks die. John Henry is every black man with a wife in three states. John Henry is every black man who knows “retirement” is just another name for death in his neighborhood. John Henry is every black man dying to leave something more than a scar on the earth. John Henry is every black man flexing in the mirror and not knowing if he should be proud or terrified.

Drunk and faltering
in my midnight chair,
someone gripped me
by the hair and raised my head.
I saw St. Theresa of Avila,
with St. John of the Cross and Rumi
by her side, arm in arm.
And then through the door behind them
came Rabia Al-Basri and Bashõ,
all with garish, wine-drenched smiles,
blood-purple lips.
They asked me, “What are you doing?”
and I said “No, what are you doing?”
They said, “We are drunk on the wine of the beloved.”
I said, “I am drunk but have no beloved.”
St. Theresa pulled my hair harder
and said, “Oh, yes you do!”–
and smothered me
with her wine-soured mouth.