Theirs is the clamor
of the anti-party: gathering

the empties with prices
on their heads, piling them

into rickshaws and shopping carts,
the hollow clanging of aluminum,

eggshell-thin, and bottles drained
of gin and burgundy a dull echo  

of late soirées, a summons 
to a void, and us 

rustling, heavy-headed from sleep,
as if the uproar of hunters

sifting through the plastic bins
might trigger a trip wire

laid out for intruders.
At what instant does the vessel

poured out in somber or in giddy 
glasses lose itself in the public domain?

At which juncture will gloved hands rummage 
through us, plundering, assessing, hauling off?

Lady, I can give you the price
of the latticework, of my labor.

I can recommend wrought iron,
show you where I’ll drill

into the brick, paint you a picture
of how the shadows fall

through fretwork and guarantee
that no other part of a man

gets through my handiwork.
But I can’t tell you which is better—

being safe from intruders or being
unable to flee from interiors.

This is a question of statistics, 
figuring the odds of break-ins and of blazes,

assigning levels of risk to individual
fears, deciding which torments you more.

Lady, I say, since we just met,
I can’t say if no or yes is right for you,

only that I’ve had many satisfied customers
from whom I’ve never heard again.

And then she presses herself,
or doesn’t, against me, like 

a creature backed into a corner venturing
escape through the hard angle

of walls colliding, and she chooses
whether by ice, whether by fire.

The sun hauled its cart across the sky—
not a god, a god’s weary ox. Summer 
had begun to hurt, and the forbidden river 
was too much for us, so we went to it.
The great stone stairway seemed to call 
with its lost grandeur for our hands and feet,
echo of the commerce it sustained when it
sustained the place. We had no history for it—
the stones each three feet deep and six 
feet wide, each perhaps a ton and like a tomb.
We started down them—scrambling with our hands, 
sitting to jump where one had crumbled clean 
away, our palms and bottoms chalk-white when 
three-hundred slabs later we reached the slow water. 
Our faces glistened like coins. A man approached 
in a wooden boat, as if he had expected us;
a small man, with a face like dried fruit. 
He offered us a ride. At the prow, 
a basket of slim silver fish, still breathing; 
a sac of mangoes hard as yellow stones.
The man pulled the boat, low with our 
weight, downriver with one warped oar. 
One of us laughed at the wretched cows
that called and grazed on the far, flat bank,
their hides hanging from their spines like rags.
A boy, the cowherd, slept against a tree.
Then we were quiet. Green became green. 
Nothing flickered. The light found all things
equally until we slowed under a grotto of leaves.
Home was legend then. We were this man’s 
children, almost grown, fanning flies off 
the day’s business, hungry for tostones, 
for slow-cooked frijoles, dreaming of—
A bright green and turquoise bird cried 
across the water, blurring its wings. 
As if it were a sign, the old man stirred 
the boat around, and then he sang. 
The voice stirred like the wings of birds, 
flocked with startling color from his throat—
it rose and deepened, now high, now clear, 
a woman’s voice, a boy’s. I couldn’t 
get all the words: arboles...ojos...
corazón...lejos.  He closed his eyes.
He sang into the sun. The music scaled 
the cliff, then fell again like leaves 
onto the water, or like tears. He held 
a cooling final note, then stopped
and dropped us at the riverbank. We paid 
him for a photo, slung our arms around 
his shoulders. We paid him for the ride. 
He thanked us, nodding, drew away 
toward home, his pockets full of coins. 
There were the stairs in front of us, like years.

Once my sister told me that from her summit at the city 
pool she could see the yellow billows spread like gas 
or dreams between kids’ legs. In something the size of the sea, 
you can’t be sure who’s watching from above. Let’s say 
it’s the Almighty, twirling His whistle, ready to blow it 
at any moment and let loose the bottomless Apocalypse?
The ocean would make bone of a body, coral of bone. 
Piss, and a tiger-fish darts through a skull-hole, a weed
weaves itself through ribs. You, too, have seen 
the bulbs flash from the sea. You, too, have felt 
it breathing down your neck. You eat fish. You’ve heard 
that mermaids sing. My dreams are as beleaguered as the next 
Joe’s, my happiness as absurd, but I’m not going to go 
piss in the ocean about it. No, not in the ocean.

Yesterday, Sunday, we got
the Times, read about the increase in
suicides in rural China.  Drinking
organophosphate pesticides, mostly.  In Lutou, a twenty-five
year old nurse couldn’t bring one of them back:
		I kept working on her, since
		I wished she could chat with me
		again while she pulled up weeds.
This was over
brunch on 2nd Ave. at 3 pm.
I’d already decided I’d
be taking Amtrak back within
the hour.  Walking back to 209 E. 10th

we saw an ambulance,  
doors open but no lights
on, no sirens.  The firemen who worked it
loading up somebody strapped down
to a stretcher.  Chicago Bulls  
jacket.  Blue jeans, black tongue  
sneakers still straightlaced, untroubled
by whatever must’ve happened.  The firemen
were calm, weren’t rushing.

Next block, a corpse being
wheeled into a funeral home.  Two blocks, two bodies—
What is going on?  What’s going on today?
—this one shrouded in grey rain tarp, tucked under the dead
weight of his limbs.  Tucked under its
limbs, a little, a detail that touched me, a little.  Corpse
accompanied by a man in black trenchcoat, wearing a Homburg hat.

I know.  But I’m not making this up:
What is going on?  What’s going on today?

At this point in the afternoon I’d
already decided I’d be taking Amtrak back within
the hour.  But their bodies, present, wheeled, had
something to do with how
the goodbye-kiss, eyes
open, stretched
over.  Didn’t end.  So that I missed
even the last train home.

Downtown Crossing in March: roses, tulips,
daffodils in five gallon buckets, nestled
in snow.  The blonde selling them wears red gloves.

Daffodils: two dollars for ten stems.  Their slender  
heads closed as garter snakes, sable brushes.  A girl—
sixteen, Asian, confused—asks in slow, determined  

English about the daffodils.  Who can blame her?  
Who would pay two dollars for fat grass gone tan  
and crisp at the tips?  The blonde gathers red fingers

—a shadow duck, a French chef’s gesture—to illustrate  
blossom, bloom.  I help, buy daffodils, wonder
if the girl is Japanese.  I speak some Japanese, and I could say

Sono hana ga. . . that flower. . . have I ever learned bloom?   
That flower: Tokyo’s cherry blossoms, March.  That flower  
now a baby, soon a woman.  Now there are three women  

buying daffodils—did our florist plant this girl?—all of us  
gathered, daffodils in one hand, the other pantomiming bloom.  
The girl looks from the buckets to our faces, hands: daffodil,

flower of madness, flower of mute enthusiasm. On the orange line,  
ten daffodils wrapped in my lap, the unerring Japanese  
in my head says Tomorrow, that flower will call out good morning.

When it was whole it was half.
It would never be more than
that: hemisphere with blue
stripes below the rim.
Its use was to hold, a place
to mix, soft scrape of spatula
against flour, milk. Squashed
to a breast, a crook of arm,
full against belly or gripped
by a hand, it gave birth to cake
or bread or soup, unable to define
their shape, never imparting
a spice. Cleaned up, it sat
on a shelf, ready for use.
In breaking it gains fifteen
new selves, every shard
with an edge. Quick
into the trash before it can cut,
where it can sleep its last sleep
among the food it once held.

Here is our circle. Dare not break
this cloister of our own making,
paper tent where no skins touch
in the white darkness.

Even now it lets me think
that nothing
has to end
just yet.

The slippers, curiosity and desire,
buff the polish of exurban floors
for the ancient arrogance of newspapers
stinking of violence and retaliation.

The dog, kicked from the yard
to the lots of a city’s shelter,
foraged beaches with friends and fauna
before the perverted questioner.

The pipe, for example, the loot of this victor,
carries the peace of one relieved
and content to impress accidental facts
with the color and volume of Sunday comic strips

for the memory of other gullible travelers
who grow miles into their contempt for nature.

We carry our suitcases on our shoulders
while espousing philosophies
on pennant stickers, as though
we each had one that wasn’t a corkscrew
for the wine of our urges.

The old communist drank vodka
and though he wished to travel the world,
was a suspicious dirt farmer
who didn’t even talk to himself;
he kept his will buried in a box.

The water sipping democrat
infests the hotels of cities everywhere
with laundered cash, an ego
the prize of Texas, and a heart that rustles
sour cream containers in restaurant alleyways.

I see you through the collar of light
where the lid fits the body of the valise.
With gush and flush we mock 
when we meet, our Socratic monologues, 
the tabula rasas on which we pretend to stand.

Yoghurt on your chin:
the straggles of August snow
cross corn-stubbled fields.

History of sunburn
told on tracts of rusky skin.
Armadilloed boy.

Wonder can you swing
fruit-bat-like from the lintel,
toes the length of thumbs?

Bedruggled by sleep,
white lilac eyelids pulsing:
fontanelles of twins.

Their sound is metallic,
as you say: a hum
nearly industrial, 
since every noise in nature
is also necessarily
historical;

and here in Illinois,
where they sing or solder
all the August day,
their notes mark time
in quick or labored
crescendos. 

Alone on the prairie, 
I’m depending 
on the telephone
for words.  
And when you laugh
and describe

cicadas you heard   
thirty years ago 
by the bay, 
I hear them better
than the sound 
that now 

lines my living room
like silver, 
like steel: 
listen.  What else 
do you remember
so sharply?   

And if that caliber
of memory 
is in you, what else
can we ever 
mean by secrets
when we listen

to each other
like girls, for hours?
I want to restore
the particles
that formed us 
before we met:  

sand dune striations, 
or the toll
of grace notes
in church songs—all
the stucco
and the gold.

I know that in the last days,
all I’ll have is memory:
so, yes, I’ll need 
the milkweed, 
the hairstyle, all the wet
eidetic leaves—

to take with me
when I wade 
without you
through summer grass
grown taller
than my sight.  

And then your own page,
loaned in prefatory light: 
the print dissolves 
into corners, letters 
loosened at the borders—

and you read as the aviator 
reads, tracing the sleeve 
of the Chesapeake, 
wandering a blaze
over Broadway at night:  

you the prime mover, 
who’d dipped in the foam 
circling your ankles
and washed, and wrote 
it all as if on water: 

miles above a dust basin
deep in the continent’s
plexus, you felt     
a bitter stream scar,
trickle on the land. 

What you read was not true:
I did not approach her.
I hid. I crouched behind bushes
And watched her pray. I understood
Little. Her words were like sand.
I wanted to learn speech.
I wanted a name for touch.
She placed her hands in the sea,
Let the water slip through her fingers.
I had only this strange reflection.

The day she approached me from behind,
I turned and nearly groaned.
She asked me if I could speak. She closed
Her eyes and waved a hand in front 
Of my face, odd benediction,
Pity soft on her lips.

Each morning she taught me new words.
I learned the island and its senses.
The wind seemed to caress, not burn.
I named my heart.
The world seemed sweet
Now that birds had names
And flight seemed possible.

But then he came, rising over the sand mounds
And suddenly my body
Not my body.

I learned to name darkness.
Its permanent seed.

On our recent tour sponsored by the Romantics
the Swiss mountains snubbed us, withheld 
their resplendence in mist. The locals cursed 
us in one language, invited us into their novelty 
shops in another. Cabinet maker, knife 
sharpener. Byron’s name in the fourth

pillar of Chateau de Chillion or some wise-guy’s
joke. Klaus’ house was four-hundred years, bubbled 
plaster and frigid. Lumpy bed, jars of marmalade 
on the staircase, and her Germanized English. Such 
bored politeness, standing in wet bath towels listening 

to her test the vowels. We didn’t stay long, skirted 
the Swiss Riviera, the casino, and central 
statue of Frank Zappa. Smoke on 
the water. We were so dramatic then, 
dashing from village to village along 

the jeweled lake. The panoramic train 
chugged through landscapes fit for hot chocolate
commercials. Cows among gold and lavender-
dabbled slopes, wooden A-frames. Middle-aged 
couples in sneakers, with camcorders, and gushing on 

cue, and us making out in first class. We mounted
the stairs to the Madonna del Sasso grotto in
Locarno. Bone coolness of the sanctuary, a nun
reciting Hail Mary’s in Italian. Life-sized
wood stations of the cross—Jesus

behind bars, his watchful face. The cabbie hat 
you lifted from a bench, and later lost. His sorrow-
sunken face. How the sin of the moment
has become remote, embarrassing, nothing but dwarfed 
pretenses. How we loved ourselves for no reason then.

Some fields have been stripped.
Others are waiting. Brown paper

stalks, a plastic bag tangled 
in the wire fence. Leaves

rise in eddies—creatures 
dragging across the

road. A fire sparking 
near the trees. No one 

tending it, gray smoke 
ballooning. Over my head 

black birds cross, double- 
cross the sky. A porch swing 

hanging with one chain. The mums
are freezing, the tomatoes

underripe, cut short. Wasps groggy
from declining sun. In the distance, 

Dutch barns painted with hex 
signs—rosettes, wheels. My sister 

in a wedding dress—her bare 
shoulders. Her image multiplied

in three mirrors, each time
looking younger—a girl 

with braids cushioned between 
white sheets smiling, waiting

for me, as I’d tiptoe in early 
each morning to wake her.

1:  A New Development 

If anything, the afternoon is slanted.
The tree-work filtering ultraviolet rays ambers 
the houses. Ivy along the base, rustling skirts,
pantyhose. Groundcover. Don’t uncover

yourself one stitch. Girls barefoot in
black leotards, their bodies plastic,
bendable as they perform in the yard. Stutter 
of a lawnmower kicking up sticks.

Snapdragons with their cheeks
caved in. If anything is shrieking, it’s 
the blue-jays. Blood-copper ripeness
of overturned dirt. The back door is open—

2:  Anatomy of a House

Insulation is the fat, 
which is why the system 
retains its heat and

stabilizes. The floor wooden and 
even, the skin the wallpaper,
the applied layers of neutral

paint. Cellular structure,
layout, the bedroom
brainpan. Compartments for all 

the fragile objects. The heart 
the kitchen—polished 
granite counters, stainless 

steel fixtures. Two-by-fours
for support. Inner guts: copper 
wires, fuses, flushable 

pipes. The furnace’s belly
rumbles. A house exhales
its own indoor weather, 

circulation, the flow of 
dependent organisms. Room 
to grow, room for living. 

3:  The Setup

English Tudor was the style, Colonial
the preferred one. Victorian the one to
envy, the staircase spilling into a grand

foyer entrance. On streets named with 
bias—Ottekee, Edinburgh, Oxford, Forest 
View.  A house is as good as the woman 

who keeps it. Market value, neighborhood 
watch. Think prepackaged, some
assembly required. As in the cosmetics

of it—curb appeal. Shaker shingles, brass
knocker, decorative seasonal flags. Wealth 
by number of garage doors, by number of kids

you can accommodate. Spacious vanity. 
Six-paneled doors for privacy, double-paned
windows for a view—selective, staying.

4:  Pre-Spring in the Affluent Neighborhood

The sun shines down equally on the houses, 
shadows fastened to tree-limbs. The streets 
are quiet, almost vacant. A father yawns as he 
pushes his daughter along on a bike, pink and 

purple streamers, the little hearts patched on her 
knees go up and down with such concentration. 
She seems to be the only thing that moves. Shades 
are drawn. It is winter still, everything is closed

up, the opening comes on so slowly.
Even the earth movers have stopped digging
out another foundation. The hole is nothing 
like a deep grave, instead it will be filled 

with concrete, boards, and bricks to house
some other family and their truckload of things.
Child, don’t stop now, keep pedaling. There is
so much, and if you turn your head, there is much more.

   I.

Boll weevil in the cotton
Worm in the corn
Devil in the white man
War going on

Dusk
light tucked in
(Chatty flies touching down, ringing sting)
At approaching knife earth
scurries away

Hellhounds howl
mouth open to all
      the civil distance  
              between tongue and fang

Twin rails frail black blood
from a black tree
Pack up your besotted trunk
Pilot,
oh don’t you pilot me



       II.

Memory in
side the humming shell

Threat rising
from the white gourd of a
bullet-riddled skull

Keep a wary eye out
Only got enough of the story to
line me a song

Sign your torn name on these
unsettled pages
Nest there:
vulture
phoenix  
witchbird

This is our labor

Lord,
bend us your ear

Feel a sin coming on

A Field for Practical Work

The sky is busy killing
earth with heat
The cooked child leaves
the womb and does not crack

The snake bites with envious sickles  
bleeding when the sun is at its zenith
then disappears into cool log or comfortable ditch

The dog senses venom and sucks it
out

Move ahead
Black Bitch
to the smoking car
withdraw your burning fangs
from my hand  

Black Bitch
tossed from wheezing train like mail sack
ambushed by sun
faints in a crumpling of skirts




The Remedy

Rose quickly (one fans the cadaver in vain) and shook
loose her humble black valise
Wheeling stranger
free hand venturing out to balance her swinging
body  
Kerosene light blinking in the windows
Moon waxing the floor


Finds herself compressed in the bellowed space between coach and diner
canvas walls which pull back like foreskin
(Whose clever fingers holding the crossed sticks?)

Starting out the hatted men worked easily
together
(Sincere thanks)
Bumped from behind with heavy suitcase and stony knee
until platform slides away

Reluctant now to take the final few steps
(What we leave we carry)
Aware of the porter’s sudden surprise
his outrage

Cunt, hitch up your skirt

And handed her an egg




Tabulated Statistics

The star is suspended high in the heavens
The apple is suspended high in the tree
The apple drops away from tree like the rain  
drop

Black Bitch fills her teapot with dew
Black Bitch fills her stomach with apple
Black Bitch cleans her hands in stream and stills the water
Black Bitch boils her victim

They come for you
slow but determined
Helping hands encircling you and tugging you skyward
panoramic perch

You see the future and it will  
be

The river their guide jumped into,
they told me on their return from Peru,
was a chummed raw sienna, not mackerel-blue.
He leaped in and nearly knocked the boat over!

They expected schools of frothing teeth  
to harvest him; but he surfaced, face bright
as an anxious fish hook.   Laughing,
he waggled his fingers, splayed them tight  

round the boat’s side as if it were a stage curtain.
The jungle chattered more than it had for days.
They shed clothes at this solid translation
of aqui es seguro and leapt into the haze.

Tuesday’s heat flash-dried their bodies,
as well as the splashed pants, jungle hats, and a psalter
propped open to air the pages.  Was that a lost
sloth there, gray among viridian, the alter-

ego of the elusive piranha?  They searched the shore
until their narrow boat turned suddenly
dull against the vermilion sun-glare.
They listened to the river’s song of constancy.

If love were of the mind
reason would have killed it.
But love lands like a beetle  

that lays its eggs in skin,
smelts muscle, bores bone.   
Only thing noble in love  

is how it emulates sparrows  
flying off the spine.   
Cupid breathed on me  

and I was liquid glass,  
pulled-blue blown see-through.   
I gave A. everything:  

my golden city woven  
into purple cloaks,  
the chicest hunting parties,  

a tireless ear. But he  
was never taught to live  
on earth, just eat and sleep  

and shit here; never taught  
you can’t just take, take.  
The balls he had to speak  

to me in hell, to ease  
his guilt, ashes clinging  
even to my shadow:

the soot love leaves after  
it enters like air, feels
just like fire, then is.

At night beneath the sheet my scattered legs  
turn into yours. Dream’s a moth with singeing wings.

Hearts are caves that flood. You boil the water  
to nothing, forget the pen in the drawer  

of spoons, nag, Where is time? When does it return?
I’m sick of raking inconsolable beaches.    

I drive; you run the lights, almost killing me.  
Concerts, movies, you have to cry in public  

while I sit damp, red. Or, worse, you wake me:  
Look: the cracks conspiring with the darkness.  

He had to be your father drifting out.  
We’d jump, call him from a dune. Your father  

pretending not to hear. You hoarder of  
lost words, midwife to my empty stares.  Words

are socks on hands. Love’s the cypress that stands
in the swamp, waving gray limb-loads of moss.

No use seeking you. Walking this hall, like a ghost  
you walk some other. I leave you notes crammed  

in the margins and live for the reply  
from your vast, dim, disappearing room somewhere  

near mine: A lovely leaking ceiling is
the most a life can be; soul that shanty

on the sand where the Gulf sometimes comes up
to spit and chew
             room I’ve glimpsed in dreams.

The shearwater’s moan doesn’t break
against burrows  
now, but reaches the quick
blood of a wingless rail.
To walk as if sewn to yourself.
Brought home, six rails lifted  
through the rough angled
lid of their crate.
To duck under green  
against what might cast
darkness over its own.
All shelter eaten, they skulk
in their furious smoke.
Frigatebirds, forked shadows, flank
seven blots on a brown
horizon: six scattered shapes and a crate.
A moment’s contentment,  
a swallow, a sigh:
The frigatebird draws its span  
to its eyes,
eating an island down.

From the bottom
of the catwalk
to the top
of a freight
isn’t a great
distance. A camera
will be there
keeping you safe.
We will talk
until the moment
comes for me
to leave you
alone in front
of the lens.
I will wait
outside the frame.
We can show
the great grace,
the calm air
emanating from you
even as you
arc and blur.
We can show
what you’ve learned
from watching our
young, the bounce
of their limbs
and wet, assessing
eyes. Their sharp
periphery, the unformed
flicker that crosses
their brow before
they fall asleep,
pupils open still
behind the lid.

The Nude, a young actress of twenty-six, lies in an artist’s Boston studio. Around her, the typical trappings: pillows, scarlet fabric, more swatches piled off to the side. She sips red wine from a glass—slowly, in choreographed fashion—perfunctorily refilled as she gets low. Beside her, on a table, a bowl of pomegranates and a pack of cigarettes. Two large Styrofoam Greek columns lie over to one side, over which drape her clothes. Clutter of canvasses throughout. Low music—jazz—floats from the stereo, forming a backdrop for her words which, nonetheless, the artist never hears. She has been told, “Lie still. Don’t talk.” Her reverie is inner monologue.
Time: Night. The present. She thinks:
*

The train in the subway was a kind of birth.
Or death.  A canal at any rate,
far down at the black end a shade of light.

I stood up by the driver, the car was quiet,
bags at my side, staring through the dark
blinking into stations as we passed.

I thought of worms, moles, groundhogs, ants
grazing around us in the burrowed rock,
and once my stop came to a still I stepped

down to the platform and I saw a rat—
a huge black rat with tiny human hands,
pink, its wet fur slimed and spiked

with sewage maybe, sitting on a bench
as if it waited for me.
The terminal was empty.  One green light

sputtered as the train wheels groaned and went.
I dropped my bags and, turning to the bench,
the rat was gone, but in its place (and I

never will forget the mark this made),
a girl sat, something smoldering on her lap,
and when she looked at me, her face was mine.


That was, for me, the beginning of the end.
Not that I’d not had visions.  Long before
voices in the elm where no birds were,
cornflower angels in a fume of sun,
across the lawn the ghost of gasoline  
where white sheets tucked and bellied on the line,
I saw the spider dancing on the wire
that separated bliss from bliss.
But that was Kansas.  You expect that in a place
the tornadoes whip up so fast, so fast
one minute you’re just sitting on the yard,
familiar patch of grass and tall sweet tea,
the next you’re in a ditch ten miles away.
This was different.  For one thing, it was two
thousand miles, in a city where I knew
no one.  And I was standing underground
and looking at a girl who has my face?

I’m not saying it’s the strangest thing.
I’m not saying stranger things can’t hap—
In fact I saw it as a fitting in,
a kind of consummation, in the dark.
Two halves, a little interval between
(or big:  two thousand miles and twenty years)
before the houselights flicker and the draw
reconvenes,  
thick in its drowse of wine and nicotine,
the veins surged up with coffee, and the thrust
proceeds:  sub specie aeternitatis,
Act Two:  The Meaning of It All.  (Act One:   
Preliminaries, setting up of action,  
determined quirks of character and place,
time to praise what tragi-comic flaws  
there be—all set?  the circus wired to blow,
the cannon propped, leveled at the stars,
the nerves erect, straddling the ball’s
homage to the guts’ evacuation—
purge!—
where as yet the brooch just glitters in the eyes,
the revenger’s cheeks are ruddy, but with rouge,
and Ophelia in a florist nine-to-five
happily arranges poesies.)  So la mi.
Prepare the beheadings!  
  Lop.  This wine.   
It gets me.  Makes me want to dance.
(O surely some evil will befall someone!)
Would you like that, darling?  Tell me.  Shall I dance?
Or, no, might Madame’s movement interrupt
the Maestro’s progress?  Or is it regress?  these
exquisite pains with which you undertake
to get the both of us:  vis-à-vis
the image of me bedded in your head
warring with the one beneath your brush.
I can be still.  (“Lie still,” he said.  “Don’t talk.”)
I can lie still and quiet as a moth.
I am not tempted by the claret flame.
Still as a churchmouse.  Docile as a frog
splayed on your dissection board, its veins
impassioned with the artificial dye,
pinned, a Prince of Pieces, crucified,
in dread anticipation of your kiss.  
I can be that.  Quieter than a fish
at the bottom of the moonless pond you cast in.
Still as the frost that claws the windowpane.
As . . .

Sometimes when I’m on the stage I think
the audience exists for me alone.
They give me being, as I give them breadth
of character, a role to fall into.
A part to die for.  Maybe that’s the thing
that keeps them coming back.  They glimpse in me
the manifest illusion or facade
of some divine fecundity of purpose:
that from these clumsy bodies, sacks of curd,
fodder for frauds and psychotherapists,
an impulse might arise, Athena-like,  
step out along the catwalk of a night,
and move among us, speaking in blank verse.

That was a way of saying it.  A bit abstruse.
(Fecundity?  Haven’t heard that one in a while.)
Back to prosaic earth.  Ho hum.  Ho hum.
(Farewell, you spheres! and heaven’s fields, adieu.
Your music cannot cheat so well as it is famed to do.)
Where was I?  On the stage.
Mostly I think of it along the lines  
of sex.  It all comes slobbering back to that,
does it not, my darling? like a beaten dog?
Sex:  the way there’s something going on,
something intimate and highly-strung, yet
solitary, too, terminally at one
with transience.  Not saying it’s not fun,
sublimely fun, metaphysical roulette,
nightly little tryst between the hook
and those cold fishes sweating in the dark,
leering at you, searching out your curves
from every angle.  But you’re in it, too.
You come here every night, do what you do,
the old routine, you take the same way home
regardless of the fact at every turn,
in every alley you can feel their eyes
fixing on you, casting out their nets.
And the weird thing is, you love it.  You’re the fly
that thrives on its ability to rest
still in the cobweb in the corner of the pane,
up to the instant when it feels the line
tighten, just so slightly, and it bursts  
free of the just-forestalled catastrophe,
screwing its head in frenzy on the glass
with a lunatic’s abandon—wa la whee!
Although not every time.  It comes to pass
(Act Two), the prompter drowsing, unaware,
the celestial timekeeps working to a T,
it thinks the web was ruffled by night air
and nestles down into the spider’s care.  

Maybe that’s not the best analogy.
I could do better if I had my head
free of the buzz of this infernal jazz.
God’s balls, my boy, the things that I could tell!
Sprung from the well-head of a pure idea,
nurtured with earth, partaken of the bowels,
a basket braided with the Bible’s belt,  
Moses-Minerva, may I so propine,  
Sir, this sip in honor of your health,
this blood-red seed where swims the sunken host
of Pharaoh’s devils gnashing up my sleeve
(or not), adrift in the throat’s captivity:
the dreggish fumes you take if you take me.

Words, words, words, words.  Ti-tum, ti-tum, ti-tum.
Nonce sense.  To pass the stones of time . . .
Where are you now, da Vinci?  Psst.  Leo.
Be wary as you sail into my smile.
O Christopher Columbus, test your map
against that which you least expect to find:
my nothing-nuggets, patches at the heart,
the morsels on this continental plate
whose very taste would be the chill of you.
The blankness of the canvas bleeding through
may be the closest that you come.  To me,   
immensity requires an open mind.
What think you, Galileo?  What are those spheres
whose music is the opposite of sound?
These frequent vacancies so tightly crammed
inside my skull you’d think I was the crowned
empress of emptiness (as I am).
What think you, Sigmund?  Am I nuts enough to crack?
Or am I (ah, my Guildenstern) your flute?
The open stops, you know, admit the tune
as much as those foreclosed.  What stops in me  
lie bared beneath the taxi of your hand,
unmanned, unsunken, still to overcome;
your camel hair that waves toward this mirage
with ever-pressing thirst to stake its claim;
your palette that would pluck the very heart
out of my mystery?

The mystery was there, and moved among us
in the first place, although we knew it not.
The mystery was staring at my face
that shuddered on itself and disappeared
like a fume of—.  Except that it was dark.
The terminal was empty.  One green light.
And whatever it was was smoldering on her lap—
No.  I knew exactly what that was.
And as she went up in a plume of smoke
made from my mouth before my very eyes,
that bundle went up also, to find its birth
beneath the playbill of a different night,
under the molehill of a different earth,
when winter would with characterless grace
bequeath my just deserts.


My father was an artist.  Sculpted things.
(That’s the idea, a little conversation.)
Maybe you’ve heard of—no, you wouldn’t have.
A boondock primitive, all arts and crafts.
What was it they called him in Time-Life?
The ‘Junkyard God.’  Our ‘Rodin of the Sticks.’
‘Earthshaking—in a mild, midwestern way.’
People used to flock from miles around,
miles off the highway (there used to be a sign),
to stand in our front yard, take photographs.
The Minister of Cultural Affairs
(whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa—
the Min-i-ster of Cul-tur-al Af-fairs . . .  
Holy baloney! a perfect blank verse line!              Bells sound, the lights in the room
I knew she had it in her.  The auld girl.                  flash on and off, a game show . . .
Somebody grab a pencil, write that down!
‘The Minister of Cultural Affairs’—
Sure it’s not immortal but screw that,
maybe I’ll get a grant!)                                         Bells, lights fade.
Where was I?  dum de-dum de-dum . . .  Ah,			
the bigwigs in Topeka making plans
to get him in the capital.  I mean
his masterwork.  The fruit of twenty years.
Twenty years, and close to seven stories tall,
back of the house, sprung against the fields,
Olympic mess of scrap and burnt-out steel,
chicken wire, water heaters, broken down
tractors, bedsprings, gutters, he didn’t care,
engines, axles, radiators, pumps,  
two twisted harrows jutting at the sky
like arthritic hands at prayer, the spike
of a tapping drill to represent
the steeple, four old shot-up sides of steel
pulled from the bus that rusted in a ditch
after the wreck that killed some local kids
not long before, became the folding doors
that opened on the haywire, busted-up,
light-crazed and jumble-tumble maze he called  
Cathedral.   
And people, they would come from miles around
to stand there, in it, ogle at the what-
in-heaven’s-name-don’t-rightly-know-but-Mister,
it’s a marvel.  So it was.  Beautiful.

Fruit of the years before his child was born—
inheritance?  a birthright, can it be?—
and finished it and went up in a fume
out on the highway, underneath the sign,
ten miles to kansas artist!  turn right here!
while white sheets tucked and bellied on the line
sitting in the yard of my six-years’
familiar patch of grass and tall sweet tea
thinking tornado when my mother called . . .
But it’s still there.  And bunched with what remains
of the yard and picket fence and bone-white house
caught in the throat of whatsoever child
that was.   
I can remember how I used to be
infatuated with his hands.
I remember how they smelled, like gasoline,
and they were very large, and thick, and brown,
with pink flecks at the knuckles where he’d knocked
the flesh away.  Oh, they were lovely hands.
All bruised and chipped and knotted with his work.
Hard work.  Not like the dainty stuff you do.
Wrenching, stripping, welding, hammering,
beating the metal to submission like
a god might do with us—
                                          make it obey,
to break and bend us to the beautiful.
I can remember how I used to sit  
on his lap at the table when we used to sing,
and out behind the house I used to hear,
at night, him out there pounding, pounding,
while I watched the spiders dance across the sill
and white heat lightning splashed against the fields
like patches of God’s canvas bleeding through.
‘He’s got the whole world in his hands,
He’s got the whole wide world in his . . .’
But it’s still there.  I’m going back someday.   
I am.  I’m going back, and I can see it,
see myself again inside the maze,
that ruin-haunted, Time-undaunted, crazed
cornfield Cathedral of my dad.  (And oh,
you therapists, if that won’t be sublime
transference, I don’t know what in hell is.)

Where was I?  Boston.  Underground.
Lured by the distant artificial lights.   
The train wheels shuddered once and disappeared,
and there it was.  The writing on the wall:
theatre district.  Scale of what I knew.
I took my bags that night and walked around
the Garden.  The reflecting pool was drained.
Ice in the willows made them lean like grand
dames that cast their pearls to the lights,
and the dark was full of whispers like applause.
But this is exposition.  How express
that feeling, not that I was on the verge,  
but that I’d actually broken through
to the new form, that it had broken through
on me, in me—that I couldn’t be the same;
that all my life had been a preparation,
a close and careful study of a glass
drawn with well water, water I’d divined
and tasted on my tongue the tinge of iron,
the pure and simple clarity of fire
the core distilled—how can I express
that fleck of cold, that filament of fire
caught from the old earth’s veins, a cold
so absolute and clear my throat inflamed,  
flamed in my very being as it swept
over the smothered heart and racing lungs
and washed across my belly where the seeds
lay waiting, hushed, aflame with open lips
like a nest of birds.   
  I remember once
I found a nest of meadow larks.
Far in the fields, tucked among the green
folded ears of corn.  The sun was loitering  
down in the next field by the whitewashed barn.
Seven of them.  Babies.  On the ground beside,
the mutilated body of the mother.
Killed by—by what?—whatever kills, the whim
of some boy’s gun as she came arcing past
homeward, almost home.  It must have been  
a while.  The eyes.  Her body just a sack
of meal the ants grazed in.  And from her young,
as I leaned over, from their mouths arose
so thick a silence it was palpable.
Not even any strength to make a sound,
just splayed there, craning, pure with fear,
their jaws like razors, diamonds of flame
so frail that just to touch would be to quench,
so fierce that to touch would be to burn
the edges of your soul from everything
that kept you safe and separate, at home—
so pure a hunger, and so absolute  
a lack,  
that to lift, to taste, to even tilt that glass
would flush you through at once and make you whole.
And the silence in the fields was so immense
around their open mouths I didn’t hear
my mother calling, hours after, when
she found me there, their mother on my lap,
a wisp of smoke, a sack, the seven babes  
like votives, candles drawn in homage round
a circle of my cornfield makeshift shrine.  
Their hunger was a portion I divined
from a single glass of water from a well.
And since deep-drawn, the seeds it watered burned
and swelled as if engendered by their own.
But that was Kansas.  All that I could tell
of depth and distance, of immensity,
when you came down to it, was water from a well.
What would I tell now I could taste the sea?

The sea was farther off.  But I could smell
its tincture in the mist that swept across
the Garden air and pecked against my lips.
There were the Swan Boats, ready to set sail
across the bubble of a hoodwinked eye,
chained like children.  In the spring I’d see  
them glide, I’d watch them from the willow leaves
ferry bright tourists with their plastic shades
beneath the droppings of the pidgeoned eaves,
baying like beagles at the reverend dead
enshrined in recent stone.  I paid my coin
and crossed myself, one spring.  I lost my own
glasses peering down into that green
obliterating murk.  I ducked
my hand and found the sunlight out of reach.   
The face faded.  What was I looking for?   

I know one thing.  The city swallows you.
Loads you in its throat, into its veins,
clamps you to its tracks and drives you down,
a B-line smack to the gangrened heart.
(Red Line to Braintree, Blue an opened vein
to Wonderland—what matter?  All the same.)
It’s cold as hell in there but you don’t freeze.
You don’t.  You only sit and think and wait
in an empty theater, on a banished throne
midwinter, in the darkness of a day,
while ripples crown and film about your head
in celluloid, the lives you might have led,
peeling like an onion to a core
that never comes.  You peel.  You peel.  You peel.
You peel to emptiness, and that is death.   
So much is certain, is it not?  So much
seems my soul, my being caught between
what passes for truth, and what just passes.
And what, whatever else may be, may spring—
the manifest illusion of divine
purpose?  Where is purpose in this?  Say.
What purpose in these syllables I lay,
Procrustes, on the rack of this blank verse?
Lop.  Th’alternative?  Well.  The mind goes blank,
the field remains untilled, the enemy
advances.   
Silence and stillness are the enemy,
your enemy, my dear.  For what you said,
in that defining moment when I dropped
my clothes (you loading up the stereo,
as if that could protect us), the glow
of lamplight on my skin adjusted so,
in that defining moment when you said,
‘Lie still.  Don’t talk.’ and in that, opted
not for the monstrous music of the spheres,
not for the twisted orchard of my heart,
not for the labyrinth of deep and dazz-
ling darkness that the poet says is God,
but for a shell, a surface (through your pride? through fear?),
what you gained was jazz, but lost a world, my dear.

I don’t even like jazz.  Never have.  Not me.
But it will be there.  In the portrait, it will make
its notes felt in the squiggling of a curve,
in the smoke that winds up like a clarinet
if I should smoke.  (Should I smoke?)  It will infect
even the polished purity of fruit—                                 She reaches into the bowl.
Plastic!  Leonardo, I’m appalled.
And look, the paint is even chipping off.
Okay, okay, I’ll put it back!  Jees.  
Not like it’s life or death.  Or is it?  Say,
how big is this?  Should I expect someday
to be found hanging in the MFA?
(Maybe even plastered to the T,
a token to your immortality?)
Maybe on a Wednesday (the old routine)
strolling through the vacant lunchtime air
among schoolchildren, ravens in my hair,
the nibble of gentry at lubricious tarts,
Monet on the mouse-pads in the Museum Shop,
ching-ching, the bell, ascend the sandstone stair,
down the long corridor to find me there
framed on the far wall of my favorite room
gaping the gulf, lounging on the brink
of all I will remember from this night?
And what will I remember?  How the wine
flared like a will o’wisp inside my head?
How the fake fruit tempted, how we might have said
anything to keep the rats at bay,
nibbling at the onion of this silence?

Oslo was like that.  Oslo.  Oh,
just a guy I lived with for a while.
Ha.
More like a pact between the dying and the dead.
Though at first it seemed the opposite of that:
A dying to be alive.  At any rate.
Sometimes at night I’d watch him as he lay
smoldering in his rosy opiate dream
of cellphones, celluloid and private jets—
the TV on, but mute, the images
dancing on the walls like hieroglyphs
in our subterranean domestic gloom—
and think that if I took a knife and pressed
its point into his sole and opened him
from toe to tip, peeled hard and pressed inside,
I just might find the thing that made him tick,
beyond the heart, that like a blood-gorged tick
dropped from a limb, brushed from a blade
of grass, climbed leisurely to nurse and suck
upon your softest places—beyond that,
and far beyond his need, his junkie’s need
to have me under him at any cost,
and not just that, I’m telling you screwed down,
pinned, like a June bug, iridescent wings
spreading for a flight that never comes,
or if it does, to come in fits and bursts
(his mostly), mine a bursting just to twist
free of the spike he’d drilled into my heart
that kept me there, even as the first,
even as the first was being lost—and then
to hold that over me as if it was my fault,
my choice, indicative of something in  
my self that would choose death in any case?   
If I could press
past that, I thought that maybe I might find
the chip, the fleck of mica in the soul,
embedded in the shards that made him whole,
a tiny thing, a cameo . . .  
And still the whole time thinking that, I knew
this process would go on forever, peel
on peel, an endless stripping back until
nothing remained to tell me who I was,
why I was here, what part in hell I played,
nothing but silent, unrepentive air.
And that was terrifying.   
                                       So I stayed
beneath him, night by night, until I made
a thing between us.  And I kept it.  And one day
in the dead of winter, she was born.   
I named her May.

The jazz has wound up, the bottle by now is empty. The artist moves to the stereo, fetches another CD (more jazz), opens another bottle of wine. She sits up, stretches. Takes a cigarette from the table, lights it. Sings, like a lullaby, to a broken tune:
                 A slumber did my spirit seal.
                 I had no human fears.
                 She seemed a thing that could not—feel?
                 the weight of earthly years.

                 No motion has she now.  No force.
                 She neither hears nor sees.
                 Rolled round in earth’s diurnal course
                 with rocks and stones and trees.

Full of surprises, ain’t she?  The auld girl.  My mother taught me that.
Recites:
                 O joy that in our embers
                 is something that still lives,
                 that nature yet remembers
                 what was so fugit—

                 O joy that in our embers  
                 is something that—dost live?   
                 that nature yet remembers
                 what was so fugitive.

Dost?  Doth.  Dost to doth.  Ha.  Embers.  Ash:
A plume of smoke as she exhales.
I don’t even smoke.
New jazz starts up. She puts the cigarette out, takes her former position. The artist comes forward, adjusts the lights (a flicker), refills her glass, returns to his easel.
Back to the drawing board, hey?  Curtain, and . . .  
Scene.
Where are we now?  Don’t tell me, let me guess.
(It’s not so easy when there’s two of you.)
Deltoids?  Clavicle.  Croak if I get close.
Lower.  Help me now.  I see it.  Almost . . .
Oi!  For feck’s sake, Ma, ’e’s on me tits!   
Ehem.  That’s boosoms to you, young lady.
O see, see how aloof the Maestro stands,
just at the distance discipline demands
(neither too close for the libidinous hooks
to catch, nor so withdrawn to be a clam),
my peerless knight of mediocrity!
Heart’s conquistador, thwarted though you be:
Columbus in his crow’s nest, Moses damned
to view, cloven beneath him, Canaan’s lands,
New Worlds of curds and lamplit honey.  How  
like a martyr to the limits of his art—
famously resigned—how like a saint he drops  
the eye in deference to the suffering lot
of mere humanity.  What a load of stink.
Tell me, darling, really what you think.   
Am I worth the crossing?  (Obviously not.)
Or am I a jewel, hung aloft the night,
dangling from the lobe of Afric’s ear,
the unrecovered country which you passed
once in a dream, and then only as near
as the gods of All That Must Not Be allow—
for I know (believe me), how your life depends
upon the thing forever out of reach,
apple or plum, cluster on the vine,
star-cluster, or the brightest star that beat
once at your own breast in its milky way,
I know,
I know it in my motherbones.  (My May.)


Where was I?  So.  You getting any of this?
I’ll bet you are.  I can read it in your squint.
Old Pokerface, stoking me for old flames,
ghost embers, angels’ dust of what remains.
It’ll take more than jazz.  The cards are stacked,
and I’ve got hands no one is going to touch.
Flush of diamonds like a nest of glowing seeds.
Ace of hearts, the queen of sunken spades.
Card-house cathedrals and immensities.
Myths, darling.  Shall I tell?  One goes like this.

Marlborough Street.  I’m walking toward the Garden.
Magnolia petals float like boats on air,
swan-blossoms, milkwhite votives setting out  
over the darkness of the waxen green,
that undertow of shadow.  It must be spring.
Then it’s not.  And they’re not.  I’m not.  Nothing is.
The grid that holds that fierce fantastic play
of sun on stone, geometry of glass,
sky-mirroring tower and the Trinity-,
alters, minutely, shifts—as if the mask
you all this time had credited as flesh  
and blood, as lover, mother, soulmate, friend,
slipped at your touch (my god) but still the eyes  
hold, though offset now, half-right, and dark
withdraws the incandescence, flutter out.
What is the howl of all Hell to that flood
that sweeps across you then?  Salt, acerbic,
bile in the wound your own incisors shred,
your own benumbed and famished flesh consumes,
betrayed by life, conscripted by the dead
to sit in abject silence on a throne
at the bottom of a moonless pond you cast in—
No.  Not pond.  Not well.  Nothing but the sea,
while ripples film about your head, the swirl
of tides beyond you; far above, the dome
of sunlight beacons where your sometime-home
lies still in state,
interred in metal husks and brittle springs,
the peapod of a house, the quiltpatch yard,
from the col a still voice calling . . .  
And the silence of that floor was so immense
the sirens couldn’t touch it, and the depth-
charges paralleveled at my heart
couldn’t sound it.
  Not till they had pumped
me clean, and seven days I lay in State,
turning and turning on my clammy bed,
strapped like Andromeda as Medusa’s head
(my savior) turned their therapists to stone,
did they get the word they wanted.  I was free.
But what they couldn’t touch, and didn’t get:
the seeds.

I’m not saying that’s the strangest thing.
I’m not saying anything at all.
I am the buzzing at the windowpane,
the frost that claws, the ticker tape that binds
your line of vision to its floundering hook
trolling and tearing in the murk of me.
Be careful, Sherlock.  Elementary:
There are things in here you might not want to see.
Consider our capacity for loss.
Consider that each absence leaves a space
fitted to what filled it, husk or shell,
footprint, tidemark, crater, well,
lacuna of the locust on the tree,
the snakeskin stocking like an evening glove;
consider that these voids are everywhere,
given our propensity to move,
that everything that takes shape takes away,
matter from matter, mirrored, as it moves;
consider, too, my dear, that this is true
for all that insubstantial stuff we call  
The Inner Life, imaginative play,  
the little Lyric BlackBox tucked away
inside an alley of the skull, your Globe,
whose repertory troupe will run the rounds
as long as you sustain them, for you are
both audience and actors, manager and crew,
props, costumes, lights, and literary rep.,
the sometime-in-house critic with a lip
for all outmoded, artificial trash,
tinseled pretension, dialogue that smacks
too much of poetry, of the unReal
(but, oh, with such a soft spot for O’Neill)—
for it’s no secret that ideas have form,
as every man will tell you from his bowels
the instant that he hears the marriage vows,
and the figure of a thought exerts upon
a nation, till it equals obsolete
or till some other figure beats it down,
stamps it in the monolithic mud
for eons maybe—tum, ti-tum, ti-tum
goes Time in all its vengeance . . .
Consider this:  that matter, consciousness
meet at the crest of this momentary wave,
swell on their own consumption, have their say
and sweep into obliterating night;
that all life is the blind, usurping spite
of twindling inbreds dying to be born,
bearing each others’ heads as up they sway
and crash without a sound upon the deep
that is as deep and silent as the mind
of God, our dark protector and our stay,
reflecting pool and Universal Dad
splayed on the highway as the fume of sun
wriggles like a maggot on the lawn
some six-year’s Sunday child sips tea in;
consider, too, what passes for the shade
of life, a leech strapped to an invalid,
itself grows gorged and falls back on the dark
before, behind, within us, all around;
that vacancy’s our nature, and the void
our first inheritance (both throne and cell);
that from the moment of our birth, expelled  
from ripeness that clung to us like a glove
we trail, cresting on a wave of blood,
howling to heaven for the fields we fled,
oh is it any wonder that we wail,
already mostly dead?

You get that, Leonardo, and you’ve made
a start.  Your fifteen-minute’s burst of fame
veining the shaft you drop down endlessly,
tied to a line of scent, a dim perfume
vaguely at one with the odor of the womb
you half-remember, and will pine for always.
It’s cold as hell in here but you won’t freeze.
You have my surety on that.  Proceed,
first through the horns of ivory, my smile,
my dark tongue lapping like a river boat
edged to the shore; look, it takes your weight
beguilingly.  (And did I see your coin?)
Godspeed . . .
Downstream dark angels flit about you now,
attend your thick descent, like baby bats,
their faces remembered out of childhood books,
all that Pandora loosed, the withered Sphinx,
faces far back as preschool you had thought
undone forever, twirl there—your first kiss
stolen over figures in the clay,
companions swimming in the sandbox frame
or housed in the schoolbus unaware
of the grim twister ripping at their heels—
lift from a ditch light-years away
to linger, twirl to one, disperse
across forgotten lawns like Sibyl’s leaves.   
By now you are a chambered nautilus
of thought; harpies and sirens hold no sway.
Fast from the shore the river slips
downwinding, willows bending in their strings
brushing the current where reflected, there,
beneath you—what?—a film of memory,
a fleck, a flicker, kernels and gives place,  
dissolves.  And darkness ravishes the stream.

If you remember when you light upon
that deepest cove that opens on the orchard,
ask for me there.  It’s where I keep my court,
seven crowns about my head, the blood-red
orbs from my branching memories, the seeds
full fruited in the orchard of my heart.
And if you feel the chill that passes all
belief, be calm, my dear; as evening falls,
my lord routinely takes the garden air;  
it’s he you sense beside you, circling there,
it’s he, the black moth guttering your flame,
dark ravisher, the frost that claws your pain.
It’s he that taught me everything I know
and then some.  O vagrant little soul,
I am, I’m almost sorry for your loss,
as much as I, the most of it, can be.
But how impossible to remain (can you not see?)
impartial in these matters that concern us.
Snatching and patching, as if you could contain
in a stroke, a brush, a canvas, in a frame—
no matter.  (Did you even ask my name?)

I’ll give you something.  A little verse I tell
myself at bedtime, which is wedtime, cold
as the frost of fifteen, twenty wild Decembers,
when in disgrace with fortune’s seedy eyes,
when the stage ghosts haunt me and I long to take  
the artificial light into my veins,  
to stand there and be brilliant for a while,
the way I used to stand inside the maze
of light at morning when the six-years’ sun
prismed through the steel and broken glass,
and the fields stretched out forever, and the voice
I made was mine and full and free
and endless as it leapt up from the nest
like larks ascending—
                                    their mouths like little flames,
candelabrum mirrored in a glass,
chalice of well-water that you brought
to the altar as the days pushed past
from May to August in the summer of his going,
summer replacing spring, and autumn then,
a tall, refinèd taper with its flame
of husk, a wisp, a shell of what had been
stamped from creation (how?) the very self
that made the bed of earth I walked on.
And how I’d take that water from the glass,
and the dry nest kept and tucked into the side
pocket of the altar he’d created
from the seats of the bus in which the children died,
and sprinkle it with water from the well,
and sing my darkness to the long-quenched flames,
my six-years’ sorrow to those little beings
that lay beyond me, all earth’s now, and sing  
for all poor creatures born to light their day
under the bower of unbroken stars, the sway
of night behind the golden dome of noon,
my song a steeple, spiring like a stem,
sunflower rising from my native state
all the mute morning, folding like a hymn
at heaven’s gate.

          Hell:

Hell is a place where everything you’ve lost
beds down with all you’d ever hoped to gain.
The offspring is a dumb, detestable,
poor stunted creature called What Might Have Been.
And it’s your destiny to nurse that thing
through all Oblivion.
And everything you’ve left—the bone-white house,
the yard beneath the sun’s prismatic ray,
gurgle of well-water in a glass,
your mother’s voice alighting from above
as you lay drowsing with the breezes at your head,
candescent angels in a field of—May . . .
Hell is a place where everything you love
lies out of reach.  That’s what I should have said.
Silence.
Tick-tock.  Tick-tock.  Tick-tock, tick, tick, oh, words
what words, what sounds, what syllables for this
what measurement, what stanza, line, what verse,
when in the very act the mind goes blank—
which act?  Which act of what?  Where was I?  (tick)
The heart a timebomb ticking out its loss
mured in the muds of winter?  (tick)  Stand still,
stand still, you ever-moving spheres!  Oh how  
to force, to apply the rigors of what craft—
Intention.  Think.  Think.  You have your head.
What’s your intention?  Ha.  To let it be
(or not).  Whether ’tis nobler for the mind
to suffer to be happy for a time? (tick tick)
To leap to the streets with artificial joy,
or a pure joy passing understanding, but
happy?  Perhaps?  O haply I think on thee
(or not).  Tick-tock, tock, tock . . .  Earth, gape!
How long have I been here?  O Lord my God,
how long, how very long have I been here.
‘When I survey— ‘When I in awesome wonder,
consider all the worlds thy hands have made . . .’
God, the infernal racket of this jazz!
But oh, somebody (father?) tell me please,
mother of mine, how long have I been here?
Silence.
Spring.  In the spring, it must have been.  (What year?)
Magnolia blossoms floated out like swans
on air, like votives, candling the air.
Processionals . . .  What I was driven to.
I with my midnight walking.  Overhead,
the gaslamps huddled in their little fumes.
Marlborough Street.  So quaint.  All quiet
but for the baying of a dog, far down
at the Garden end.  tock tock, tock tock
my footsteps as I slipped from pool to pool  
under the lamps spread out like stepping stones,  
stations, spotlights tripping down the dark
infinite proscenium of God,
our heroine
in her one-night-only, searing monologue,
‘Now You See Me / Now You Don’t.’  tock tock, tock tock
Flash:  I am a star, I am a queen,
I am the greatest actress in this town!
Zip:  tock tock, tock tock . . .  The old routine.
And on and on.  It must have been awhile.   
My veins were rearing but I had my head.   
(Oslo, the rat, had left some in the bed
under the mattress where she lay, still sleeping.
I lit the candles and the silver spoon,
and hey nonny nonny, went out to jump the moon . . .)
Near four, it must have been, I started home.
Fairfield to Exeter, Dartmouth, down
the long line angling at the Trinity,
Hancock behind it like a grid of night,
starless, a dark too daunting for a star;
tock tock, southward, crossing now Columbus
(O my conquistador, where were you then?),
my breast a white moth leaping into flame,
my phoenix heart, the dust inside my veins
opening to a desert where I see,
still I see it, spread before me like
Wonderland:  Jerusalem, wriggling like a fume
on the horizon where the streetlamps bleed to sky,
eternal City, transparencies of stone,
prismatic towers, steeples, and the one
sound, within it, pounding, pounding,  
hot on the anvil, hammering the heart,
working its darkness to a golden bird,
my father pounds the grace notes as I come
closer, lured on the siren of her call,
my mother standing on the white-framed porch,
inside the white-framed picket fence
framed in the fields and over all, a sky
no longer winter, sere,
but touched, refined with early autumn’s tone,
husks of late summer refolding into June
like hands at prayer, suckle on the vine,
land of milk and honey, and I’m there,
I’m really there.  My God.  I’ve made it.  Home.
And the street erupts, geysering the sky
like fireworks, sparklers whirling on the line,
like roman candles that we’d hold and burst
across the yard at fireflies on the Fourth,
red, orange, blue stars above me, then a blast
like an A-bomb shakes me from my state—
O God.  This is my street, and it is burning.
O God.  This is my street, and it is burning.


What is the howl of all Hell to that cry
I let, my darling, as I leapt into the flame
to pluck you out, still sleeping?  It was I
burst through the brownstone calling out your name,
I who through arms and axes, helmets, took
to the burning walls and corridors and blaze
of the stairwell, down the tunnel clogged with smoke,
not stopping till I lighted on your face,
nested, like an angel in its shrine,
seven flames about you, dancing in my brain,
not stopping till they held me at the door—
i was the one who saved her!  she is mine!
And they took you.  And they hid you (o somewhere here . . .)
And I never saw my darling’s face again.
The jazz has wound up. Silence. She lightly sings:
                 A slumber did my spirit seal.
                 I had no human fears.
                 She seemed a thing that could not feel
                 The touch of earthly years.

                 No motion has she now.  No force—
The artist’s finger rises to his mouth, in concentration. She stops. He resumes. She takes a cigarette, lights it, resumes:
                 She neither hears nor sees.
                 Rolled round in earth’s diurnal course
                 With rocks and stones and trees.

Poor soul.  I could almost pity you.
Stuck on that patch of shade between my legs.
When millions of such shadows in me tend.
No matter.

Strike up another number.  For Jesus’ sake,
give us a lively one.  Come on.  Come on.
The universe shall live by jazz alone.

I can rest here, deserted
by the only men who love me—

the freight of grief I carry for them
left to uncurl in the sun, like a dying

stem in my palm. I kneel
among the tendrils: to study the stand

I will take to prove my guilt.
For a moment, I deny I was begotten,  

not made—the life-line on my kissed hand,
proof I was once wrinkled and imperfect.

I’ve always known my true life would begin
and end in a garden like this, my will not free,

my breath not Word, everything: bloom—
but the bloom the wound of a pupil  

overtaking the eye.
The darkness a comfort.

Because my errant whisper—
even muted by a wall of leaves—  

becomes prophecy,  
I’ve never said what I feel:

that I would die to live  
as a carpenter’s son, to see

my rough hands make a thing
as real and inhuman as I am;

that I dream of being
a wooden box filled with flowers,

set next to an untended grave.  
How I would cherish my part

in the bread of such an act,
in the artful life of the dead.

I know so little of myself,
even less of them,  
so I’m stunned
when, in a dream,
I taunt Nietzsche,  
on my knees,
calling him “the little minister.”

He doesn’t want to play,
holds his temples in his hands
like his head is a Fabergé egg,  

or a soul, not that I know  
anything of souls.
On all fours, I can only cry out  
a long, ragged neigh, stomping
and violently flinging  
back my head—a horse,
whipped into terror,  
his front knees buckling
and suddenly praying,
his mane trembling.
A steam rising

from his wounds.

I know so little of my desire,
but I feel base lust
for Pasolini, who’s been crying,
muttering, “I repeat,  
all sex is ironic.”

He’s wearing a black cravat
tied so tight his face is red.
When he tries to loosen it,
he gets erect, and cries some more.

It’s all too much
for Nietzsche and me.

          We embrace in a long kiss
          that seems to answer
          every question we’ve ever had.

Alone in the house,  
as the lights slowly rise,
Pasolini—in staccato,  
ironic claps—applauds.

Even the roots of the maple red
sing all your edges into apple.

Your laugh is dragons’ thread
aware of yielding.

We are a double tail
with our delirium of fire.

You exhale, sprung through starlit glass,
thirsting to open my wing—

unhoused afterwards—
then you pause patiently spinning,

as the white crease unfolds among the curve
and breath makes its amethyst

on your side, warm as our droplet
erasing tension end to end;

at the pore, where the barb tangles its holster,
you are the color of ravishment

meant to lift me out of this
damp blade in the cooling hymnology;

you repeat yourself growing blue
preparatives of fate,

while over us the swallows skim
and all is hushed in pink—

Rise then out of love into love
love’s as the love is; love rearms and prepares to love;

the love of lovers returns.
With you, it obliterates all consideration.

It cannot be matured by law and precept,
but by sensation & watchfulness in itself.

As usual, I have been occupied with nothing but you….
Love is a crystal conscience—

I wish I was either in your arms
full of faith or that a thunderbolt

would strike me.
New-faceted hands meridian with blue…

the world is reduced into a meadow
for our four eyes’ astonishment.

I shall find you.
Your hair smells like marble noon & laurel dome.

Your eyes are the olive hornets surrounding
the explosion of water-rose—

to glance unhitching a spot of breath
beneath the burnt ruby of your memory

is the broiling naked script of your light
around us we open the pearl of sweat

weaving its lingering threshold  
walking down, I found you around me

phosphorescent like a presence,
among the trees.


How Long Has That Train Been Gone? (Professor Longhair)
The train’s vacancy left red steam
along the hives of trees which sang
jonquils and anisette like haloes rising
negotiating vowels of wood.
Baby Won’t You Please Come Home? (Miles Davis)
Home is a stone snared within a stone
and all its dark persuadings cleave their tongues
to my condition—my head holds honeyed apprehension
and my legs are insidious, but stunning bolts.
Didn’t It Rain? (Mahalia Jackson)
Metallic irradiation casts itself on all skin—
a self-upbraiding liquid. It expostulates joy,
yet overarched a sweet ether sets its glaze.
Rain-regions of thought have similar introversions.
How Deep Is The Ocean? (Irving Berlin)
The ocean insinuatingly breathes permutations.
It etches proscribing words like fish drying:
all beautiful people are exempt from the incantations  
of decay, but what of the long-fringed fire in the piano’s lungs?
What Is This Thing Called Love? (Cole Porter)
There is no sex in immaculateness; only distance
wherein a perfection forms precisely because
s/he is unavailable for caresses, comments, seeing movies.
The projecting curve is as red as a cannibal.
Where Did You Sleep Last Night? (Lead Belly)
I became a bee and my resolute reveling led me
to an octagonal pouch; the devil saw no bee,  
and heard no sound from bee, but only, by intervals,  
wrapped me in a black and yellow blanket.
So What? (Miles Davis)
Coltrane’s forty-minute solos had gone on
once too many times for Miles, his boss,
and he apologized, not knowing when to stop.
Said Miles: “Take the goddamn horn out your mouth!” 

“Hi wire” he says, “it’s been done before.”  
On the edge of another bench with his  
hair on fire, bag of peanuts at hand,  
a galoot in cahoots with the crowd.  
Eating the flames with a casual flair,  
sings “Ashes to ashes, funk to funky,  
we know Major Tom’s a junkie.”  
To egg the roaring chickens on  
he thinks about flaying lions in the next round,  
but taking the easy way out clowns  
in his new canvas suit, jumping  
through the hoops, master as it goes.  
Tests a horse by lying underneath,  
wonders about the rear end of anything.  
Three rings bite the nose,  
incredible the way the old tent glows.


Sister says
I don’t, I don’t want no snakes on me. But put
them worms around me & I’m a princess of slender
slippery sounds, got a carriage without wheels
that slides in rain. Got a half-shaped brother
swoonin’ for gals in mags, a great fat
pumpkin croonin’ love songs soft & low. You talk
la-la I’m gone through smoky mirrors & beaded
curtains while you’re hopin’ to shave your face.
One hair, two hair, three hair four—baby brother
you’ll never have no more.
Brother says
Rhythmic Orion, my favorite friend, comes
wrapped in chains, changes them to sheets,
unwraps like angel food cake—no layer
shows.  He shows in the night, when I
am asleep, when I take pants off he puts
them on. A regular clothes thief. He makes
me cry & he makes me laugh, he gives me guns
to shoot the champs.  & the champs go “oh” &
“oh” & blink off their prizes.  Rhythmic Orion
strips off his belt & the stars spill in my hand.
Sister says
Baby brother’s got a gap in his face that needs
fillin’ fast. You watch the walls move, I’m
busy. Don’t talk to me about culinary angels &
don’t tell me the ways of the sun—you got a nerve
slitherin’ like eel breath, I’m gonna scuttle
that steam. No years old & he wants to know
where he’s at. Honey, I been through that.
I’ll knock the stars off your hair. Macho doggies,
that’s how I end—that’s what the last word
bam-bam said.

A man appears, disappears,
            revenant of the man within the man.

What’s left but white shirtsleeves,
            two gold buttons on a vest

and a trail of fog rolling onto the street
            from the doorway of Au Petit Dunkerque.

Behind the window’s gilded bars: 
            cigars, rows of gold-filled bottles,

and a model ship with twelve sails 
            that always travels east. 

At half-mast, a man no taller than a glass 
            dressed in a captain’s suit

wears the face of leaving 
            but never leaves.

In Mondrian’s studio the doorway
            never flinches.

A straw hat retreats into shadow
            hiding from the sun’s blanching heat.

Walls white, table white 
            and a vase glazed a muted gray.

Inside, a flower has forgotten its name
            and practices the art of dying.

Where are the masking tape and rulers,
            the exacting mathematical graphs?

Instead, a chrysanthemum and a woman’s breast,
            skin partitioned by black lines. 

Her nose equals a perfect red square, 
            hips, flawless rectangles in blue.

A door is open, a man is missing
            and here, a woman in plain view.

Always naming:
the tree, the bird in flight,
the reddish boulder the stream
runs over green, and the fish
in white smoke when darkness
falls over the woods.

Signs, colors, it’s a game—
I’m doubtful—
it may not end fairly.

And who teaches me
what I forgot: the stones’ sleep, 
the sleep of birds in flight, 
the trees’ sleep—does their speech
go on in the dark?

If there were a God
and he had a body 
and could call me, I would
walk around, I would
wait a while.

Here’s to what could have happened
many warm nights ago, in high

rain. My older love over, living
out his last days in Rome—
here’s to the missing hat, the returned hat,

nevermind: your slight, the deeper
station, your long missing eyes,
the shade of them, the young sleepers.

Here’s to what did happen, your
followed arrow song, followed
and following, farther and

further into a
telescop-
ic here’s what might happen—

open your swallowing factor,
your better news, tongue
hanging
over teeth, touching
the lip, barely, on

the bottom, the stream of a funnel
of air, suck-
ing in the breeze, the waft of

me,
bruised eye,
mercy-breathing, sold-out

body, hit-hard armature, my
bad credit, debts and allegations.
Take in
the walking foot, the one, the last stance.

Last night the wind whirled,
shook the windows, rain flashed
in the streetlight’s glow, turning
to snow then hail,
while I, dug in at home,
shivered with ancient dread
that you in your grave called
to be let in with me instead,
and seemed to rebuke this unnatural act:
that I could accept you were no more than ash
and let you be consigned to earth.

The first of our burdens is silence.
We have been told not to speak
and so we don’t, at least not
in a way that can be heard.
We have been told to keep silent
through every provocation,
as though our silence were a good,
willed thing.  This is the way
we have grown, silent upon silent
thing, a chilled series of silences
that will not admit of words.
This silence is our heritage
rather than a family tree,
this silence provides us roots
and limbs.  We live in it
because we cannot build another,
no other treehouse will be good
enough.  Nor will we be,
cheered for a moment as silence
lets other things whistle, then
let down when we realize where
we are.  There is nothing
we may hold to after these years,
just dust and even quieter things,
things which do not need silence
because they’ve disappeared,
left nothing in their wake,
not breath, not ears.

the spelunker at the cave lip checks
        her gear off
her forehead light concentrated pearl
                on each hand
a glove snug tips cut round belted waist
        tools pick-ax
clamps a rope ringlets bound she puffs out
                clouds shivers
as the cave mouth sighs sedimental
        damp and climbs
in down the rough tunnel-chute she comes
                to a cliff
precipice her pearl light diffuse V
        penetrates
a few feet she anchors rope begins
                to repel
down and down and down a slip and down
        a three day
festival faze she wakes haze struggles
                to part dark’s
dress folds wrapped around her every
        muscle leg
works against leg works against leg works
                against leg
the last veil toed off skin sloughed shroud shed
        a pulled off
luminescence one hand jerks around
                the waist roll
to gaze at porous walls illumined
        by fallen
pearl light crevice cranny shadow fed
                by prostrate
body ballooning illumined back
        lit she thinks
monotones like Braque’s gray and bronze cubes
                notices
violet cream sighs widens eyes her heart
        beats in time
with the living stone spe-lunk lunk-spe
                spe-lunk throb
with slitted light pictures dance in red
        and ocher
fragments wall hiss depicted growl grass
                winds speak hoof
beats rain din moon phases sing rise rise
        touch our eyes
drawn over eyes rise cradled by her
                shadow she
traces a circle inside a square
        inside a
circle inside a square cave inside
                cave inside
cave inside cave she climbs up climbs out
        into night
emerges into dim silver light
                now to climb
that hole punched askew in the starless
        mustached sky

When he rubs his hands for blood flow it snows.
If I were a leper, if I were a snake… Shavings skim

the fresco’s surface as strips separate, peel, palm
creases deepened. …would I cease to hold these hands

together, would I slough, erase my face… Slick slate
bodies of fish spread wing-fins, swim and leap

across the wall to form an ellipse : they mirror
the fresco worker’s face as his thumb goads metal,

scales polished in circles. Skin becomes scale. Lime
and granite kneaded to the consistency of dough

transform him. I am a leper—no, a snake that sloughs
itself to reveal that supple layer. If he were a leper,

like a leper, would the swirls and lines deepen,
separate, cease to hold carpals to wrist to radius?

If he were the snake, like a snake, at least the lines
would stretch, hold, redden into pink scars. Either

way he sheds skin, rubs olive oil over fingertips,
the metal tool, the wall; his eyes grow as distant

as the eyes of the fish. He breathes, skin passes
over gills, leaves yellow wings slippery, reflection

born as he swims, slick-skinned, I am land-scape,
shadow on marble, shadow on grit, I am fish.

The land is thinly-settled.
Despite huge fields and machines
the towns lie sleepy
in boxwood gardens—cats
seldom meet a thrown stone. 

In August stars fall.
In September you sound the hunt.
Still, the gray goose flies, the stork walks
through unpoisoned meadows. Like mountains
clouds soar over the woods.

If you don’t take a paper here
the world is fine.
In kettles of plum butter
your face reflects well 
and the fields gleam fire-red.

Though the Welsh have the worst
sort of folklore for our situation:
Discouraging the sturm and drang
surrounding pie & sausage platters.
We can still take our pranks
to a more ocean-view.
We are still dependent
on a network of enormous baskets
to earn our living, and all the acrobatics
needed to maintain them.
No amount of lightning can change this.
and I’d prefer the insides 
of one of the more sultry chanteys.
Though I’d be quite lonesome without you,
Month of Sundays,
with your rollercoaster designs 
and your army of local collaborators.
Though I have nothing original to add,
and have worn out six pairs of handlebars
just getting here, with your name ringing
as a brighter, unfinished warning.

It’s only when I look at trees—
This one—finally—reaching
Above the elevated train track
Trembling outside this window,
Glowing orange leaves scratched
On electric green, reaching
From the dirty earth—that I ask what it means
To be mortal, how we are living
Towards dying.
                        Sometimes your eyes glow like that,
Lashes tipped with sunlight, glimmer
Of wetness beneath.It gets easier, bearing it.
Not like I’ve got Atlas’ burden, but I was only bones
        for six or seven centuries and not malcontent.
The Romans had a knack for architecture
        and my catacomb offered certain comfort—dry,  
        undisturbed.
Pope Paschal had no business rooting around
        like a mole, mussing up his vestments,  
        scraping his elbow in eagerness.
I’d tell you how he cursed but it’s unseemly to gossip  
        about God’s chosen.  I’ve had years to learn this  
        and other codes I should have known before I died,  
        being canonized and all.

He christened me Cecilia and so I am.
Patron saint of music by chance or even purpose,
        patron saint of virgin brides by design.
I’m not sure what to do with all the prayers  
        piling to mountains.  I never asked for this
        and my negligence is a common symptom  
        of the unqualified.
Such an astral rise from bones to relic, it’s surprising
        my spirit didn’t get the bends.
And Paschal missed his calling as a publicist,  
        how quick he was with backstory and his gift  
        for invention: tortured to death for the rejection
        of my bridegroom, a pagan.
But who of us was not back then, seven hundred years
        before the Christian robbed my tomb marked
        for Artemis: Callisto.

Claimed now, Heavenbound, I keep
        busy unknotting the secrets of my flesh.
A maiden, yes,  
        but having lived my life for the huntress and her nymph,  
        I am no martyr.
Phantom blood pulls to the forest and, if given voice, I would growl.
Muscled limbs knew bow and axe better
        than any man’s caress and I miss the swift shadows
        of beasts more than kisses.

But it’s no use, wishing to be cast out from the canon.
The situation has its perks, an unblocked view  
        of the constellations and I stare.
Enviable, their dip below the horizon, a rest before
        their rise and chase across the sky—unfettered movement.
And Paschal, in his bumbling, stumbled  
        on a sliver of accurate divine.
Callisto, Ursa Major, Great She-Bear
        condemned among the stars
        can never leave the sky.

Let me explain in terms you’ll understand:
picture a boy who, starved for love, has planned
and executed another household crime,
and now his mother has discovered him
and glowers down from the bright ceiling where
her face is the dark sun, and the ear-whir
of fear and desire mounts, for soon she’ll speak
his name with passion and meet his pale dry cheek
with the full sail of her hand, loosing the tears
of shame and gratitude—all the boy cares
to know of bliss.  
                                   And then forget his trauma
with its dysfunctional-family melodrama,
and think of me with her to whom all heads
bow as to the body’s harshest, best-loved gods.

1. In Which He Turns With Intent

When we were almost out, all I could think  
Was they can’t really let me take her—  
Can they? And when I heard
The rasp of her shade on a fern near the cave mouth,

I knew she was still there, I had to turn,
I knew I couldn’t bring her back,
Because it wasn’t her
But grief that I loved with such passion that kingdoms

Were moved by its sad music. Should the source
Prove hollow, then the music must.
And if I now shun women,  
It’s not for Eurydice’s sake, but for theirs.  


2. In Which He Turns Inward

Somewhere in the night a woman
Carried a burden into the lake.  

I remember the snow settling
Like sleep. Cars turning onto the shore road

Must have thrown her ropes of light.  
And the radio in her apartment  

Clearing its throat for days, her phone
Ringing, the sun gleaming elaborately

On the cold white skin of the city.  
When they came for her things,

Their narrow voices widened
Like the pupils of trapped animals.  

Of all the tricks of memory, the cruelest  
Is accuracy. In the empty street below,

A limo passes, bass notes pulsing, the rest  
Of its song lost. As clouds of exhaust  

Rise toward halogen moons, I hear  
The door that’s always gently clicking

Shut behind me, and I find myself
Climbing, again, my incomplete notion  

Of her skirt-covered thighs, uncovering
All the lies I should have told her.


3. In Which He Never Turns

Emerging, my flesh firming again, I gasped
Like a fish in the scalding air. I touched my face
And blinked until the wall of light gave way
To shapes: a tree, and beside the tree a man,
Kneeling and weeping. Then the words returned:
Weeping and man and tree. And like a tide  
Flowing back to a marsh across cracked mud,
My thick blood moved again. My ankle hurt...  

His music, for a time, was a light thing  
Balancing the exhausting gravity of flesh.  
But sadness always was his heart’s true song,
And one day, after a flimsy argument,  
His flat I wish I’d never come for you
Brushed past my own I wish you’d never too.


4. In Which He Turns, Afterward, to a Young Man

The past—that’s where you’ll find your paradise.
Why look here? Or think now about the cost?

I found my own in what I thought was hell,
But only after I, alone, had crossed

Back. Whatever lies before you now
Won’t have been paradise until it’s lost.  


5. In Which He Turns Away from Himself

He heard her brush against a fern,  
And though he didn’t mean to turn,  
He turned; she vanished into mist.

Clutching at air, he woke and found her,
Breathing, beside him in their bed.
He felt as though he’d risen from

Deep water, heart thrashing the tight
Drums of his lungs, into this air
That tasted of salt and absolution.  

He slipped soundlessly from their bed,  
Walked down the hall, past the glossy
(Framed like some ancestral portrait)

Of him on stage with his old band,
Into the kitchen, where he brewed  
A pot of coffee, took two cups  

From the cabinet, and brought them back
To the dark room, their tails of vapor
Rising and curling quickly away.  

Dusk. Before the House of Arum,
Hay, half-moons, and hay. A fire  
floats like linseed oil across the horizon.  
Homelessness. A sacred grove.  
Women gathered with birdseed and clay.

first chorus
For what you ask us, if we hear you right—  
Then it must be winter. True,
there are things we’ve seen not made of this earth:  
in the ice, the strange cry of a calf  
clings to the river’s borders. But young  
is not the strangest beloved, in the old fields,  
on the old roads, where no one watches  
the wind but watches its trail— the tail  
of a Blue Norther, Lord, known to knot an ewe’s wool  
before it’s shorn, fastest in its extinguishing. No,  
we were not quiet in our old hearts.  
In the sudden cold of our bedchambers and blackened  
noons, in the night’s known but exquisite spying.

second chorus
Ten years since the first winds walked  
across these yards. Ten years,  
the woman who watched her husband walk west,
watching the Cimarron’s water— And we,
the wives and mothers of strangers,  
of men who watched their farms and families  
fail, the men who spent crops  
for hills and salt water— Who should say  
the night knows only their bleakest, ghost-filled places?  
We saw the night beat into our strongest  
barns—yes, bleating— our daughters shrouded  
in linen and hay. Our men now dead of Dust  
Pneumonia, our men now dread as the cattle’s faces.

		A speaker steps forward from the first chorus,
adorned in deerskin and face paint.  
She faces the women, hearing some sound beyond the clearing—
a distant wailing, from somewhere within the woods.

speaker
I know a man mauled  
by the first kicks of a calf in Spring. Sister,  
he said, Sister— there are spaces  
where the water runs the length of a sober man.

first chorus
He said, Sister, a sober man.

speaker
He said, Sister, there are rivers  
where the calves crawl like crabs across the sand,  
rivers which covet the coins  
placed upon men’s eyes, and walk  
with a man’s children, and drink with the man’s wife.

second chorus
He said, Lord, the man’s wife.

speaker
He said, Lord, there is water  
where the wind eats
the sparse and nameless things—  its secret looks,  
Lord, the laugh of lean pasture,  
and riverbeds red as the cattle’s racked meat.

chorus
A grave and curious quiet, Lord!  
What carvings in dirt and death are these?  
What wind wound through the ash and apple trees?  
And hieratic, holy, the hymnal woods—
What water prepares our coming? What rains  
will spare our fields? We’ve known what the river  
finds in its feeble sleep: When there was winter,  
there was mistle-thrush. God-rush. There was thistle.

Soot everywhere. Trains, as if World War Two were our era,  
pulling out of old South Station. At every grimy window,  
two or three men—their postures grief-struck, heroic.  

The iron terminal all my grandparents had arrived at,  
their valises and sacks abulge with whatever mean
practical possessions they’d thought to lug into their futures.

Now I had their copper pans, their Sabbath candlesticks.  
Gloom saturated the enormous room—no light motes,
no cappuccinos, no New York Times bestsellers. No matter  

what the mission, you’d be too proud to fail to carry through.... 
The hanging clock’s hands could hardly bear the inching heavy weight  
of time; I couldn’t see the arrows move, but if even one local clock  

were taken for repair or replacement, we’d be saved from separation.  
Were we—was I—certain you had no rational choice but to report  
for duty? You shouldered an Italian leather case I’d never seen,  

I, who’d polished and folded all your belongings. I touched your face,  
you, already distant, aching to “get on with it,” and I—I knew  
a great hole was being torn in my life, my life that felt like  

the kind of rice paper Japanese printmakers always seemed to use—
such colors, such defined images of comfort and beauty ripped away.  
Who’d ordered you to go, to cross three continents  

and three oceans, knowing the inescapable dangers? Was it  
the Secretary of War, that garrulous fool? What could I have thought  
to do or say to keep you from the mysterious assignment you welcomed,

impelled as you seemed to be by your headstrong restlessness,  
your admirable infuriating insistence on doing what’s too hard?  
Was it too late? On Track Ten, obstinate, oblivious of your wife
  
pleading in the metallic din, were you off to rescue, or murder,
a harmless sinner, were you already doomed to end in a dark alley,  
iron and soot, by good angels untenanted?  Don’t go  don’t  go   don’t go 

Old sack  
that even now costs less  
than a good bistecca,  

how simply you betray me.

Like a drinking fountain  
running night and day
on a slab of diminishing travertine

as Flora bends to you
with her vase or Neptune washes the scales  
from his hands, never stopping  

to think that like that whore, Perfica,
who after a good night’s
work, straddles you like a dolphin,

you can’t keep this up for ever.  

One day your recklessness will sever
us, and as you fall  
toward Orcus, so I will fall

as words from another’s
lips, in other mouths  
moving, other lips and tongues  

around me now singing
the taste of me, the heft and clear sound.

That
you have to act as if you’d
broken-in—

what’s that mean
exactly?

and the mist?
what can the mist
possibly mean

if it means one
thing to the scratch tickets

and another
to rose petals—they turn,
flower petals

turn, torn-up
lottery tickets turn, 
in the wind

a steady stream
across
the sidewalk, 

turning, the brick
sidewalk

sailing a little, 
before settling
under

the same sky
boot heels
walk below—

but what does that
bring to the mix?

You’re just a thief now,
come in
from a white squall of rain—

highway rain—

no one whose name
the headlines might out.

You’re not unique.

I’ve let down those I love too.

I’ve swiveled around
and in the frozen cloud
seen the fire

all cross-grained
by rain. I’ve smelled the sweat
and perfume

on the wet towels
she left behind, & I’ve made a mess of
my name at dusk.

I was being called at dusk.

I can explain only this.

Across the street the pitbull
glowers in dew.  Jowls
quiver drool stretching

hot icicles which never
reach the ground.
Everything wonderful

and worthy of lust exists
just outside the invisible  
fence.  To feel this

we need only try on
the leather collar
and bolt in any direction.

We learn by going.
And then not going anymore.
A squirrel

works out the riddle of wires
which connects this house
to that one, leaps

for the ethereal oak tree,
flails into grass and dirt.
Jaws snap shut

on air.  A wisp
flits into the next yard.
The sad monster

edges out, presses his nose
closer to what’s there
and not, which are the same.

Old motors gnash the frozen street,
a staccato that perforates, then

tears night from evening,
leaving the irrevocable future

where it’s difficult to say which noises
are the horrible ones, which ones

should go on tapes to help us sleep.
Sleep is difficult—not the act,

the thing, the fact of being severed.
Sleep rests like the lot beneath

the window with its latent touchy
car alarms, though all night

it’s a curled animal without movement
or sense.  Hours accrue

without us in them even though
we are, the way we’re in outer space

without knowing it and the earth
seen from the moon lies down in the dark.

Once, the moon was flawless, smooth
as a newborn’s brain, ice water

pooled in a cave in the woods.
Then Galileo opened his mouth:

clenched stutter of a nail pried loose.
We opened ours too, hungry eaglets

whose nests speckle the cliff-face.

You are given a ball of string, as large as a trifling moon

without tending
it grows red herrings and milieu, it turns out   

cells and hair and a heck switch  
activated by household chemicals

where is it?
you follow its inklings, but end up nowhere

you swear you’ll unravel it
you’ll use the kitchen matches  

if I can’t have it my way at least I’ll have a fuse

look up
see the beautiful scar

leave it alone    go to your room

The snowman was my first Earthling.

The sky fell on his rocky hillock.   
We exchanged nods.  I offered aluminum foil.

He said he lacked an omnipresent character.
I checked my bag.  I found a peach

and took a bite and placed the fruit in place  
of his coal arch.

He sang of love, and the grossness of white.

His eyes were deadpan.  Crows sprouted
from his arms and hands.

In my bag I found a battery.  I took a bite
and placed the cell in place

of the tomato in his chest.
He sang of love, and the grossness of white

until he melted into pools of Sprite.  
I held out my arms.  The crows whispered.

I held out my arms.

She knows her father has gone without food,
that her mother endured the unspeakable.
Her brother, older remembers and  
the neighbor’s husband is dead.

And yet,
she is unscathed.

Everywhere the world offers its sorrow
like a glass of water.

A man her father’s age asks her for food,
another for money.  Girls with her  
mother’s green, frightened eyes  
hurry past on the wet street, as if
they will miss their trains.   
If not these, then others.

The water comes too as tears, sleet,  
gloss over the bodies who run.
To the rivers, to the canals.  She begins  
to read the sea as accumulation.

In an effort to dream, she sees films  
at the neighborhood theater, only
to find she has not escaped them.  
Cambodians, Mexicans, Gypsies,   
Poles...boarding ships, building junks,  
swimming channels and streams, some
drowning near shore, some at sea.  

There is little special about her.
Like many she retains a sense  
of thirst in the presence of that water,  
unlike some who have lived  
and have had enough.

I would eat anything.
For she, who cooked the delicacies,
For he, who paid the bills.
What was it we ate then?
Cow tongue, ox tail, fish eye, pig feet.
We ate body parts.
Tongues for better speech,
Tails for balance,
Eyes for intelligence and vision,
Feet for stability.

Hungrier than the other two,
He and I also sucked out the marrow of bones,
Bit the fat off every inch of meat she served us.
No amount of fat could sully our leanness.
Our skin shone with the oil and was elastic.
My only strength my appetite.

Children are penniless.  They have  
Only their devouring to give.
For the mother and father we devour
Danger, poison, grotesquery
And live.I crawled past the leafy greens and hid
behind a pimpled gourd to watch her,
this tomato vender in the mercato 
nibbling on her knuckle.

I needed a foolproof disguise to get closer, 
so I bit open a huge bag of basil
and picked it apart with my thumb.
Then I climbed inside, pulled 

the back of it over my head and poked
a little peep-hole in the front.
I hopped past the cabbage to the salted meat
and almost got discovered

by a fishmonger reaching into me
for a few leaves to garnish his scrod.
I finally made it to her,
my knees tired from squatting,

the bottom of the bag, though I had 
reinforced it with veal cutlets,
wearing extremely thin. When
I finally garnered enough courage, 

I pushed my head through the greenery,
like a smooth muskrat in the lily pads,
but she didn’t notice me. I tried
tickling her ankle with the tip of a leaf

and humming the first ten seconds 
of Vivaldi’s Spring, but nothing,  
her eyes fixed on a few mice 
crawling through the parsnips.

So I slowly slid my arms 
back through my suspenders,
thinking, for a moment, 
of the great Italian lovers:

Michelangelo, Vasari, Leonardo—
before I tip-toed out the door.

This thin-lipped American girl 
spoon feeds gelato to a bulldog
and I realize this city isn’t a city at all,
but a small dungeon inside a tortoise shell
gently rocking on a calm sea.

We can escape, they say, but only
if we’re willing to slam ourselves 
repeatedly against the gates 
until the guards have had enough.
But then, of course, there are those 

reptilian walls of Tuscany,
which are impenetrable.
Once, I heard of a young man
who made the long voyage 
through Pistoia to the border region,

sneaking past local Carabinieri 
with only the clothes on his back.
He used an espresso spoon 
like a tiny chisel, carving away for days
at the softer part of the regional wall.

Some say he is still swimming, by now 
off the coast of Sardegna, but not me.
I think he’s just like all the rest of us here,
sipping a macchiato at the bar,
fighting the urge to splash it on the barista 

and scurry out the door—
milk foam gathering at the corners 
of my puckered lips, like an old man
with a dried-up cotton mouth, 
a rabid raccoon.

Wrists bound with narrow rope
as one binds a lamb’s quarters before 
spring slaughter.

Lost, her aquamarine dress,
its gossamer layers
sinking through foamless cold,

platinum-tipped waves,
her red, vegetal curls pulling apart
into a fine net

in which nothing is caught
except for her face, which is dry,
dry as the cape of the man

almost hidden on the cliff—
bearded, arms raised to his sides as if
he will leap in and save her.

But this is not that story.
She must braid into these depths
and not be forgiven.

Poor the stream striving by mouthfuls
down-acre, and sad the deer
that must creep toward what little is left.

I sinned.  I made them exist,
coveted the heartish breastplate
of white fur

that so wholly resembled feathers
and belonged to creatures neither lovely
nor immortal,

wanted to replace their horrible breathing
with the dark tenor of water,
fleshy and moving,

though even the small grottos carved by
spring’s rushes are empty now
as honeycombs.

The swirling in the water stone remains, old glacier, 
words lost when the others came, I wade into the water 

to touch what he had touched, 
           my body 

in the circle of his house. Wooden signs warn 
that I am trespassing on owned land, & my mother 

is afraid to cross the signs, but they are a shifting 
dream of borders, the image dependent on the steps 

you take. This is the home he chose after everyone 
had died. I sink my hand in water and touch 

the walls of rock and yellow sand, pines that line 
the road so that everything is entrance.

I’m so afraid of pissing off the dead, as if they’ll start 
swatting me with china, black crows, push

me down the stairs—they seem to have so much
time on their hands, like vituperative high school

girls with long afternoons. I developed an uneasiness 
about the ghost of my boyfriend’s mother. 

Sometimes the dead don’t know they’ve died, so he rang 
a bell in three corners to let her know that she could go. 

Then the living room clock stopped the way they do 
in houses of the dead; then, it ran ahead. Two matches 

tossed in the sink, then two wet books as if they’d been 
starting fires in rain. The feeling of light snow.

His mother had Alzheimer’s when she died, 
so maybe it is still confusing knowing where to go.

We went to her grave beside a field of fawny grass,
bright weeds, markers all around like boxes

in the basement. In winter, we ran between 
the dead on the dirt path, red in the face, 

pushing through a minute. He missed his family, 
but the only words I remember are the white

ones in her field, the dead in flight. I want to tell her, 
look, don’t be mad that we sleep in your bed, the electrical 

blanket burning my thigh, his face has the same line 
as mine, and he held my photo in the airport until I appeared.

He gave me a spindle of white thread from your sewing 
box to remember you by.  The space problem seems to 

disappear against the being here. It’s hard to find the right 
train, that lone woman feeling of holidays in a hotel.

I don’t know where you’re going, it’s true, but the daughter
of a magician came to visit and slept in the staring gallery.

We need to put a few photos away. It’s like the story 
of the man who kept the woman he loved dead in a chair, 

a back room, flowers everywhere, but that didn’t help, 
as if the image means no one has to leave.  

We danced a sweet dance in the morning, dining 
room the one room where we were not afraid, 

sweeping each other in arcs elliptical as families 
escaping though there wasn’t any music.


The news that week includes a lyonefs
displayed, attacking Fowls and Catts.  They watched
her feeding time, remarked on her mercilefs
cruelty.  Meanwhile, Cotton Mather preached
against Hard-hearted Sinners, and Hardnefs of Heart.
He helped with her confession, which reflects
on attempts to destroy her unborn child, a part
of her Wicked crime, completed through Neglect.
Now hers is a Stony Heart, of Flint.  Ah!  Poor
Margaret, behold: the congregation calls 
on your wondrous Industry, Agony, your death four
days off. Pray for a Clean, and a Soft Heart; don’t fall 
from this fresh gallows to the Mouths of Dragons,
unconcerned, adamant, so little broken.

 My first thefts were small.  A couple of eggs, and then
      a jack-knife.  After that some chalk.  A fair
      piece of broadcloth, a filver fpoon and ten
      or eleven dollars from Mr. Symond.  A pair
      of filver buckles, twelve tea-fpoons, filk mitts.

He asks the preacher for this psalm: My heart 
is smitten, and withered like grass, so I forget 
to eat my bread, &c. My time is so short.

He reads Ezekiel: A new heart will
I give you, &c.  For my heart was bad, 
bad indeed. At the gallows he asked if the souls
of the wicked, at death, would appear before our God
or immediately pass to Hell, and wait their doom.

      Soon, dear sir, I shall know more than you.

To be sent in a cart to State Prison, to climb the stairs
      to the attic, where the women are kept, and left
      there, left in that close heat with strangers, their
      children, their filthy bodies.  Charged with theft,
      say. Rats.  Fleas.  Cholera, buckets of shit, and years
      spent fighting, trapped there, forgotten till you died.

The preacher visits her holding cell and swears
she’s sure to go to hell.  The Sheriff’s kind:
gives her an orange, a ride in a coach, at last,
to the gallows.  She’d dreaded a cart.  They tie black bows
at her feet and neck, tie her white shroud, and ask
Would you rather go to the State Prison, Rose?

Just curious.  She stood like a lamb, still, dumb.
She thought of the cart. No. I had rather be hung.

Natives cut hemp, tore and hackled it by hand,
baled fiber, shipped it to Tubbs Cordage factory
where men still shake out tangles, dirt and sand,
and feed hemp to successive combing machines
until it pours as water from a hose.
Slivers spin clockwise into yarn, then double
back in strands, reverse again to rope,
so all good rope is absolutely neutral.

San Quentin’s warden sent the sheriff heights, 
weights, two good ropes, a schedule. Grease the line 
with mutton tallow; put the knot behind
his left ear. After Sanchez was hanged, cut down,
he came to life on the ground: breathing, but not
conscious.  They carried him back up to the drop.

In the paper the women were weeping.  Pixelled tear
stained women, stunned outside the prison in Starke.

Hill bought a shotgun, practiced shooting near 
the Pensacola Ladies Center, parked
and waited, shot and killed, reloaded, killed
again.  He put the gun down, met the cops, 
his face down on the asphalt, very still.

The women in the paper wept when the shot
of sodium pentothal stopped his beating heart.
They held each other up, or knelt to pray.
They cried that Florida made Paul Hill a martyr
and the Bible justifies his work, his way
to rescue babies: Whosoever sheds
the blood of man, by man shall his blood be shed.

A measuring stick with its ‘either’ and ‘or’
weighted to balance perfectly
from the midpoint of a head

I want to toss it in crazy loops (throwing like a girl);
shoot it off, one end first, then the other;
float it (if it will) to see how it takes
our water, falls, and waves;
flip it over, make it float back-side up . . .
(How does it balance now?)
I want to twirl it until it’s a lopsided circle, 
twirl at all angles — a sphere
of sorts — as I run around doing whatever
 I do, not trying to be careful.
Maybe then, Mr. Aristotle,
logic will measure this world’s
givens, therefores and takens instead —
not just the flat place in a head.

who do you play with now
  you with your toy tonsils appendixes legs breasts

Hitler’s 
kaput
  who used the salute to collect for you
  tapping toes to Tristan      one       million        two         million          three
                                                                          Christ

he’s kaput too

oh your men are all watersmooth handsome
  believable collectible breakablejustlikethat
                                    but what I want to know is 

how do you like your blueeyed cancers 
                                               your viruses

Mister Death
they won’t die for you will they


I remember his science fiction books all over the back room sanctuary.
I remember looking around to show him something I’d made.
I remember country songs, CB radios, “breaker breaker one-nine.”
I remember military marches, the World at War, words like “honor” and “countrymen.”
I remember his barrel-chested torso, a nylon Teamsters jacket, Local 676, “Mike” stitched into it.
I remember when I got to drive his truck into the dock, his shift over—I was 13 and it was the thrill of my life.
I remember the belt, how he let me snap it, make a loud noise.
I remember him saying that it made sense I got straight A’s since I was from “good stock.”
I remember the game where we punched each other’s arms until I’d say stop.
I remember how his eagle tattoo flapped its wings.
I remember he said “show me a man who doesn’t eat pussy and I’ll take his wife away.”
I remember I didn’t understand at all what that meant.
I remember wanting to go to Annapolis because it was the navy and he was in the navy.
I remember him shirtless and hairy, scaring kids on the beach.
I remember guns in the cellar, potato wine, Soldier of Fortune magazines, saying “I’ll be ready when the revolution comes.”
I remember his Hitler fascinations, KKK biographies, eugenic rationales.
I remember being sad for him, how he seemed to hate everyone.
I remember not telling him I was an altar boy.
I remember taking trombone lessons because I saw a picture of him playing one.
I remember he told me to not stop fighting until the other guy died.
I remember lay-offs, unemployment checks, blaming the blacks who took his job.
I remember looking at pictures from one of his books, Sex and Society in Nazi Germany, blurred pictures of women with swastikas and their breasts hanging out, as some of the first erotic pictures I’d ever seen.
I remember when he finally told me he’d spent a year in jail when he was 17 for blowing up a Mexican’s car.
I remember when he finally told me how he’d broken his nose—in the navy after calling another sailor a “nigger.”
I remember thinking he deserved it.
I remember our last conversation, the clink of his whiskey on ice.
I remember I’d just said I met the woman I was going to marry, and he asked “what ethnicity is she?”
I remember I said Jewish and Irish and he was upset.
I remember it was New Year’s morning, 1995, I’d taken mushrooms the night before, the sun had just come up, and I realized he wasn’t kidding about all this.
I remember mom sitting us down, telling us what he’d done, and how he had to leave.
I remember going back to my room with headphones on, blasting heavy metal music.
I remember “perpetuate the race.”
I remember Boys from Brazil.
I remember telling him to “get a job,” and how he punched me to the ground.
I remember when he stopped reading—no more Asimov, Blavatsky, Descartes, Bertrand Russell, no more cogito ergo sum—“I can’t see the point anymore,” he said.
I remember thinking on my 28th birthday, “This is the age when he started to go crazy.”
I remember when I first saw my naked body as looking like his in the mirror.
I remember thinking, right then and there, that if I have a son, he’ll never meet him.
I remember driving into Camden, NJ to apply for welfare—Mickle Street, where Walt Whitman died.
I remember he said, pointing out the car, “if things don’t get better we’ll have to live here with all these people.”
I remember another game: Two fists in front of me—pick one, left or right—“six months in the hospital” or “sudden death.”
I remember laughing, wanting to play again.
I remember when my sister told me he put all his things in a trailer and moved out to the desert.
I remember I wasn’t surprised.
I remember that he let me listen to George Carlin but not Richard Pryor.
I remember he took me to a Nazi memorabilia store and had me try on an old Nazi uniform.
I remember I looked at myself in the mirror and thought I looked handsome.
I remember how he didn’t want me go to college, but I did, and he said, “Good luck.”
I remember thinking I should just drop out of high school, work at the car wash.
I remember thinking I was an All-American Boy.
I remember thinking I should march when I walked.

I had a mild, bloody birth, and I don’t go outdoors each morning. 
I don’t wait to glow in photos in which I fail to appear.  
The work I do isn’t attractive and my career isn’t where you come from. 
I can’t just hang out and carve notes to strange men. 
But I keep staring up at these men who are taller than me.  
Like I did something wrong in the first place.  
There’s a certain type of tall man who has nothing to do.  
They love to be talked to in worshipful ways. 
They love the grammar of my worship and they love to scratch their beards.  
This logic isn’t connected to my symbolic suggestion. 
Now I know I am a man, a man who knows he will never glow. 
My hand is a hand that says two hours left. 
I won’t stay under trees outside for any man.

The light is oceanic green, and makes hexagonic  
light on the platform, with claws and gewgaws of light.  

Each side of the monolith forms a point,  
and when the moon shines coldly  

from the cowl of space (a bell, liquid, as sound expands  
and gets thicker in the sea).

Now a sea song
[Amazing Grace, traditional]:

Descending like a cork on her waves
Floating on her water wall?

Although the darkness made us slaves
To the moon’s arresting call.

I could not break from its cold grasp
So bound our paths would be

Each drifting sound her liquid bell
Made us the whale-dense sea.

Each bottle fell to the sailors’ bones;
A house on the oceans’ floor

And inside her bricks which opened there
I saw a rising velvet door.

A grove of spikes: When the Quaker hunter  
espoused nonviolence, and stuffed his musket,

sharpened his hook, with its long sisal  
and hemp rope, into a puffing heart

bigger than an oat-fed baby, he turned  
in the dewlight like a battering ram.

True intoxication gurgled up in a thermos  
of adventure. They’d go out from Massachusetts for years.  

They were looking,  
but their prey were listening.

A sperm whale’s ear is bigger  
than a fist and it hears twofold noises:  

the telescopic part hears squawks.  
The enlarging cathedral part  

hears echolocation.
Squawk—related to the whortleberry.  

Correction...a hoarse squall, never from a horse.
Sometimes known as night heron, with a creak,  

a screech, a ghost eating caviar.
Utter like a public-address system,  

like a bimaculated duck, with windup gears.
Next to the inflatable balloons, there’s the echolocation.

(See under: bat versus manmade devices)  
Radio signals sent and reflected back,  

from the altimeter to the moth. (See under:  
torpedo guidance, silent films, Buster Keaton doing marimba)

Concealed in space: Spermaceti whale males  
dive 3,936 feet. Females dive to at least 3,280 feet.  

They dive for over an hour.  Squid beaks are inside
the stomachs. Picture a gray rose bigger  

than a transcendentalist’s room up in the eaves, like a matrix  
echoing its math-maze of osmotics.

Dr. Johnson, in the 1755 Dictionary:
A network is any thing reticulated or decussated,  

at equal distances, with interstices  
between the intersections.  

That’s why the image of wooden networks
banging a reggae less a private ventricle

than sound immemorial to the order of air,
is a membrane gliding like soapstone  

to bodies minced has sixty times’ air’s
intensity! And it’s all underwater: a blue ghost  

sucking the fieldfare of smoke: Blueaproned, bluetrampled, bluemantled,  
and blueglimmering home.

Jaw bones in an arch: When the whales eat,  
they eat in a herd’s harem, a solitary bull	

joins a school of 10-40 adult females  
plus their calves, the length of a breeding season.  

But the big squid are smoothed red  
lengthwise-jettisoned like a jet,  

which, wholly isolated in dark, has pink saucers  
and terraqueous chitin, but don’t bite  

the minute semitransparent threshing of flesh
mounting the portico of its mouth inside her mouth.  

Sperm whale uses his head’s oily buoyancy  
with his bloodflow, turning the oil to wax  

to a snowy chamber  
convulsing dried blurred ink, extracting air between globules.  

When I die I want to feel like jumping  
through the keyhole in your door—

nitrogen narcosis—and be sent in a single infatuation  
to the sea. Because I have my own “transidiomatic affinities.”

The female leads herself into dark  
realities of whale moments, intermitting between  

her occupation of calf-care, in the Sargasso’s alcove,  
fastening her hearing

to the echoes’ vault. The male hears it  
and resurfaces,  

saturated with squid-ink, refusing the evidence  
of tiny holy eyes,  

melting clerical burnished flames,  
at the rim of each echo.

Savage disorder when we enter nature:  
The gate creaks among the weeds,  

we forget why we’ve come to begin with  
and with a downward glance the muscles  

in our necks tighten as if a blood-red ribbon  
has been tied to the oaken door.

It is a door which restricts entry—
interior predetermination—and eyes

the mass of the next room,  
where the speechless, unspeakable

echoes rest, in the vast, interspaced code.
[Reprise. Amazing Grace coda]:

The sonic waves from a mother whale  
Travel through the oceans’ space

Each darkening sound of metallic hail
Receives amazing grace.

Light: skin’s desert fragment torn
like a dime, where there’s a fist

where skin is a whisper, whenever  
the moon makes its dim

sink in the lake’s basin: a train’s  
stiff haul in the night.

Light: lemon pinwheel, when the rind  
waxes a flittery forced timesheet

that’s torn then punched, making a cannon
filled with iron pill

when it’s swallowed they fly  
like a yellow eel and smoke rings it.

Soap: removing its surface from itself,  
with bubbles like a cauldron,

the air moves away from it
in spheres composed of a shine

driven in fabric swirling like a window  
approaches to a jump, and bursts.

Soap: not a filth magnet, to get through,  
like a cupboard’s color,

reversing its convulsive prefabricated texture,  
this brick closes around its pores  

with its wire stairs and brushes.
Perfume: even though we live in an amber-solid whorl,  

we breathe that floating mechanism  
by which amber unlocks its petals

and fauna, dancing as a tinge  
upon the resin in its document.

Perfume: a coloratura askew like a cascade
within a spotlight makes impending change when she is rubbed:  

notably electric, along the Baltic shores,  
entombed in aloe-wood.

All its life, a river mimics the sea,  
the one with the upturned moonrise,

and is an instrument calling washable smells,  
and light, and clean bricks pouring velvet  

incapable of trembling. 
Head: beyond the blanket scaffolding

is the massive pulpy anvil. Etched in barnacles  
is the steam engine script from an ancient language,  

Macrocephalus of the Long Words,
which is its name.  

Used for light, soap, and perfume,  
its oil moves like foam.

Head: a cathedral, I have said, and a pulpy ghost,  
white as a stiletto, and within its coils

are energies which harden, and glitter and palpitate.  
In lampshade lace and photographic liquid,  

its group song  
pleats tiger trim, swell satin, pink ash,  

feathery chenille surround, and felt velvet 
and it eases as the water table tilts, dimensional.

Humped herds of buffalo by tens of thousands:  
Whales are superior to us.  

They emit their undersea and trans-watery signals  
with their thoughts

larger than a bus, which is like communicating
through telepathy.

Evil walking at midnight: a low, harboring call  
meaning to get away from a ship.

Bell shines like: a hull painted green...well,  
don’t hang around. Don’t want you hanging around.

Ice sled sinking: I take the waves by the reins
and am an accident waiting to happen, when my weight follows.

Scooping the clam: our troubles are over
when dry land tempts with its crow call.

Introspective strum: Whales are superior  
to us. They move in darkness,  

and in its blanket of cold
their head wax hardens and liquifies

like the manufacture of pianos, with 18 rock-hard
inner and outer maple rims pressed and wrestled  

with amplified soundboard into a shapely dome.
In the open sea, there is sound.

The complex motions of whale wax
within the globules in the whale head

transmit and surround the front and back
as a soundboard in space, and move through water

like a grave carved from the graphite drums
registered within our ears, of pillbox size or smaller.

But the superior whale ear, ensconced in bony
auditory bulla and connected with tissue-drawn

sound to the jawbone and its cavalcade to the brain
larger than everyone we love.

Its immense, curling organ is the drum itself?
massive tympanic bone, cradling the instructive twofold

inner ossicles called malleus and incus.
Like the instrumentalist’s revolving vane

their involucrum opens with satisfactory vibrato, with its spinning
motor ascending from f like a yarn-wound yawn,

it is sustained and heard. If a boat is in front of this sound
it will crack, disperse, and become an only orphan in the dark.

It is not well known how boat-barnacle-stripping chemicals
cause deafness in our whales, when they do not receive

echoes, as in the blue-black caverns of their planet,
and beach themselves. When the fatty enormous structure

washed onto Chilean sands, it was an unknown organ,
though its skin no longer covered the great tympani  

and drumrolls of that oratorio many miles down.
If something from our disregard for their planet

disrupts their elastic ligament and synostosis,
they are deaf hulls and the air-filled rotational axis

is unplugged, the stage goes blank, the cellulose
in the film bubbles and burns.

Music encoded in perforations:  
In the lacquered, electroplated positives

known as the “mother,” of early grooved masters,
there are limited numbers of discs that can be made.

The stamper wears out. The pressing breaks  
into a shard.

What is more beautiful than mammals who remain
at the origin of humanity, beneath the waves,

beneath the normal levels which subside and surface
over moving ridges and troughs, between one  

and the next as undulation, livelier than breath?
Where should we go on the convex of land,

between the hollows, where the rounded snow
of water reduces itself from the wind’s action,

and we’re alone beside the leviathan, as phenomenon?
Under the cyma or ogee molding of the great arch,

not of whalebone or cathedral carving,  
but the universal, zigzag ornament of waves?

These are the rhythmic alternations of disturbance
and recovery, like sound, like light, like perfume,

with particles transmitted like messages in the air.
Along the nerve we move restlessly.

1. The Body-Object

The object is this body
that envelops and subjugates,
common noun
transporting allegories.

The body is this object,
necessary adjective
stranger and less our own
than the least of our dreams.

This body—object
that’s neither mine, nor yours, 
nor death’s, nor any
other possessive pronoun’s.

The earth’s. It’s hers. The earth
which receives us warm,
open, and willing.
The earth’s and its elements.

This object is the earth’s,
the earth that eats you,
body and life (are they the same?),
fruit and life (your seeds).

And finally, whatever it may be,
this peel wrapped around us:
thing, earth, or grammar
contemptuous of the metaphysical,

the body is a peroration
from father to son (or to mother)
and the soul—the soul 
has nothing to do with it,

nothing but its location.



2. The House


The house is like the body:
brick is the cell
under the stucco,

a temporary shelter 
of blood, sand, and whitewash,

that in the beginning 
lived in water
and grew paws 
until it made itself real,

its secret places
infringed-upon,
its rooms undressed
and bolted by shame,

an object derived
from a joint effort 
that plants itself (in Space)
then blossoms (in Time),

and when it blossoms, 
it gives birth 
to Light and Beauty (curtains and flowers).



3. The Building


Body, house, building
they look like brothers
in Height, Shape, and Fear
and in being solitary. Solitary objects.

I see a construction
glittering enormous
and I tremble down to my 
foundation and moral fibers.

There, that which corrupts men:
	bed and table,
	bread and woman,
	love and the roof
	that protects us
                   —superimposed.
There, the laces and the pajama.

			There
	the “What do I owe?” and to whom.

			There
	the clipper and the lock 
	of hair on the floor.

			There
	the naked body,
	as if we’re in a doctor’s office.

The wool. The bullet. The irony.
The window. The cement. The betrayal.
The X-woman. The radius and circumference 
of the other. The way to the top

and the way of falling

into yourself, into the earth
		and on top of your brothers.

There
	the construction—
		a crude invention
		a cube of loneliness.



4. The Room


Through the door, I reach the room
of visits and feasts,
of deaths 
and long-winded ashtrays.

Curtains
		that take flight

g  l  a  s  s

surrounds grazing tables and
carpet-pastures.

On the sofa, apple-shaped
hips are sitting comfortably,
ankles woven in nylon
are balancing.

Enter through here, 
eat, and leave. Enter
the same way you leave 

and discussion 
isn’t always polite.

There the stereo—singing—
its wires and crystals
running needles over the eardrums
inside hi-fi grooves.

From this box, 
trills in 3-D.

—Like some cake? I’ll get it for you.
—Like some whiskey? I’ll bring it.

There your eyes fix on 
the curved video image,
arriving at a laugh
through familiar channels.

Who knows how they get in
with their ads and flashes
their cowboys and thousand theaters.

Here you spend the evening

on your favorite chair
until the image wipes itself out,

or sleep wipes out everything. 




5. The Table


I went to harvest you from the Vegetable
I went to mine you from the Mineral
and I put you back together as an animal
who, now naked, completes the room.

Tablet profound and blank 
	where I’m reborn,
	where my fists
	where my forks
and my ancestors in me
reflect on your varnish 
the same scar.

Slave shoulders, flat thirst,
how you lower yourself 

to the circle of hunger

			of friendships and chairs
			and well-turned legs

			where rounded restless hips 
			seat themselves sumptuously.

	Made well or made badly
the plane that made you
	chipped out of the ground
the bread of the man 
	that made you. 

PEACE!


	people shout somewhere over the table

			WAR!

	people shouted over the table before:
			flat kingdom
	 		sculpted in marble
			map
			hippodrome of passing beasts.
			
Above you I bend my flesh,
		my crystal,
		dry fists,
		coins, cathedrals
and staring 
I discover in your varnish
		the weight
		the image
		the scar
of this my body
that today is alive and contemplates you
and that tomorrow
	you’ll be holding up flickering in the candlelight.



6. The Telephone


Doubled over
the black trunk,
ear and mouth
inverted over
glass or varnish
                            —you rest
black object
acquired
at great cost
                            —you rest
corpse rounded
at four corners,
open fork
that feeds the mouth

                            —over
glass or varnish.

The clearest tinkling
bell of distances,

you transmit
plea and shout 
mineral and organic. 

Dull,
the hand that picks you up:
volatile indicator
perfumed nail polish.

You know how
to raise from the linens
the naked body. Suddenly
the Other possesses you 
and the door slams.

You receive
smile and spittle
without protest,
grave promises
in loving tones.

Annoying and stingy,
why don’t you offer your opinion?

You’re just a dark spot,
cold and motionless
                             over
glass or varnish.

They use you (I know)
because you don’t distort
—your speech is frozen.



7. The Refrigerator 


White and rounded
on the kitchen tiles,
near the table
with so many feet.

Wire after wire.
Indoors.

Petrified water
turned white
alaskan or siberian
“creamagulated.”

Inside:
unripened fruit harvested 
from a flowering field

a dozen of white,
oval things inside a shell,
with a yolk inside the clear,

with white 
drawn from tits
still warm between the paws,

dish after dish
holding lunch,
beer and relief
pouring out.

—Does So-and-So have? 
why don’t we have?

at the cost of
in spite of
thanks to

Before the visit, 
the white 
rears up.

Pull the handle, 
the white 
mouth gapes:

beside, above,
under, over,
with, beyond

Looking for some pretext
(to the heat, to summer)
I make a poem
with prepositions.



10. W.C.


You are the end

              of house
              of man
              of poem

              the ultimate remnant
              of the ultimate remnant.

Seated

              in the rounded white nook 
              of the commodious
              accommodation

You wait

              incommodious
              intestine

You receive

              mute, naked
              the integral verb
              (aquatic mouth
              gaping)

Humiliated

              more than humiliating
              you’re the general separator
              of good and evil
              pushbutton or chain
              rooommm rooommm blog blog
              blong rooaingg
              rooommmrooommm chainngg
              language
              blank
              again.

There is a guest in my reclining chair.
He is made of bricks, acid trickling
between them like blood.  At first
I was deafened by his silence,
then it began to make sense, tenor
bees sorting themselves from the drone,
I could use the words I was hearing.
He pushed me around with long white arms
that grew in all directions, taunting,
telling me I must become nothing
to love him, then hating me for being
nothing, trying to slap it out of me
like the last penny rattling in a jar
of change.  I hit back, until he
shattered in a thousand crumbs,
stale loaf.  No more cryptic stories
mummified in his nibbling mouth.
I stood up to leave, summers ago,
in a different room.  Wrinkles seeped
from the bed sheets.  He was on
the phone to a distant country.
I dealt him a hand of cards, and afterwards,
couldn’t speak even the simplest phrases.
He’d become my slave, in the dust
at my feet, I had to kill many people
to keep his attention.  The house was
no longer mine, no house was mine,
and in the chaos after the earthquakes
I saw him wandering, churchless, child-
less, and everything I needed he gave me
until there was nothing left in the world
but a few rocks, lakes.

It’s the first
hour of evening
and we’re flying

towards California
again, and the promise
that awaits us there.

Say something here,
as the cities switch
on beneath us,

about the myths of the West,
and how everyone
will loll in the orange

groves, unchanging.
But who could stomach
that stasis? Unfairly,

the darkness grows.
The reading lamps
come on, in clusters.

They’re like little cities
themselves, containing
multitudes: how

the plot changes
from glow to glow,
the motives mix;

the messy synthesis—
watch it cover
the whole half-world,

the lands we seek,
and the lands we’ve left
behind for good.

And now this new state
we’re in—is it one
of unknowing?

Or California, again?
There’s a ding,
and the reading lights go out

as we start our descent.
For the whole flight, we’ve all 
faced straight forward,

though none of us could see
what lay ahead,
nor, if we turned around,

the contrails stretched out 
for many miles behind us
like a rumor of lodes of gold.

Tell us, southern-
seeking birds, why wait
for frozen rain

to seize the weather-
maps—keep all
of North America shut in,

slipped or slipping
still, against these stultifying
walls? Better to head

north ourselves,
find there
those empty quarters

of creation still left to us.
To ensure survival
we’ll have to understudy

in the frosted fields,
apprentice to the semi-
silent woods. It’ll be just like

childhood’s first blast
of sneaky, freezing
wind, or that first time

you enjoyed being alone,
learning what it takes
to thrive: a will

like a winter
leaf—evergreen,
or not at all—

  Working past midnight
he touches the desk lamp bulb with a thumb
absentmindedly, again and again.  Documents
blossom like moonflowers, heady with fresh ink.
             His back to the window
a storm of tiny wings hits the glass: 
the night is leaving fingerprints.

I’ve put down a chair
where there wasn’t one
& then welcome more distance

starlings suffocate my call
so all you’ll know of any snow
will come to you from the sky

for the next world bring only your back
or anything that you’ve stolen
& breathed into w/night

a vulture chick’s circles
its throat all aflame
& its heart filled with hunger

I think back to my mother
her winter boots capsized w/blood
& my tiny fists lit from within

what will the wind have to say
of the new grass & calm?
what does any past want w/recovery?

I’m glad it is you & not the hornets again
somewhere I hope they pay
good money for these tricks

Taut and unyielding (but a little, a little) the gristle-
creak, wings swelled,

		           an arch of muscle and bone spread
(but a little) wider and still (a little) wider, until

what beneath, what lying-in
your shadow, is—

an occasion for soul or spirit or stay. 

How we want 
	           and then become, so easily and without blame, without knowing even, 
what we want—juncture between two bodies, whorls of a gastropod shell,

joint or line articulated, we remain seam-like, threading our way
toward stitch.

Casings clink underfoot like tiny bells.
They are everywhere. 
To think something so hollow could kill a person without a guess. 

We shout into the wind. It is bitter. It passes through us and our voices 
don’t make it very far. There is no mercy here.

There are no seats except to level your gun sights. They have been frozen for weeks.
The whole of the valley spreads itself out for us 
like a girl, 
her arms gangly, nipples hard as ice 
and bright in the distance.

Cars on the highway don’t know that we can stop them with our bodies. 

This year has grown long faced and I sit with my keys that forget 
where they could be useful. 
Or maybe I forget how to use them, but there are no locks. 
There is only the warm belly of the car that brought us here. 

Cardboard cut-outs step into the breeze and fall away. 
As drunk as we are, 
it’s easy to put a hole in their hearts. 

So here we say our goodbyes to a year. There is so much 
not to remember.

The horoscope says there is peace in my heart tomorrow. Now it is an empty bottle, pieces
of other people’s lives stuck to the bottom. 
Tomorrow it says I will glow, 
today nothing.

There is no seat for mercy here. 

I keep stepping on bullets that have spent their voices to shout 
across a distance and find some thing to tear through. I keep falling 
down onto these legs. I have stared onto the lights of these towns 
in a brisk sweep of fog, thrown rocks at the power lines:

Listen, there is so much left to forget. This year 
has traveled like a sinking ship. I sit, and no locks open. It’s so easy to shiver.
No end is in sight. Tomorrow will already be glassed.

There’s no seat. No mercy. Some birds fly still in circles 
through the crystal sky. 

Bullet shells remember when their bodies weren’t so hollow. 

This long year divided into hours would never end. It rests 
in an excessively large room peopled 
by disaster,
by birth: 
two brothers who sit at a table and talk quietly. 

Their conversation passes from one end to the other.

Some birds still spread their wings in these freezing winds.
There is no seat, no mercy here. Just shells 
that have wandered too far from the ocean, spent casings that forgot 
what made up their echo.

Listen, 
my heart is not 
	  a circle
circle		   circle
	   circle

Somewhere else a woman wakes,
Stands in her window. A lover 
snores on, dreaming of sheep
who are dreaming of him.
It gets a bit confusing. 
There is a lot of bleating. 
She swallows light with her mouth,
spits out the day’s repetition. 
Its reflection—

like fire in a glass.

Some prayers—when spoken—shatter,
bring torrents of water.
Salt, sweat and spittle hold onto the man
and his pillow. He could be a shepherd,
if only he knew how to wrangle wool
back from his dreams.

He has never been lost outside of a city.

The woman turns, now, to him—
forgetting the other half of the world is asleep.
It is only through knowing the day that she can stand 
there without screaming back the night, 
without falling like strands of thin hair,
out the window 
and onto the rising street.

She whispers to herself,
	
	They are thirsty. Drinking tears.

Gnats swarm in thin black clouds across the burning lawn.

	On his half of the world it is night now.

Her eyes well and dissolve.


The manual instructs: forget 
Icarus & go with Brueghel’s crows. 
As we taxi, the ceiling’s low 
as black hair on the belly of a plow 
horse gone to seed. You pull back, lean 

away & the ground gives up 
its calloused thumb on the strings. 
If lips are the eyes
of the ear, you’re a formula 
for vertigo: body heat, changes
 
in pressure & liquid surrounded 
by liquids. You parrot 
the new science: a quantum bit holds 
an endless field of wheat. 
The glitch, for now: 

contact of any kind 
turns it all to chaff. Think what it means.
Everything we know in a sphere 
of no volume, poles 
at zero & anyone. Another small step

beyond Oresme’s “du ciel & du monde”
or one more ass-first leap
from the evolutionary plane? 
Engine-drone ascends. Acquacheta? 
The gauge shows a mile-thick 

stratus band. In the Opera of Intensio 
& Extensio, wet behind the ears 
& good as blind beyond my nose, 
I’m head-over-heels & you hum a thin 
red line to the false horizon. 



ii

The manual instructs: windshields 
flow to gravity’s center 
& the eye makes a better mirror
to the gauge than a window 
on the world. What if the eye paints 
the mirror & the sky

is a harp of hungry birds? Juno, nude, 
slips into a blue cloud, Pasiphaë’s skin bristles
beneath her cow’s wooden hide. 
What if the eye’s a camera on the corner 
& strips the politics 
of pocket-change down to paper 

lanterns & easy porn? Camelot’s on M Street,
third-rate Lazaretto &, Jesus Christ, 
have you seen what passes 
for rain? Manual instructs: you can touch 
nothing you’ve seen yourself
thru. Wind, shield or liquid? Memory 

or marble? Lips follow Bernini’s ecstatic folds 
& I can’t tell if you want to fly with Teresa 
or dance Ixion’s tresca with an anvil
from a thunder-head. The speed of the rhythm 
spins the gauge. Altimeter reads: 
circle seven, ring three. Centaurs train 

bows on bald crowns & milk-white brows. 
Questions remain. What if a quiet eye boils 
a river of blood? You want to touch
me? You & what army? Want to know whose 
musical chair this is? Ask. Who wove cane 
into hexagons? Who knows how to bend bone over steam?

if   in one turn   tumblers go on around you   
dreams douse themselves in rubia 
tinctoria & move thru walls   both eyes wink & bend 

nickel pins in you   if heat from what’s left 

unlocked all night softens ripe fruit 

in the dark   if an open wrist 
falls into a bed of cochineal shells & the sky’s a bucket
in an empty well   if an arc from the green

stem whets the blade   wait for me with your eyes
cut at the clean edge 
of us   a nose above the inaudible

pull of the pigment pool   there are bodies 

above & below   let the hallway 
fringe itself in chalk & waver thru cracks 

in its plaster hands   let what follows a fugitive

moon search the violet lake we left 
nailed to the wall   here’s wax to protect the Vitruvian red   

here’s a pure hour of your hair 
brushed along the uncertain condition 
of the floor   walk on me   lie 

on me & you can feel it give   I’m grain by grain 
& you’re light from a clean dime that spins 

in a third body of copper air   we’re a window left open

in a storm on the skin   we move against each other 
& leave curves in narrow marble
ways that sharpen the wind   we let in veins

of starlight that turn blood into soft metal 
& bring on a scent of animals 
that bloom in us bright as antimony 

ground into lead with a dash of salt from the sea  
thrown to the wall by a candle   
			
there’s a shadow of huge teeth from this loop 
of string   there’s this keyhole’s worth 
of chrome you left in my ear   a pocket full 

of loose change on the table & a thumb in the pastel 

of an arched back when cymbals touch cinnabar 
in the Villa of the Mysteries 
& the puff-push of your voice on my face 

turns indigo in my eye from nude green 
into a moth of breath burning blue

the sky swings its empty wooden shadow
over the table   a bucket full of shade
over a heaped plate of hearts on the half shell

that night I dreamt I was a piece of ash swept
up by a fire in the high scrub 

of a desert night   flame from a frozen shot of vodka   

I wake up late & alone in a blind pool 
on sun-crushed sheets
the dream’s gone into the eyes of another woman

she’s five tomorrow   & I see it as if from off in far red			
hills   a glow from behind the slope   I taste it begin 

to fall on my upturned face   let the fire roar   

& whatever falls fall like wet ash into white heat   
had by both bent
wrists   a wet noose hoists me   I turn & spin

out of control in the empty up & up 

I say : “I dreamt your daddy’s a burning man”

& I’m thru the drape of a dream & holding on
to what fell on me fell all that night fell 
thru me like an open wing   quick as a candle

swallows a black pearl    it fell on & thru me   whatever it was

				fell like rain was its middle name

God so loved the world—
but we don’t love him back,
maybe don’t even believe 

our fleabitten selves deserve affection
from a flea, let alone the Lord
of Hosts. We scratch and breed
 
like feral cats in a landfill
who know life is garbage
in various stages of decay

and delight in the rat’s raw morsel,
sheltering beneath a ziggurat 
of tires too bald for the cunning

broker of rebuilts and retreads,
as the greasy world waits for rain.

=scalped grass, trepanned soil,  
granite folds, gray, like a bare brain;

a collision of lilacs with lilac anti-matter;

the apple tree null with its perfume  
when everything fogged with mildew.

=a mutter when the backhoe idles, 
mind-devouring decibels when it moves; 

or TNT, as infant apples  
like pebbles = shrapnel; a sudden, public 

subtraction from the backstory
of family life, old stone cellar with its fuse box,

fruit jars, potato bin, cistern.

=an addition, as if we’d buried slaves
or a calf, alive, beneath cement.


This old inn, supposedly haunted, with its drawing room 
Of Victorian brick & brack, its acanthus-leaved plaster, and neat
Half-ring of chairs around the piano would be the perfect
Place for the recital I’ve planned of all my omitted sins.
That’s art, you see, that’s song—not I’ll tell my tale 
As though ’twere none of mine, but its mere mirror’s
Silver lining:  I didn’t do anything (no blame), but desire 
Knows all guilt’s pleasure of saying exactly what I did  
Not.  You see, I studied with the great monologuists, the silent ones 
Whose gestures simply continued behind the scrims 
When the talkies came in, becoming all nuance, a dialogue
Of shadows that more colorful confessions hardly illuminate.
But it was illumination that came to me, in a room
Like this one, a little intimidating, a little too elegant,
A place, in other words, to which I might aspire, and if
I lied right away, sang like a canary, to talk my way in,
Well I was hardly the first false witness to bear and get better
Than I gave, measure for measure: between the bar lines, 
These black flecks of melody a voice might join and join,
Or the mirror of a voice.  That’s art, like I said,
Sprechstimme, that’s song, almost, different from life, and better
And not, and longer.  As long as it is wrong.

Empty, except for a single horse crossing between
The grandstand and the barns, the rider in shorts
And a sweatshirt, the thoroughbred’s lanky pace,
Long lines.  You’d like to think Degas, you’d like
To think what it’s like here in summer, the silks
Of the jockeys, the crowd, straw hats and sun-
Dresses, but it is almost fall, this is practice, not
Perfection, not the sudden break from the pack,
The lengthening beauty of a stride, that long shot
Coming home.  This is what you do in a fallen
World, a controlled trot around the barren enclosure,
Hoofs striking the scarlet of downed maple leaves,
Feeling for a halt in the gait, a muscle’s reluctance,
Injury’s insistence, something to be worked out.
What else was the curse when the garden gate
Closed, but this careful labor to make right what’s
Not and never will be.  Oh, if it is love, it is not
Something nuanced, fine, and selfless (or more
Than the less the self is).  It is the love of a parent,
Desperate, for the wrong child, the one drifting in the wind
Of his own distracted discontent, the one we couldn’t
Save, not exactly, any more than we could ourselves.

The slow horn
makes a tunnel in my sleep,
a tunnel of no-sleep,

then a question:
why that sound in darkness
near dawn, a warning

like the first hint of smoke
as the woods catch fire
in a hazard of twigs,

then the whole woods
lit with alarm?
Or is it a dream

that the day
has already prepared hard weather,
dawn like a black knife?

An elephant moth, devoted to eating, 
a tender of meat, a compulsive, a meek, 
something that should have been smaller.  
Did I do that, or did my body? 

I was an Omitted Child.  I love the law, 
my box, knowing what I should do.
I cannot touch, or swear, or forget my food.
If my mouth opens, something has gone wrong.  
Something has gone very wrong. 

This will all make sense to you.
I was only an Issue, anything more or less 
would have meant love.  My own will, 
for instance, is blank.  Given nothing, 
I am only the thing in the woods searching 
for an adoption, a different statute, or a good kill.

We all go untouched, is a lie.

We think in heavy thoughts, is a lie,

is a bed, is a thing we all need in the heat.

Somewhere the centuries

are building up like a brothel queue. 

No better time to tilt your head back.  

We all know how, is a lie.

The bed, like a gorge, is a lie.

I want to say it’s me, where you are,

what you’re suffering with your hands, is too.

Not a color, but something that happened.

Like the year the bed was shared and you forgot

everything that happened at its edges.

Not shared, but emptied.  Not emptied, but utterly.

I wrote it all down while you slept, and I did not ever.

Not a color, but a reflection of what you’ve done.

Not a mouth, but a place to be hurt and by this I mean:

an adult orphanage.  At best, another if, then.

A thing smeared, and not even that.

I know enough I resist
a padded room I dig
in my heels there is
nothing but the apocryphal to
find in straps and straightjackets

but something else is in 
the heels of my shoes
that’s why they took my
shoes away they left the
laces they tied them end	

to end in a circle 
held it up what’s this
mean to you they asked
to me I asked yeah
you Trainwreck what’s it mean

all the stopping and starting 
wears out the parts I
point out to Patrick a
metal beam holding part of
Gloucester up and rusting and

he withers I walk back
to the car and he’s
already there another time I
was already at the car
when he walked back another

time I’m the only thing
on fire in a room
or the only thing not
in the room the book
he’s reading snapping closed open 

looking over the bomb inventory
looking at the huge list
I heard the strangest music
my eyes were loudspeakers I 
was shivering cold I must’ve

caught a bad fever the
local witch doctor stood my
ankles in a shallow place
in the river and affixed
good examples of a certain

kind of plant to me
in three places chest neck 
and head I shivered I’m
made of molecules he said
over me certain preprogrammed wordsIn wind, the dark leaves bristle.  
He walks through the park, footsteps 
muffled by the damp grass, night air 
cold against his face.  

The stars in their positions glint, 
track him through 
the tall willows, their arms 
dragged down to the dirt.

This late, the place strewn 
with the waste of crushed cigarettes, 
the broken threads of light 
unraveling through the trees, 

he’s come to meet you here 
alone, his hands 
rising like birds out of the shadows, 
flocking to their desolate source again.

This is for the ants, the ancestors, 
the obsolete street car, the crumpled
candy wrapper the street sweeper
misses month after month. We should pause
for the hickory nut rotting in the ditch,
the amputees of Dayton and Fort Wayne,
the widows of the 23rd Airborne Division, 
the shrew left for dead by the pure white cat
outside the office door.

Citizens, let us revere that which does not budge 
from one childhood to the next, 
i.e. the Dairy Bar, her chocolate frappes,
her tawny brick, her many features stoic and eternal 
excepting her inflating prices.

We should mourn the lost book report 
now under a road-stained snow bank, 
the brook trout blasted elsewhere
by a firecracker jammed up its ass,
the plain, heartbreaking failures
of the Carter Administration.

Let us now praise the Squirrel Lady 
and the Butter Queen. Let us cheer
the Austerlitz Volunteer Fire Department’s
annual lobster shoot and barbeque. 
May it arrive soon. Let us commend 
both the peach-blueberry tart and its creator.
Let us celebrate the Little League team
mired in last place, the left fielder
who’s turned his fear into heroism. 
Let us acknowledge the efforts of the oaks
holding the edge of the meadow.

There is no reason not to honor
the bear who tolerates the subdivision,
if occasionally raiding its delights.
The triumph of crabgrass cracking the asphalt.
The before-dinner nap also deserves our respect.

Please pay tribute to the stone fence
forgotten by extinct farmers,
thanklessly dividing beeches from pines,
accreting into the entropy of needles and grubs.

Remember the paper cranes
folded by the thousand each Hiroshima Day.
May their feigned wing-flaps in the hands
of New York children eulogize the clouds,
distribute our molecules, 
dissipate this sting that is history.

Va-va-voom!
Betty’s bathing suit is striped
pink and white  
or is it the jaunt of her hip
that blasts Archie stiff-
limbed into the air, panting? 
No dependable ponytail and
“Who’s the new girl on the beach?”
The sultry mane, the knowing cleft, 
a hint of yes, and Jughead’s hotdog 
shoots from the bun.  Even Reggie 
wheels around because 
Boing! Something about her
gets them sprung. 

So weird, the allure,
I had to double baggy her,
sealing in a hormonal stampede,
all the churn and dust, 
and with extra scotch tape, 
clouds of boy lust.
							 
But then I’d scratch open
and climb past stories  
in my favorite tree, 
where I fingered the pages    
until an unpictured longing
ravished me.

Mark your corners and take the floor
caught in the lobby’s indiglow / finger
prints ghost the glass / the gold door
handle worn / dull like your storm
door when a sun / square slides over the white
Count One and Two and Three and Four
aluminum the shallow / X relief
where diags form / triags where
each edge casts / a shadow / you
thumb the handle the way / you thumb the black
Honor your partner honor your side
button / a reflected torso in both
doors’ windexed glass / when we meet
like this here / in another
hotel we never / know our luck to find
One’s a phantom and ain’t no bride
a single queen / bed or what looks the desk
clerk will give neck / ties loosened /
one room / left with double beds /
we take it / pay / I rub / the grey key card’s
Step to the middle and take his hand
inset / arrow as the clerk prattles on
about the continental
breakfast we will / skip / your hand
brushes my thigh my gut / preps for the drop
You’ve formed an X now allemande
when the elevator / stops loose flutter
like speeding down those hilly
Pennsylvania / roads but mixed
with that inner / itch the a-spot pulsates /
Stand side by side now don’t delay
your eyes burn like bronzed / leaves hall camera
checked / at the door / we do not
rip clothes off or worse cut / straight
to sex but linger / on button on snap
One step behind that’s the tandem way
mirror to each / other as we shimmy
off a sleeve as we unzip
and step from dress / pants no words
whispered in that pause / my lips / list their lone
Turn and face your partner’s eyes
esses again / again across your lips’
soft lines / lines erased by tongue
and teeth / how else to say / this
to pull all those nights into one / distilled
It shouldn’t be hard you’re both the same size
image / charcoal / framed print above the bed
line edge smeared a hint / of thumb
print / lines within lines shaded
blended all to suggest a pear / sitting
Let’s play arky rotate the square
in a bowl half / there half not upper side
one with the white / paper where
the light hits / it from sources
outside the frame pear / in bowl suggested
The belles turn beaus and the beaus don’t care
like our cradled bodies streaks / breaking flesh
breaking / open flesh’s edge
our edges diffuse / scumbled /
a smudged fit beneath this hotel / room print
Smudge those angles with a docey-doe
The square’s now a circle so off you go


Euclid on the Erotic Postulate
I alone I alone I alone saw
I a lone letter break into three lines :
Definition Eleven expanded
to transform the letter T from two lines
to three : one perpendicular connects
two parallels bisects two to form four
the subtended angles equal the parts
and wholes greater than both part and whole six
lines broken recombined the multitudes
of I the lone I I alone. I ask
you what postulate would one need to turn
One into I to turn I into You
an i into a u One into Two.
If One and You are both I’s what do two
I’s equal. We? Yet how to get from One
to Two without the word Sum. Deflate One’s
start to form Two’s end. Flip One’s middle, add
a peak. Straighten One’s end arc slide its bar
through itself : One become Two. I call it
the erotic postulate a lone proof :
not parallel or perpendicular
to the order-dis-order border : more
than just intersection that single point.
It grants a wide straddling a long split
flexible across infinite line length
and what that length contains : solid broken
dotted dashed : every reclining obtuse
angle each sharp gut blow acute degrees
parade of shapes as they rise off spectrum
take form and break down to the zero point
only to build up in variation :
cube turned sphere turned cylinder turned torus
strings morphed into membranes regular waves
of irregular pattern emergence
of refined chaos. There is no royal
road to geometry. There is no God
but in things like I and You One and Two.

I wash the anointed cutlery again and again.

I wash the blades and also
the prefiguration of the blood.

I wash the transformations of the wound.

The sand, the sand.  Oh love, the sea, a pair of forearms.

I wash the almond eye of sexual desire
and the festival’s whirling music
with a rag of noise.

I wash a foot, a hand.

The sea, the sea, brimming with images.
Oh, the wind, its fierce undulations.

I wash the end and the beginning,
time and eternity.

I wash the bull’s muscles
and its heroic shadow oozing out.

I wash the body of love with the immaculate water of suffering

and likewise wash the faces
with the lustrous blessing of wisdom.

at home, at night, the train horn
amplified by darkness 
the same chord, now, then again

as if vanishing were simultaneous with
embodiment

and lament a form of praise

which is to stand inside hunger and 
abandon oneself there 

to be already there, 
watching the flame burn down 

or I could set out everywhere
pitchers, pans, baskets, to catch the rain

I want so badly
to be humble before something,

but I am humble
before nothing.

Want to look into the sun
so long it reveals the thousand faces,

bellowing echo of chorus-voice
singing see me and live in awe.

But nothing—like throwing a brick
into a lake, no skipping, just falling—

dizzy from the sun, closing my eyes,
a burn-hole in sight—

the sad realization of hollowed out sky,
and friends, I am here to tell you:

There’s a pocket in space,
the abscess of a rotten tooth—

and here’s the bad news—
we’re hurtling toward it.

Nail your feet to the earth
and feel the hot wind of its momentum.

Of course, it’s not worth it,
but I’ll recite a prayer—

when we hit that black hole,
let us race through, a comet on the other side—

from a light year distance, 
a white astral lint string

to the eyes of warm, welcoming
selves from another universe.

At the pond just beyond
the radius of the park,

fog rests on the water surface,
too heavy for evaporation,

and a boy, small boy seated,
legs crossed beneath him,

no adults anywhere near,
no one resembling a parent—

watches a locust sail
the silk face of a lily pad,

he is entirely new, no past—
in a past life,

a small tree, wind, or candle flame—
now here, eyes like earthglobes

staring at me, my minute
a year to him,

the tear from my eye
a drowned lake.

A trumpet has two horses: 
I-can’t-go-on & I-must-go-on, 
Or I knew nothing 
About his pain and the pain it caused. 
Or I was weak, I was bold, 
I was born here but I went away 
Like a foreigner among intellectuals.
Or I was dead, 
But standing feet from the grave,
I felt sorry and happy.  
What’s inevitable and what we can still change.	
A whinny, a neigh. 
Or the heart’s dull thump 
Thumping on its way.   

Like a fowl’s blame this palsy ghost.
And of its cock-heart decayed.
It picks its luck from worms.  
The little lassos in their oozy, woozy brains,  
the indefatigable brains
crying out as if in a parody of song.
What it tries to do and can’t.
What it wants to be and what it can.
To be made whole.
To be made a man 
Strong, and from a caryatid dark. From its shark pale 
the albescent eyes 
nothing but a rumor
of what has been borrowed from Adam — 
that first philosopher, 
that name philosopher.     
A king of figs. A king of fibs. On this eve 
Of making twigs from a tree
On a white fire, this violence.
For this ghost had been beheaded.
Its feathers sewn from envy.

A hand moves like a metronome’s music-in-a-box. Fluorescents
hum, headworks drum, handwork piles while clocks run down, mouse lines
run out, but both you and barometers sit still. That squeaking’s no creature cry;
it’s wipers clearing your view (streak-and-rain, streak-and-rain) till you’re hypnotized
and synchronized: no speed ahead, no curves, no shifts. Pop
goes the sky clutch. But no wheels spin. You’re in! — in a god-awful flash of life
in neutral.
Well, blink your eyes. You can’t stand time saved for long. Squint. Show the young tiny things:
pretty leaves shining out and up, lifted beaks, little tasks (little proud things). Count them: Spin.
Dye. Weave, loop around, look sharp, run and stitch running stitch, stitch a run. Work over
rumpled guilt skin. Swaddle it. Bunt it. Face here and there, interface, bind,
snip, tuck, tack, blind stitch — then finally, stitch blind. Fine. Your work’ll pile high.
But you were a needler of proud needlers. Now they might as well cover your face.
Your needle’s stuck.
A girl gazed up at her father and wrote down in her diary:
Life is very tall man.
He wants tiny stitches to cover him.
These will take all my days.

I trembled upon the sinks of the void,
the washing away.
My identity flowered beside a wheelbarrow my father
						                                  drew.
Stones had their names,
I had mine and was equally secretive.
Houses glistened and gave no clue to invisible natures
which might stand them up
when our backs were turned.
No choirs sang out of clouds at high noon.
The void was an absolute bore.
It was grizzled by gravity,
held a flower between its teeth but would not bite.
Yet identity,
she was my maiden at night sneaking through unlocked
						                                  doors.
Awake, I awaited her coming.
She crept into my bed,
her breath like the things she ate, the small things,
the dates and the earth inside,
the fingers.

Not to love the simple sun
but the classification of all suns
and the alert, hand-given, the alert of rats,
given to me by my brother.
His nightly hands constellated in the air,
my brother the keeper of signs.
At his hospital they are always awake
watching the stars fade one by one,
enormously decorative stars—they fade!
And rolling over in his bed
my brother, the thought, my brother
asks if I will remember them;



what?



The stars infinitely going.
Their terraces bombed.
Who will sing of them when all is finished?
Who will carve them into black snow?

I feed the ants before I poison them. 

I wrap my grief in tinsel and call the funeral director 

Sugarbeets. I want to spoon her in two. One for now, 

one for never. Does it matter who D-I-E-D?  

After the service, there’s sex and crackers and crushed 

fruit.  Her father snapped black and whites

of all the lilies in the room. Graveside, we shoe-gazed 

and eavesdropped—Palm-sized birds and the threat

of afternoon rain. Touch me now, she said, 

I’ll freckle and tear.

The boy flies downhill like a bolt,
a thunder flapping in his spokes,

while bits of shattered stormlight hiss
and frizzle in the grass. Above,

a cloud-cliff slams the tropopause. 
He brakes his Sting-Ray as the dark

head overtops the trees. Just stop,
he thinks, Just stop, just stop, just stop

—he wishes floods would wash away
his house, his neighborhood, would scrub

him clean as bone—a dove’s bone, or 
a crow’s. He’d be his own, at last, 

the thunderhead blown green above 
the plunging trees. But now some shine 

among the lilacs drives him, trembling, 
through the kitchen screen. His mom 

is slicing onions near the sink.
He tries to find her eyes—he wants

to see it there, that shine, but she’s
a massing cloud, electrical,

a stormhead building to its peak.
It doesn’t matter, really, who

they are. They both are part. He gives,
except for fear. Same flesh, same cells,

she wants the boy to be her. No,
or yes—he doesn’t understand

the question. She is so unhappy.
Whatever dad is not, he is.

That doesn’t make it right. The knife
raps board, relentless, in his mom’s

right hand, the onions’ clear blood runs, 
the dark head blows its load of vowels,

squalling over fences, hedges, 
courts and fields, scouring, but it’s not 

enough. Some trace remains to turn 
himself against himself, as though 

he’d failed her. Lightning arcs from her
to him—the boy smells ozone, singe, 

the funk of pitch. To death, a pine 
will bear the hollow where its heart-

wood’s fried. How lightning serves its tree.I woke up to the sound of the peacock screaming. 
It was early morning, but not yet light out, so its cry, 
which sounds like a child’s lonely call, was alarming—
even for the city, and even though I know it lives here, 
guarding the children’s garden with its distressing voice 
and cumbersome tail. I was asleep and dreaming about
a place I had gone as a child—a lake with amber-colored
water in which our dog liked to swim. His nose—the breath
coming through his nose—made little chirp-like sounds 
when he chased the sticks we threw for him. Despite his
enjoyment, the sounds he made had a fearful tone, which
woke me up—both he and the bird woke me—the combination
of their similar noises spanned the separate realms of being asleep
and being...I almost said alive. Awake. The lake had rough
rocks offshore like shattered islands, and a shallow beach
where we’d washed our hair, bars of soap bobbing 
at our waists. At night, our dog slept soundly because he swam
so much—we all swam; we slept well too: when we were
young, we slept like the dead. Perhaps it was this revelation
that woke me. The bird continued to cry as I tried to retrieve
the dream, if only to see our dog again, now long gone, shaking
on the shore. But nothing was left; all was lost—only water:
black and empty as the hours before daylight.

The dawn comes early here. I rise with her
easily, rested, even though the night
brought armies through my dreams, wave after wave:
the monsoon wind first, tearing the branches loose,
hurling them to the roof, then swooping down
to work the roof itself free from the eaves.
And then the rain, for hours, its thrash and thrum
a raging heartbeat telling me some truth
about the heart, unmeasured, unrestrained—
how frightening it can sound, and comforting
at once. Even the calm that settled in
after the rain loomed like a worried truce
until, before the dawn, two small gray birds
stole the last crumbs of quiet from the sill.
 
None of this has disturbed me. I awaken
to watch fog climb the hillside, angled light
fracture the open doorway, where a string 
of marigolds turns to a string of jewels.
Anywhere else, I’d miss the laughing thrush
calling his mate, ignore the blue-tipped wing
a black bird shed. Here, time slows till the bee
arrests the swerve and dart, coming to rest
on fronds of saffron-spiked crocosmia
to find a long, sure drink. On the same stalk,
a silver drop hangs somehow undisturbed.
I watch for hours. These hills ask for no more
than what they offer: silence, passion, sense,
storm and then quiet, all risked, all set right.

Sargakhet
for my guide
 
You bring me to see the new land. I
will have to manage now myself. There’s been
an accident, a sister, burned. You’ll go
down to the plains to tend to her.
 
Evening. The sun at angles on the paper-
white apple blossoms. The air taking the glow.
An old orchard, too-small trees, overgrown paths.
The pink-scrim twilight. What’s behind it now?
 
Crows swarm, dive-bomb, then land down in the thatch
or perch. You say you haven’t seen them flocked 
like this for months. I want them gone, but you
wonder out loud why people don’t like crows.
 
The sunset takes impossible dimensions
glowing white hot for too long on still clouds
until the silver linings etch on stone.
We leave before the day’s clear light is gone — 
 
down from the ridge, through nettle patches, brush
unclipped, then clipped, down past a cottage where 
smoke curls gauzy threads — the evening meal.
A child escapes. A thin voice pulls her back. 
 
                              *
 
People see signs. Crows, ravens, dark clouds. I
misread the too-bright outlines — like eclipses’
coronas we know to avoid or blind
ourselves, like shattered glass, spilled mercury — 
what seemed to be was not. I should have known.
I’ve seen the dead leave signposts on the sky — 
wrong colors, shadows where the crows have flown.
 
The woman on the path is angry
but I can’t tell at whom, or why.
She speaks, and in your face, the change — 
a page turned in the calendar.
 
                              *
 
                                                Go back.
Should I have seen a sign so many years
ago — when people told me stories? Then,
I wondered, but put the notes away, deleted
what I had written. It was fiction, and
I don’t write fiction — 
                                “In his house
            three sisters wait, invisible and silent — 
            the oldest too ... too everything: too tall,
            too beautiful, too smart, growing too old. ...”
 
or stories of story-ghosts. I should have asked — 
“Your sisters?” — How to phrase it?
                                                     Would you have answered? — 
“There’s nothing to do about it. It just happened.”
 
                              *
 
None of it happened. Meeta was real. She married.
 
Here now — 
                      translating word to spoken word,
your English almost fails, then doesn’t fail 
at all — what other phrase? She is no more.
 
                              *
 
Her husband wants to keep some of the flowers.
He pleads for just a few to carry back,
something he can hold on to. He has lost
so much already in the accident — 
a fire that never will seem just a fire — 
that always will arouse some speculation.
But if they saw him here tonight, they’d know
there’s nothing behind the story. Only this — 
 
a young bride ripe with child, a small, bare kitchen,
a burner on the ground, the fumes, her clothes
draped as if waiting, ever, to ignite — 
No intrigue. She lived long enough to tell.
 
Now, at the river, you must tell him no
for then she will be looking for her bones.      
 
                              *
 
You come back to the hills alone, your voice
like spider silk strung from the darkened branches:
I thought I would be the one to bring her back.
 
I want to say There is still life here, but
instead, I skirt around it, back away.
 
                              *
 
The baby was too beautiful. Eight months — 
so perfect, even the doctor was unmoored.
 
The babies aren’t cremated, only swaddled, 
and taken to the river, to be left — 
 
The image only helps if, at the instant
she touches the surface, gods appear,
unwire our vision so that we can’t see
her lifted to another river, somewhere — 
where Meeta, now incarnate, waits for her.
 
                              *
 
Why does your sister (I met her only once),
haunt me before and since? Was she too real — 
your weeping mother too, two years hence, thin
as death itself (that’s what you said) — her twin — 
(another story) or your father?
                                                  Still
at night, I see the baby girl alone
spun in the river’s eddies — 
                                              I can’t tell
what branches hang above her — 
                                                       or if the crows
are flying towards her or retreating, or waiting — 
or if she’s safe, warm, dry — 
                                               even the moon
isn’t a moon but months of pages turning
until the uncaught soul alights again.

I’ve come to hobbies late
in life and suspect this
will be my last.
In the basement workshop,
perched on a wooden stool, I lean
over the workbench with a sack
of brass dog tags—
smooth ovals like tongues
pierced at either end. I’ve borrowed
the alphabet—each steel letter
backwards on a stem: boutonniere, 
Doric column, lightning rod at attention.
I choose my words 
carefully because space permits so little,
and hammer hard a dozen blows
to force an imprint in the metal:
Apricots, Rosa Rugosa, Eden, Avast,
distilling, myth-making, the way
a scientist in her lonely lab
wades into a microscope
to let the world expand.
It comes down to this:
Sweetie, Beach Plum, Elixir—
the rest of what I ever said—
jury-rigged, glued with conjunction,
tentative, subjunctive, speaking around
the indelible—drifts off
like so many airy gowns.
Upstairs you hear the hammer
pounding and tell me as we lie
again side by side under the patched roof,
under the reeling stars,
that it sounded like someone
bludgeoning her way into or from a room—
you could not decipher which.
The afterimage burned inside my eyelids
is of us with a chisel
and mallet, stammering after the dark.

What I loved about 1970, I couldn’t 
know then: denim bell bottoms, our pet
schnauzer, Psyche, yes, and the elevator
like a slow, brass skeleton at Mrs. Edson’s
Southern School for Ballroom Dance.
I loved that I knew not to touch
the electric fence behind our house
again. I loved the hammock that dipped
like a Cheshire smile between two oaks
and Saturday mornings sorting medical journals
on my father’s office floor, concocting a maze
of depression and psychosis. I loved my guppies
and black mollies except when they lunched
on each other. I loved the willow tree
in Abby Goldsmith’s yard, that she said
49% of it was mine. I loved
that when I hung from a branch too high
and hollered for my father, six
men eventually came running. I loved
the forts built in abandoned lots, the creek bed
dry or nearly brimming. I loved
root beer and sarsaparilla, that I could return
the new shoes resembling corrective Mary Janes.
I loved a different boy every day.
It was 1970, the era of free love,
and I was nine. Olin Shivers,
Einstein’s descendent, Gordon Beckham, future
quarterback and banker, Arthur Gidding,
quiet, blonde, perpetually disappearing.
Love as lazy Susan, so the unrequited nature
of affection in its particulars never smarted
long. And Venus McCamish, with whom I played
Samson and Delilah during the Tom Jones special.
It’s not unusual that I loved her too, and hence, 
I guess, the Bible with its harsh romanticism.
I loved Lot’s wife for looking back,
Adam for pulling up his bootstraps,
and yes, I loved the trash compactor 
in the Sears and Roebuck catalogue, 
its promise to condense 
a week’s refuse into a briefcase.
I loved its potential 
 to disguise our waste,
our taste for excess, predilection to bite
off what could not be swallowed for all
the children starving in Hunan and Timbuktu.
I hated that my mother had forbidden
the investment, insisting that we feel the size
and heft of our desire, that we sense
the awkward weight of plenty and lug
the cumbersome bags of what we couldn’t use
up to the cul-de-sac. I hated that she made
my sisters and me wait by the mailbox
hemmed with liriope, instructed us to thank the man
who leapt like Fred Astaire’s younger, dumpy brother
from the back of the trash truck, to shake
his earnest, leathered, outstretched hand and not forget him.

For a year my little sister
sang everything: directions on how
to tie one’s shoes, correct answers
to algebraic riddles, descriptions
of her favorite meringue, predictions
on which coast would crumble first
into the angry sea. For some reason
my parents put up with this:
the pitched arias of grocery lists,
injustices of school lunches. They let
her warble and chant, yodel, 
croon and scat a cappella, rendering
our home an antic, shifting stage.
The day she bellowed
Ray Finney is dead
in her yellow summer dress
we had to admit her voice
was improving, that her delivery
made Ray’s death a little lighter.
So emboldened, she began singing
obituaries of people we’d never met,
bringing civic leaders and inventors
of tool-and-dye shops into our midst
and in a stroke, killing them off.
I hated her for that and so penned
her obit: singing girl, age 9, found garroted
by older sister. Eventually she grew
out of trilling. Trees stopped speaking
in Portuguese to her. Tadpoles no longer
told her Arctic secrets. It was
the worst death of all, my mother said,
textbook, and without pardon.

We learned swans in origami. 
Hours folding and unfolding 
Sternums. We hunted our beach 
For brighter sea hulls. And found
 
A drowned dog. Pale 
Glyph of dog, washed still, unferal. 
 
Like a hearth extinguished. 
We could see the wind 
In its fur and the water 
A fallow field color.
 
The branches we poked 
At its dorsal blade, touching 
 
The curious there of hereafter.
Whose. How did it arrive.  
It was the year we learned 
To swim. We rose every time 
 
To the sun already west of us 
Like a saint leaving a typhus city.

The bridge’s shadow     lies across the water
rippled and furled by     the river. This is what
we wanted of great     architecture, to see
the massive—the ship     pulled down Broadstreet
in spectacle, conveyed     into the harbor waves—
the massive made light.     Taken down by its 
own weight, a drowning     body becomes a 
cool instrument for     fathoming the deep.
Have learned the spirit     clings to the body,
like strayed mariner     birds on driftwood. 
 
Here is one walking     curled against the drizzle,
he holds a blue cinch     of anonymous 
market flowers. I will     name them gunsparks,    
and judaskisses,     (I’ll not call you John, 
you don’t need a fixed    name anymore.) 
watching him until I      can no longer see him.

Isn’t it strange that the trees behind me only become real when I look at them?
And, that what happens in the trees happens only when I turn around to see them—  
that a leaf skeleton, a pepper moth, the nest of a wood ant
exists in this world, rather than in another?
That the universe is split into two, and that I live in only one part of it.
 
When I talk like this, my husband listens.
When I tell him I worry about what happens when I’m not looking, 
he says, things that you don’t worry about are the things that happen, 
which makes me think that I should worry about everything.
The bicycle shop, my daughter, the possibility of war.
 
When I smile for the picture, I hold my daughter’s hand.
I feel her weight lean into me.
I try not to think about what’s happening behind me,
that I don’t need to know everything that exists simultaneously.
I could go mad if I don’t stop.
 
Everything is next door to each other, but there is no way to communicate. 
There are so many choices happening at the same time.
But I’ll stop now.
There is a decaying world among the leaf litter, but I won’t look.
I won’t think about what hides.
The ground beetles, the centipedes, what remains of the tree.

Before the picture was taken 
he had no idea it would end up folded 
into a fraction of its size 
to fit behind his back teeth.  
 
He didn’t think about the creases 
or that his shoes, his ankles
and part of his leg 
would be missing from the picture one day.     
 
Instead, he was thinking 
about hanging the portrait 
above the stove in the kitchen 
next to the painting of the wild roses, 
 
and about his youngest son 
whose right hand is too small for his body.  
The photographer says: Okay, now tuck 
his hand inside your jacket pocket. 
 
It begins this way, 
the father thinks
as he takes his son’s hand 
before the picture is taken; 
 
like the wild roses in the painting
above the stove in the kitchen, 
growing under a wide range of conditions, 
except extremes.

Look inside my little train set.
      No masked men level guns
    at penny-sized passengers.
            
When lilac blooms brown and fall
                        some small angel tips his hat
     and retreats back into a stone.
 
Every night, chained dogs compose
    fight songs on the ribs of lonely trees.
            My soul is their excuse.            
 
Well, that’s that.

When I met Everyman on a shore, I called him
a dirty word, stole his flatbottom, rowed 
into winter waters.  He caught up with me
by following the gatherings of crows.
 
Together, again we prayed at the river’s edge.
A delta formed in the clouds.  Together
we killed the song bird, called it Mercy
as we ate it.  
 
From there it grows hard 
to relate exactly who killed whom.  The sand
speckled with white pebbles?
The six children in black hoodies 
waiting the tables set there by the water?
 
Tables that sat the dead.

I found my history in the tiny
bones of a hummingbird, its beating heart
that could fill a thimble with all its blood
in seconds, its frantic wings,
its soft beak and subtle feet.
I found the tongue,
its lathed shape, its tucked flesh,
and rubbed it between my fingers
until it settled like clay,
never again to fly sideways
or beat its wings faster
than a prayer can leave lips.
 
And for that, I offer a prayer:
hummingbird, fly into my mouth and lay
your eggshell head under my tongue.
Let me turn you over—brain case,
eye socket—the needle of bone 
and death against my teeth.
I will hold your skull still in my mouth
to weigh it, to weigh myself,
and remember why you taste like sugar.

I hardly dream of wolves
hunting, howling, barking, 
and turning a dead
moose to its back, its legs cracked
at the knees, blood pooling
at the wolves’ feet, steam rising
from the kill’s split ribs.
 
I hardly dream of wolves.
I hardly ever dream,
hardly ever of the womb.
 
I am not that far removed
from cracking bones
to put food in my stomach,
from dipping my nose
into the gut of a moose
to warm my face from the cold.
 
I am not that far removed
from eating only what I catch,
not that far removed
from being afraid of waking
to find my family vanished.

Little yolk, fly-speck, web
unworked, detail without name,
unlatch yourself from me, go.
In your small submersible,
your thousands of cells have stopped 
beating.  I felt their tappings
like braille on a quaking bog: a faint print, 
then none.  Go, almost thing,
the sundews have opened
their sticky pink mitts to catch
your brothers, and soon
the cranberries will float red 
on the harvesting pond.
(This, too, will come to an end.)

We didn’t mind the dirt,
and when they gave us fire
we could stay warm,
which helped us to understand 
kindness.  We walked around
all day picking things up:
shiny metal rocks, feathers,
what the animals had left for us.
They had been here longer,
but didn’t seem to mind our arrival.
The mountains were always far away,
like forbidden ladders to the horizon.
We never did learn how to swim.
When we looked up at night, 
we waved to all of the blinking
gods above us.  We were sure
that they still watched us,
that if we became lonely
they would send someone else.

Near the lobster cart, the Dairy Queen,
        cracked enamel tubs, a sled, torn screens
  
that joggle in the wind.
        One cockamamie fork up on a ledge. 
 
A forage-house, a cracked assemblage: 
        An oil-smeared curtain blowing in the rain.
 
Even this junk shop claims to be for sale.
        Even this junk shop comes apart, and splays
 
at crooked angles where the sills
        of two half-farmhouses that formed it
 
separate. The porch cracks and moldings sag. 
        The whole becomes components. 
  
And for sale for who? 
        No proper summer people will come paw:
 
(The maples are already turning red.)
        Still, of each thing here someone has thought: 
 
Don’t throw it yet. Someone might want it.
        Someone might extract a value from the wreck.
 
Some artist, maybe. 
        In real life who’s got time for salvaged screens?  
 
For rescue, anyway? But, if someone comes 
        who needs an oil-stained curtain, bless him. 
 
May someone find a window in this wind. 
        If the bathtub holds water, let someone 
 
re-use it as a planter for geraniums. 
        May anyone who likes to mend: come mend.

I. Genesis of a Music, 1921
 
The squeal! Microtones of wheels. 
Steam-whistles echoing in the mountains.
The track and the track and the track.
 
Ramon Novarro left him for the movie screen,                                   
his parted lips a tragedy – :
the mouth moves, no words come.
            
Harry had to find a way outside                                                
where he could lose himself
and hear the sound of words 
 
wrung out and sung. 
A railroad junction – :
where a man confronts an empty sun
 
and razes himself in dust. 
He had become an O
from which all sound, vibrating, comes,
                                    
a nerve-twang, 
pulsing motion,
a dark persistent drum.
 
II.  Chinese Theater, 1925 
 
This bottle of cosmic vintage, emotion’s voice,
is the endowment of all of us,
and hadn’t Pythagoras of purest heart
 
chastely plucked his harp to hear
music in the stars 
tuning notes to divine words?
 
In the concert halls of California
Harry ushered for his bread – :
A music drama vacant lot!
 
Unreal rolling r’s, consonants exploding.
No human vowels resurrected. 
The portamento's unnatural glide!
 
Solace: the Cantonese Music-Theater,
its Whitmanic cacophony, cracking
peanut shells, the wail, musicians’ whirl, 
                                    
peddlers hawking edibles in the aisles,            
the dancers rustling, actors’ syllables
and all of it a voice, a voice.    
                                    
III.  Intrusions, 1935
 
On the train an Indian hobo
intoned a ritual of spring
and Harry was back in Benson:
 
a stagecoach crossing yellow earth
dotted with cacti and century plants,
stalks blooming on the mesa
                                                                              
where desert sound intruded
like a lover in his room,
mingling with the Mandarin
                                    
on his father’s phonograph,
the creak of black bamboo – 
Had it had been only the wind?
 
Now it sang in the boxcar’s pine,
while the Indian rolled in sleep, 
and in rhythmic intervals spoke truths:
                                    
The Chinese built the railroad. 
Mexicans drove the Yaquis from their river.
Li Po had nine hundred places he called home.           
                        
IV.  Sonata Dementia, 1949
 
In a herdsmen’s cottage in Gualala,
the Pacific in the distance,
Harry puts his back into it, hauls stones
 
up the hillside, then sits enthroned
and gazes at glass-embedded walls
to catch the afternoon sun glancing....
 
A deer tick bite began to swell his hand.
Damp air untuned the instruments.
In delirium a marimba sprung from his thigh,
 
dust and thistle from his throat.
The sky flashed its knife.
The rain spoke in tongues – :
 
trainyard vernacular, hobo cadences, 
nervous thunderings in deepest tones.
As his taut-string yearning
            
greeted the percussion of the weather;
his spiraling self slid from him
                                                unfretted.
            
V.  The Shock of the Past, 1959
 
Avant Garde! – Not Harry, who heard
another now, an earthly memory
in ancient rhythmic strains.
 
The percussion needed deepening:                  
pernambuco, Philippine bamboo, 
trunks of Sitka spruce, the instruments
            
towering as he lowered their tones,
the drums reached only by ascending
wooden risers silhouetted on stage.
 
The earth rumbled at his summit
intoning the past, the aftermath
of long-gone galaxies whose light arrives
 
too late: As his mother crossed an intersection,
Harry had waited for her just blocks away.
A streetcar dragged her body 
            
under its great weight – : silent news 
for Harry who read about her death
in the sarcophagus of a page.   
 
VI.  Garden of Delight, 1964
 
The Gourd Tree: a eucalyptus bough,
twelve Chinese bells hanging 
like ripe papayas on the stem.
                        
The players reached to pluck them. 
The Eucal Blossom of Philippine bamboo.
The shape was the very sound!            
 
The corporeality of bodies – :
hands, arms touching smooth hollows,
human form inseparable
 
from the music ringing,
and Harry himself, in shadow, striking
Cloud Chamber Bowls suspended
 
from a redwood frame, his mallet
controlling the vibrations.
He was a Socrates listening
            
to a daimon who sang notes
nightly to his ear, nothing less than
human himself, a trembling carillon.
 
VII.  Pioneer Hatchery Sessions, Petaluma 1964
            
A bulldozer brought down a wall 
while the tape was running. A player broke
a Cloud Chamber Bowl. The shattering
 
was the song, his life. All this while 
John Cage, his gullet miked,
cut carrots on stage, flicked cigarette ash
 
at the audience. Harry, evicted again, 
dreamt of burning his instrumentarium.
The charred Kithara’s curling strings
 
the sound of slow death. Out of the ashes
he made gongs from aluminum nose-cones
of airplane gas tanks and coupled them
            
to the Gourd Tree’s stem. All one instrument!            
He carved and strung new gourd resonators,
lacquered them and went looking for rain
 
like a Navajo in a parched desert.
Anaïs Nin, taking it in: Like water,
it was as if one had drunk the music.
            
VIII.  The Musical Landscape, 1968
 
Three drinks and Harry expostulates.
American Music? Refuge of Sterility!
The Neglect of The Real All Outside:
 
desire in the parks, car horns, young men
hitchhiking in the Western night,
their plain speech epitaphs
 
scribbled across highway railings.
I’m hungry. I’m twenty-three.
I’m far from Baltimore and think I’ll die.
                        
Amid the chit-chat of the drawing room,
Harry swung his elbow like a scythe
shattering a delicate, expensive lamp,
                        
the porcelain shards tinking against 
the terra cotta. Servants knelt
to pick them up. 
                        
He fled New York for Sausalito,
his instrumentarium left behind,
homeless again and outside.

I.
 
A jay landing in wire grass, 
the tiki hut’s floor of wet tar— 
 
prickly pears strung
on a line, blurred and gummy—
 
then, cast on my wall, 
the silhouette of a branch
 
drifting; the after-air 
of the opening door.
 
My skin, inescapable. 
Outstretched on my belly,
 
I held onto the raised 
stitching of the bedspread.
 
Waking from dream, 
I knew those were your 
 
hands stealing away
and the laughing.
 
 
II.
 
Red lights, smeared,
wobbling in a circle:
 
they hung over me, materializing 
from a cloud, or a thicket:
 
flesh, long-enfolded, 
was unflapped: 
 
the sour smell of
moist grooves exposed.  
 
What leapt inside me 
when the bell’s mallet struck 
 
wetly against my palette?
Who’d stop the ringing?
 
Afterwards I’d make a plan
to escape the bitter drops:
 
I’d sleep with my face 
in a pillow and try 
 
to eat the fibers.  
I’d be immovable.
 
 
III.
 
You watched over me:
sandpaper, gorge—
 
fold fallow plow—
whispered, I could kill you

It’s the last of the terminally ill,
my mother says, pulling down preserves.
I know what she means. She means
 
she’s relieved that our town will stop
disappearing for awhile, will hold 
at four hundred and ten (give or take). 
 
She means she’s anxious because losses
come in threes, and Charlie makes two. 
They can’t build on that land,
 
my mother says, preheating the oven.
I know which she means. She means
by the creek where it floods.
 
She means no makeshift house
can survive such waters. She means
those boys I used to run with
 
don’t know any better.
When are you coming home,
my mother asks, sliding the pie in.
 
I know what she’s asking. She’s asking 
did I hear that men are throwing 
stones at other men in celebration.
 
She means post-election in Palestine.
Do I remember how the hummingbirds
smashed and cracked into the kitchen window
 
until she took the feeder down 
and the murmurs of their wings 
were overwhelmed by other songs, by other birds.

The morning train is turning like a compass needle
 
now the night has folded all its schedules
 
in the stands of pine and cedar, all its innumerable wings,
 
and tomorrow he will be gone from the lumber-yards
 
and the farmhouse windows that semaphore like televisions
 
and the vacant hands of Herbert Lee 
 
and the killer and the quiet of having never seen a thing. 
 
Quietly now, while his truck is idling, 
 
dark decides from all the county’s limbs,
 
shattering into birds that shatter then collapse to his skin.
 
Beaks lace eardrum and eardrum, his cheeks, his tongue,
 
their obsidians needling for what he’s seen, 
 
what he would surely tell, so he won’t have to see it, 
 
so he won’t have to whisper it, even once, ever again.

Strange rides shotgun,
“Satisfaction” blaring,
now number one, though
all he hears is Reverend Lynch
on the courthouse lawn:
If it takes killing to get the Negroes
out of the white man’s streets,
I say kill them. They’ve got 
a car in their headlights
on John Hardy Hill, 
four black foundrymen
just off the job. Strange leans, 
blasts the windows, then levels
for Willie Brewster’s spine.
Home, Strange crawls
through the thick July night,
smiles We got us a nigger
to the man who gives him up,
stands in court to tell
what he’s heard to give
twelve white men
what they need. Strange 
swings the gun, sighting 
bats that skim the yard 
while Junior Walker chords 
Shoot him ’fore he run now.
A half-laugh passes,
then he wipes his brow.
A dim light shows the LOVE
he’s tattooed on his hand.


I know a man in need even in the dark, 
but I dared not offer kindness to an unclothed 
stranger. My wife kept me back, pressed 
her wrist to my hip and shook her head. 
It was five nights ago he washed in our pond, 
one cupped palm at a time tremored 
over his cold skin. We watched a while, 
surprised by his trespass. I’d say he’d run 
from something he had no wish for us to see. 
Fear is a private thing. I remember 
when our oldest was crazy with the fever, 
flinching at shadows on his bedroom wall —  
wisteria vines, wings of the last indigo buntings 
were all that was behind them. Even grown, 
he refused to tell the things he saw. Never slept 
in that bed again. Never opened that door.

In spite of kids in latex gloves
palming Boar’s Head ham on scales,
 
he’s not history yet.  He’s as proud
of his work as a blood-spatter expert
 
breaking the code of sprayed gore.
Next door left, in the gourmet shop,
 
brie and baguettes; Love-Lies-Bleeding
in the garden center next door right.
 
Two witches, catty-corner, run
a crystal shop.  Self is the artful
 
lie it tells itself, Mind is no more
than neural chuck.  We know
 
it’s only human to wait in line
for the choicest cuts, to forecast
 
when our number’s up, to tense
what feels a lifetime for the flash—
 
all that forbearance just to end up
a rat-eyed stiff.  Blood-gouted
 
apron in a hamper, the butcher
drives home by instinct, and day-
 
dreams, at the red traffic lights,
of tongue, our strongest muscle.


Every Three Years,
a new death. He’d watch them come and go
like people strolling, in pairs or alone, beside a canal,
before rounding the bend of the towpath.
 
Some, after passing from sight, found cities or farms.
Some vanished in the heat-haze of an August afternoon,
or in November fog that grows thick near waterways.
 
Sometimes his wife asleep beside him seems to be three women—
one who says, don’t you see them, making faces at the window?
another who says, you’ll see them soon enough;
 
and one who says—
but right now he can’t recall the third thing she says,
the thing, every day, he counts on her to say,
 
as she had yesterday, but had she the day before?— 
each day behind the next, like rows of hay bales across a field
that slopes into another field, with more rows of bales...
 
Other times, he’s reading to his dead from a picture book,
holding up the illustrations, panning them from left to right,
pausing at each face, so everyone can see.

Your body pitched, hyperbola of noon,
arcing declination over the gunnel
and into that tangled sea, a skein of trouble
you’d always known so well.  And as you fell,
 
were you thinking of those native men,
those regnant boys, those unvoiced naked slaves 
who ran into the body-bruising waves
to greet conquistadors agog with lust
 
for this new land, this never-home you left
unwon?  Yours was the world of expatriates:
terrible siroccos, insistent breakers,
fell cities with nothing underneath the bridges —
 
only water, only ever water
and the body’s obdurate throb of recollection:
the voyaging hull foam-licked, the purser’s lips — 
what strange unrest, redundancies of flesh....
 
You had met the bottom of the world,
and it was cruel, possessive, calling you
to that obscurest ocean, where everything
is welcomed, wanted, and nothing is explained.

That we might someday somehow come to master
the old despair, the weakness of our bodies,
the vicious ignorance of one another,
 
we shared ourselves completely with each other.
We knew that every man could be the master,
not of desire, but its sway upon his body.
 
That which begins with the spirit ends in the body,
but neither is the prison of the other.
Every night, we’d pray to the Heavenly Master
 
for the strength to overcome ourselves, to master
our fear of God and His will, our fear of our bodies,
our bodies’ powers.  In one room after another,
 
men and women turned to face each other,
each of us, at once, both slave and master
in that impossible land of the other’s body.

They lowered Emilie into the earth
with ninety-seven hours worth of water
and a depthless chill. The coffin was walled in glass
so she could see the shovels spill their dirt,
burying her with just a slender pipe
run up to the surface for air. She could hear
the brass band playing, the couples dancing, people
dead on their feet into the second day
of the marathon. It was 1932,
late fall; already she had swum Hell Gate,
wrestled alligators, parachuted
onto targets at carnivals and fairs
where ever they’d have her. When Jim suggested this,
she agreed, as she had with almost everything —
another stunt to put her face in the papers
and prove that those years of possibilities
were not yet over, that anything could happen.
But still, as the darkness and the smell of dirt
closed around her, bound within her box,
the air becoming terror-hot, what thoughts
whispered themselves to her? English, German,
bass drum, hard-heeled shoes, the Reading trains,
the traffic—black hearts beating through the earth
to mask from her her absence from the world
that might, at any moment, forget she lived
and leave her there in that nothing grip, near panic,
singing to herself so that what sounds
she heard she could hear clearly.  Hours passed,
unknowable but borne, and still the blare
of a distant trumpet, singing her to sleep,
singing her awake. Four days and an hour
interred before she heard the shovels speak
the words of resurrection. As they lifted
her windowed coffin, dancers, band, spectators
applauded. There she was—girl Emilie,
hunger-weak, light-blinded, still alive
and strong enough to step out of her grave
and wave to them, twenty-eight years old,
gone impossibly far and then come back.
She told them all it hadn’t been as bad
as they’d imagined, though nobody believed her.
She let herself be buried several times, 
for smaller crowds and shorter stretches, until,
after a few more years of stunts and shows,
she married a man named Muse and loved him, left 
the daredevil life to raise her children, to whom 
she didn’t say a word about the risks 
she took, the feats performed, the several deaths 
she could have died. Like any worried mother, 
she feared that they would follow into danger,
giving themselves to chance. It wasn’t until 
they had grown and settled in their safer lives
that they heard the stories of their mother’s youth:
flying with Alligator Jim, swimming
around Manhattan, being buried alive.
American Persephone, the girl
who went into the ground, alone and lovely,
and rose again, alone and beautiful,
over and over. Even through those years
of bearing children, keeping bees, cleaning
the old Long Island home, she kept a bit
of that blackness in her body, boxed inside
her aging heart, both memory and promise.
And when, at ninety-eight, after all
those quiet decades—neither dull nor wild;
contented, mostly—she faced again that depth,
lowering herself, she saw a girl
rising up to meet her, slim and pretty
in a cotton dress, singing beneath her breath.

Iridescent flies are writhing on the driveway.
We set up our chairs to watch, while the crows,
in uneasy groups of three, keep up their guttural
mutterings in the cedar. Who hasn’t reached a point
when they don’t care who’s watching, and aired
the open folds? The system is swinging north.
 
It will miss us, sprinkling only a spell of restless
sleep, our minds not free of the idea of it: People
are standing on the land by the lake, shouting
to the people in their boats in the lake about what
they can’t see behind them. The children ask why
the ride home seems shorter. The unexpected, too,
 
unfolds slowly. Who hasn’t missed what they weren’t 
looking for, and petted the Black Widow’s eggs 
tacked up to the underside of a chair? Falling faces, 
such things have been creeping up on you. 
The system is red in the center, undulating in and out 
of an oval as the animation tracks it north. Men keep 
 
their collections in the basement, in the lower-level 
sheds, the ever-dank relegations most prone to flood. 
So taken are they with anger and love, the crows skip 
their ritual proclamations on being spared the storm. 
The driveway flies are spent and they blink, dissolving 
the mist into the salty southern edges of their eyes.

I like it best when the window is a mirror
I’ve opened slightly, so it reflects
before dawn the back of my computer and the top
of my kaleidoscope, and I look up 
from the keys, not at myself 
but where my fingers are sending letters 
I’ve invited to be words, and where my eye 
has rested against color, all of this 
printed to the last of the night, as if it’s you
and we’re talking about how things appear, 
and to prove it, one of us says, here they are,
appearing that way, while the other says,
here comes morning with its eraser 
of light. While all of this is going on,
my shoulders are stiff from the batting cage.
It’s like being a stapler after years 
of wanting that, how my upper body 
seems to pinch down and asks me to lower 
my arms as the light arrives and I see now 
there’s fog again, curtaining I feel 
for the sake of the curtain, not the behind, 
the reveal that will come when I’m still 
trying to decide how they are in any way my arms. 
The notion of possessing should be interrogated
by our cop shows, until I break down 
in the little room with its table and chairs, 
with its hope of violence, and admit 
I cannot summarize myself without referring 
to the boot-mark of the drunken painter,
who was going to burn the canvas 
until he noticed the accident 
of walking on it had put a shape in the field 
that marshalled the grass to defend 
its existence against the intruder. God, 
if someone said, you can’t mention painting 
ever again, I’d go to the market with one tongue 
behind my back. There: the top of the mountain 
has arrived, things are falling apart 
into the familiar nostalgia of how good 
meaning feels when it’s what you tell yourself 
you want most of all, and in that moment, 
it’s there to be had in the shape 
of a door knob you’ve turned so many times, 
the shine is gone, leaving a dull opening 
into a room of similar odds. If that was half
of our architecture, and at its limits
we were sewn to a bag with a wolverine inside,
or this extreme comfort of sense had to strike 
at least once a day a match in a room 
full of gas, there would be a bright howling 
more often than is the case. What would be gained 
by that, I don’t know, but I enjoy the sense 
that each second is both fierce in its defense 
of itself and indifferent to being petted 
by our recognition, like a knife 
happy to cut your throat or your apple, depending.

My pillow is old. I haven’t bought a new one since my head settled on this shape, nor have I asked in that time the wind to change how it leans against the light post. It often feels like I’m being followed by objects. Trees are slick at this. To shake them I have to climb above the tree line or go to the desert. Trees are about to stop being green, my parents are about to stop being alive: that was unexpected. Before sleep last night, I thought, I’ll never put my head on this pillow as a giant. Not Andre the Giant or the Jolly Green Giant. That thought made me consider the ambitions of my pillow. If a giant came along and my pillow wanted to go with him, I decided to support my pillow in this decision, even though a giant’s head is more than it could handle. This made me think it might be comforting to have a pillow with me at all times about the size of my ear. When, for instance, my father is having a stent put in right now, as my mother has had stents put in in other right nows, a small pillow would lend the right kind of support to my ears, which are kind of out there on their own. My parents, who were giants until I was eight, are more like withered fruit these days, I’ll soon come into their house and see their pillows waiting on their bed for them like good dogs who never bark. This is a story almost everyone comes to tell, then that story is told about the everyone who told it, then the everyone is replaced by a new everyone, you see how many pillows will be needed by the time this is done. Invest in pillows is what I’m telling you. And holes in the ground.

    Like the blossom of the cherry tree unfolding from its good 
 
offices light falls out of spring green within the lung an unclasping 
                                which runs under water:  one hears singing in the silt.
 
Humble lectors in a labor of notice:  the skin goes 
                                                   brown and blush and earthly—
 
                                                            and wishes oh be and
                                     let not:  not—,  yet:  no hindering.
 
I cannot choose my treasure:  Thou shalt—and thou 
                           Shalt—
                                          In the long grass and scrub I am shoring
 
My portion and loose papers.  Settling raw.  Shambling into sunken                           
                          traceries.   And splint.

Her song like a letting        
she unclasped
 
Her buttons with slow         
fingers lest she be too warm saying I was
 
Trained up to my book—and careful not to neglect 
small necessities
 
Following honest
exercises her hand at her thin 
 
Neck walking on seams of frozen snow then           
going hard under the black iron street
 
Lamp wavering 
in willow willow willow:
 
                      Her salt tears fell from her and softened the stones
                      Hie thee and hie thee and 
                      Hie thee
 
Easy to sing, then, in a fluttering caw
sound (like a hollow
 
Fire):  desiring to be:  (when was it that I bloomed?) (who is it 
that knocks):  waiting without—
 
at the locked door for a key

*
 
Dear John, our recipe’s fallen among
          the flour and egg. The measurements
miss their original number and fervor, 
 
a langue franca rolled in raw batter. 
          As a result, we grew gigantic. Living 
makes manifest otherwise intangible 
 
receipts into squab, a mother sauce.
          Into small pots: egg cracked 
over a bowl. We should all know: I 
 
came folded in, folded in. The hands
          that burned on the cookery also undid 
the door-latch, fly on a pair of pants 
 
till more was made and enough was 
          not enough. I grew tall, reaped nests 
from the top branches cradling spit
 
and wood—whole systems in which 
          I play no part. How humiliating. Soon 
I snapped each and every bird between 
 
thumb and forefinger, eating to keep
          cloud-steady, ingredients below yet 
to be combined, the potential chemistry 
                                an undiscovered country. 
 
*
 
Dear Lesley, the gardens here function
          as prelude to the stone monstrosity
they call a fountain and the water is
 
nothing but a tearstain on the cheek
          of this decrepit continent. Holding
up the world can be tiring. If you feel
 
you must, you must. You say you’ve
          grown larger due to overeating, just
hyperbole. Truly we are the smallest
 
creatures in the universe. This is what
          I feel when lounging safely in Italy—
my own country a giant’s forehead
 
pulsing with the rainwater we’ve come
          to call ocean. Those three ships, one
for each state of mind, sail from crown
 
to brow. And you thought it took ages
          to reach paradise! The move was small
as a drop of spray blurring our vision
 
for a moment then melting back into
          the already present river that pours
through us its many gallons per year. 

Squeeze to form a ball at the tip and pull the bead 
through the valley of the seam where the tile meets the tub. 
The label on the tube says “Brilliant White.” The walls
have been grouted and now the finishing touches apply.
It’s been a long weekend. There were errors and lessons. 
What married people like to call future references. 
So if you will be so kind, step in here with him and stand 
in this naked, bruised, porcelain boat, dry-docked 
by leaks and mutinous mold. Stand with him like you can, 
without his knowing. Stand close enough so that he might 
feel you watching, so he will believe he has done something.
He has scraped the stains and slapped on the new skin. 
He has missed a square or two. His arms and shirt 
are mortar mud. It flakes as if he were made of stone. 
But he is nearly done and if you whisper in his ear
he will know there is a word for living this everyday life. 
Hardly anything is noticed. All an imperfect alabaster. 
A hair in the soap dish. Rust in the bowl. A gurgle 
in the plumbing and a shudder brings the hot. 
All this for what? Just her soft body, arms crossed 
over her knees while the water rises through her folds 
and a froth of foam fills that space. What more is there
to learn, but that to get the straighter, tighter seal, one
must use the finger along the fault, as if tracing
down her spine the gentle contour of the earth.

Ten boughs for the darling who longs for the lizard-faced boy.
Ten songs for his sick mother. Ten lashes on the ogre’s back for carrying 
the hay barn across the river, but ten kindnesses if he should drown. 
Four eggs and a loaf of rye bread make the poor family’s dinner tonight, 
which makes the six of them sleep, even the father under the night’s long feather, 
be it twill of winter, uncompromising and bare, or the promise 
of nothing in the hours of their next hunger. Praise the daughter twice, 
her tendril-bone, praise her anxiety, her rattling tooth of wind, 
her flakes of skin. If you were to die right now. If you were to be no more, 
it would be no more than the smallest of these. To go wordlessly in sleep. 
To go without a father, a mother, a simple dog who whimpers; these 
who would be no more. It is that vacuum of disappearance. That final, 
unforgivable seal. The sheep over the fence. The bloody wool caught in the barb.
The bleating of the little one lost, as they pound on, relentlessly. The puma
from which they run. The night’s cliff just beyond their knowing. It is this
finality that allows us to stretch out now. Way out there. Where it all could 
just melt away. Where we may pluck them from the floe, find each clue, 
and shear. Make way. Safely to the barn. When I have wet sheep warming 
in their stalls, all will be quiet, but for the little one lost. And if ever 
the lantern tips, the ogre will carry the burning barn off to the river to drown. 

I do not climb into the animal mind. I do not 
willingly place my hand against their long necks
and touch their white feathers as I do this page.
It has just begun to snow, those first heavy flakes.
When I look up, it is not to see my forgotten lover’s face
through a small line of pedestrian geese. 
I thought I had forgotten their determination, their
sharp instinctive stroll across the Jersey Pike.
I thought I had placed them back into their meadow, above
the glassy, Canadian lake: that mother and her young
where we would never meet, before we met in the road.
She took her bullfighter’s pose, one wing already
broken by a Subaru. The Mercedes to our left
wove toward us while we looped behind 
the driver’s careful conversation with the air
under the whistling brakes of a Peterbilt. We all 
slid through like water over stones. Yet
we knew they could not last. So what good 
was it that we had passed? That we had survived
all that we had been taught, to live one moment more?
One thing does not mean another. No one lays down a life
like a snowflake on the tongue. At eighty miles per hour, 
geese are pages filled with our lives in love:
plot-less stories that did not last. No wonder they are 
no good to us now. Yet, on any frigid given night
I can feel along the summit of my knuckles
a pressure of her fingers digging in, and I think 
we might have died with those geese in the stillborn past, 
and that our bodies, when we feel them at all, are being touched
only by someone’s memory of them, some 
misplaced desire moving the frosted cells together again.
Finally we are given one thing: the bone-white 
intelligence of snow. How it awakens us after falling secretly 
the night before. Finally we inhabit these winter cities.
And as the ice creeps in, we clap it from our coats,  
to restore the not unpleasant death of our longing.

She moves about the office
like a happy homemaker,
 
clutching silver tools:
mirrors, vacuums, and shears.
 
She unwraps each device
from sterilized plastic as she would
 
a sandwich from wax paper. 
Her coifed hair rustles above 
 
her neck, floats across the room
and descends as she sits.  
 
She begins her work. 
The charred scent of cloves
 
and metal fills my mouth. 
The hooked instruments 
 
prod and drill.  I am prone 
to her gaze and absolute
 
focus on this one
tiny area of my body, senseless 
 
and bleeding.  I think I know
why this work satisfies her.  
 
A speechless hour passes. 
Then she smiles.  She shakes
 
my hand and turns briskly 
on her heels.  I am unconvinced
 
by the attention she gives  
and crave her practiced reassurance.
 
Alone, I gather my purse and sweater.
My jaw aches.  I feel the need
 
to explain myself, as if 
I have done something terribly wrong.

Doubt, 

you are 

muscular as a boa,

and smooth 

as cognac

aged fifty years 

in the throat.

You muffle

hard outlines 

under your skirts,

offer a grey handkerchief 

to each certainty.

Behind the civility of veils—

what manners!

you understand how vulgar

clarity can be. 

At your discretion, 

the lampshade’s tassels.

Yours, the axe swung wide.

You own the dog 

afloat 

on the ocean, 

the blurred print

on the dog’s sodden collar.

Hands that hold

a cold canary,

burning lungs 

that must inhale.

Last child 

left in the parking lot.

Dead horse, 

middle fork,

gloved hands in hair.

Don’t mind my doubtful face,
a few choice blows will right it—
tongs but a quarter-turn from the forge.
 
Striker at the hardy hole, 
the smith minds his horn.
Red end—sudden drop—
 
flattened, my lips 
at the upsetting plate,
that I might approach the abyss.
 
Tongue plunged in a throat of steam,
so I speak in the voice of the crow.
Hammers, list a bit—
 
would I were become anvil, 
hit in the service 
of shaping a third thing.

So it was that I worked with a man who was dead.
The aroma was mystifying. 
A blood-like smell.
 
His things were exactly as they were the day before.
Inked fingers remained on every surface.
His books left lying on the table.
Drawers of his drawings, his instructions.
 
There was an entire room filled 
with soaking paper I let dry, 
then pulled from the press one by one.
A letterpress book he made 
for the King’s only son, wrapped in gold leaf.
 
They say he carved the skulls of animals for two years,
smelted zinc plates, printed 132 pages in 42 hues of green,
and died from it.
 
Each day I fumbled with metal letters, 
misplaced objects that seemed to disappear.
And then a flash of light in the print cellar.
No mirror or glass to reflect. 
So many colors in one carved shine.

We admired the lindens mired in mud 
with all the mirth of the careless
as I pressed an ear to his chest 
to hear all the stories 
never read to me at bedtime.
He pressed an ear to me
to hear the aviary in my artery.
You’ve got me all a-flutter, peanut butter.
The baby mouse we saw was dead, intact,
held beauty sharp as a thumb-tack, 
but he flinched his look away from the window
to the piano cover that crouched 
in the corner like a needy black lab.
O, my misty muffin, my discreet-pea, 
your X is so sexy, your Y is so yow,
your Z is the very zenith of huzzow.
There was no music in the music room
except for the time-ticked numbers 
on the wall above the numb piano.
Tell me, why do we want the clock to go tick tock
when it really goes tock tock tock?
Because the heart-sick talk of tick tock
is both the want, and the have.
You’re the cat’s pajamas, 
you’re the bee’s knees—
nonexistent; unnecessary.

  I was here...once 
before, I remember the little 
man, broken, in 
                the Adriatic station, 
      stingy rain and crests of oil-
filled brown waves 
     breaking.  Yes, the beach, 
trashed with Slavic syringes 
and Turkish condoms, so much     
  the police ran out
and sang: No one swim.    
 
      I could claim your body since
I was your brother 
    as I suppose 
I’m still next of kin (though 
I imagine you now 
have other types 
of kin).  We were told 
 
we could burn the body 
for ease of shipping, or 
we could grease
the minor palms of 
invisible officials, 
              we had options, 
we had many ways 
to make grief
more insane and bitter 
in the mouth. 

i
 
turning back—relenting—
is often better 
than the leaving...though 
I’ve used both 
to get my way. 
 
departing, going, getting
on the highway, 
               an exhalation of regret 
                                like just-cut, dead 
hydrangea floating 
in dead water...in testament,  
it gives off 
      a scent of forged nostalgia—
 that this moment
lasts, that beauty’s severed head
of petals somehow 
persists and gives 
pleasure
 
and so one turns back...
and turns again,
to go.
 
 
ii
 
now the going,
the leaving unimpeded,
shaking the dust off the serape
            is just joy, 
going, gone, owing no one nothing, and
if I did, try to 
make me pay.    
 
no, this time 
let the lips stop, 
let them close my eyes with coins, cover 
my cheeks with reverential, scared-
shitless kisses,
I’m the vapor leaving, 
though I appreciate the gesture,
I really do.
  
             bee-stung stunned lips, the crimson
she kissed me with, slits  
        in velvet that opened 
    in a tongue of put-out flame, 
raw thickened flesh that licked 
    the deepest draughts 
of honey and air and her careless   
hair...  
                                and I’ll miss:
            all of it, the kind 
of love practiced here, where
you balance at the breakfast nook 
with cantaloupe looking at 
          the intent, known faces 
casually telling out
      the news—plans 
for swimming later on, a just division 
of the cars, how my dying made you 
feel first this, then that.

Mornings I lie next to your sleeping 
body, the amputated light grown long 
 
as my father’s old stethoscope hung 
over a bent nail, half-expecting 
 
to see, as I did then, vestiges 
of that time when I begged 
 
Father not to pack the infected tug
of flesh inside my shoulder with bandages.
 
I learned how bones can betray and sag, 
then freeze into the shape of something 
 
like an arm. He never could forgive 
himself for falling asleep while driving, 
 
and so I left him, arm healed, to his grief. 
He did not beg me to stay, and the dogged
 
persistence of his hammer pounding 
nails into the boards over my door rings
 
fresh regret into me as I tell you I’m leaving, 
that my arm need not lift across you any longer.

The diner is closed today
for weather, a paper sign
 
on the door, the parking lot
unplowed, the trains  
 
derailed at Mason City
because of the ice.  That noise
 
could have been deer
folding into the fields
 
while the Monticello
Boys Choir sang
 
in the auditorium
about messenger angels.  But what
 
is ceremony without coffee,
pancakes wet with butter,
 
frozen blueberries, spatulas
greased with this morning’s
 
eggs, while someone crouches
outside in corn, hiding prayer
 
beneath her blue sweatshirt,
the whispers of farm
 
against farm, conspiring
to unzip Illinois?  
 
The same man who 
discovered margarine
 
named his daughter
after a white flower.
 
In the south garden,
bearing his name, the cows
 
lose their legs in deep snow,
eating down to the exhausted grass
 
and the frozen lowing things
that uphold it.  In this,
 
we find our can openers
and turn the heat so high,
 
the air filling with such expectation
it could be the new year.

If there ever was a time for a laundress and a lamb, the time 
is right now.  This minute!
 
A sangoma flutters her fan like a flying fish over orange 
water.  Across the river, a construction worker’s sons are 
eating clams. They wait for their sister to heal.  Three days 
at the most.  The youngest son, the one who is building 
castles just this side of the muck, swallows a shard of 
clamshell.  His hands dig down to clay.
 
Their father has gone inside to run a wet rag and an ostrich 
feather over the girl’s neck.  She secretly wishes she could 
fly, but knows prayers can’t save them. Her stitches burn 
into his hands, the strings of his wife’s mandolin.  But the 
instrument is dead.  The oldest son destroyed it with an 
obsidian sphere, as tight as the sangoma’s bun.  
 
She fans the water, rife with persimmon skins, to the
choking son, clamshell tearing, blood beginning to run 
marine from his nose.  A wave builds, then, twelve flying 
fish leap at the boy, cave in his chest like a mandolin—not 
the one the eldest destroyed, but the one the wife still plays, 
far from all water in West Phoenix, where her clothes are 
always clean, and for dinner, always lamb.

Winter’s early evening, and I pull two duvets like clouds 
of moonlight above our shoulders. Our bodies fall into formation. 
Even the lamps are spellbound. I’ve said a hundred prayers 
to her knees, and now, I’m at work beating drums for our future, 
making a ceremony of my dark, firm hands.  
Outside, thick skeins of black branches sway woozily. 
I’m thinking of the last orange red apple I bit into, thorn bushes, 
and wooden scented vineyards in Sardinia, charms beneath 
fingernails. What color is that cry trickling from her mouth? 
In our sacred grove, we leave melodies singing on each other’s skin.

Since that first kiss in the lobby on Boerum Hill
I’ve fallen in love with Brooklyn, and the risky, yellow ledges 
of subway platforms, and the way a small pinpoint of light 
emerges out of darkness to whisk me away, if I want, 
to the island of bankers and foodies.  A village of monarchs 
flickers in my knees when she’s around. All I want 
is the pure speed of our hands pressing through the years, 
and occasionally, to eat scrambled eggs at midnight 
and her full-throated eyes, which will not apologize 
for learning to sing as men fell from skies like popped balloons.

The hen pecks at the dust,
it pecks at a rock,
there is nothing to eat, she’s the last one left.
Mara yells at her, do something useful with yourself.
The hen stares back, what else should I do?
Mara draws green water up 
from the well, heavy with sludge.
She no longer boils it, waits 
for it to settle.
 
Clouds form, pass by, taking their rain
somewhere else.
She has watched everything dry up and die
waiting to dry up and die
but she keeps going, 
cracking the stale grains between her teeth.
 
She thinks of her children whose souls 
have gone elsewhere.
She always thought they would come back
lightened of their bodies
and play in the yard.
They never came.
She thinks of the child growing inside her
floating in a tub of murky water
eyes closed, tail of a fish.
It will not live long.
There will be no milk, like with the others,
only a few drops of blood
bitter, dripping from her nipples.
 
A few months ago she loved a man
who got drunk on vodka 
made from tomato paste thick as dried blood
then shot her chickens one by one,
all but the last hen
who has nothing to eat and will not lay eggs.
Stop! she yells at the hen, there’s nothing
left here! She sees the new baby
pecking at her dry breast,
its small mouth opening
and closing, opening.

The fifth war was for the seeds, the right to what was green, and for the soil—more precious than kerosene. Before, the tomatoes had grown thick, wrapping their fingers all the way up the banister, the red fruit hanging like hearts through the summer, you could smell them in every room. We had a secret peach tree that sprouted through the living room floor and the children laughed when the fruit burst orange on their chins, dirtying their shirts. The neighbors saw the stains, soldiers came, dug it up and carried it off. Let it go, I said, but my sister—her two children so young they might never remember seeing a tree at all if she didn’t save it—tried to fight them off with a broken floorboard.
Soon after, another armed guard stole the tomatoes. Now, we scavenge, buy what we can on the black market, wild grasses mostly, plant them in a bucket with whatever soil we can get, mixed with old newsprint and asphalt. Place them in the sunlight, pray for the blades to stretch their cells upward, bright yellow turning so green you could imagine whole fields of it, the new skin of every child left in the world.

Once, when your wings 
   were white, you kept the favor
of Apollo, one crow for sorrow.
     You paid for
your knowledge with your tongue, your feathers
 
burned to ash.
   Now you hunt in the lime-white dusk,
turning your ripe eye to the ground. Your lucid
     lonely caw
from wild cherry trees, paper birch,
 
buries itself
   beneath the skin of our house 
so that when we make love it’s always fucking:
     our hollow 
breastbones and hips, hapless tinder, rub
 
against autumn’s
   inevitable angle
of decline. The familiar sparrows and wrens
     don’t linger
in yesterday’s matted fur, bruised flesh,
 
or bother with
   the blunt black-and-white gestures
of gods and men. In a ditch before the trees,
     the wounded
know the final chiaroscuro—
 
your curious 
   shadow. Like myth’s weathervane
the change at last delivers: the gods punished 
     envoys for
their crimes, all animal we labor.

We walked to the meadow to catch butterflies,
my brother swinging the net with his long tan arms,
swinging, too, at the birds, at anything that moved.
Sometimes he found translucent snake skins, discarded like rind.
I rubbed them between my fingers, felt the absent muscle twitch. 
Most days we caught nothing, although my brother taught me names—
ruby-throated hummingbird, mourning cloak, scarlet tanager.
I liked the painted ladies best: so careful, so close
we had to get to see those almost-human eyes,
rimmed like an ancient Egyptian’s or a peacock’s tail,
staring out from beneath the gently pulsing wing.
Down to the ravine we walked, the deep v 
ending in a cold clear stream. We splashed through the mud;
he was taller and quicker than me, and the hard scars
beneath his skin grew harder. When we tumbled across
the banks like spoor or seeds, I had heard nothing
of the road for so long I had ceased to believe in the road.

Blue mornings toward August we woke to the rain
driving its weary heat down through the eaves
and across the windows. Thunder grew nearer and receded,
then coughed out its song, a foghorn taken by the fog.
Before noon, we each put down our summer reading and slept.
When the rain faltered and the sun regained its watery light,
stroking the leaves and the shiny, pummeled blades of grass,
I woke you dressed up as Cleopatra, Aphrodite, Helen.
The cottage was our stage: you played the stranger.
Silver stick, horned, tongue like a lily, you claimed me
each time more beautifully than the incarnation before.
You begged to be even a shepherd on the most distant hill
of my kingdom, declared you would risk certain death
just to touch the milk-white ankle beneath my gown.
Was it just dusk, or did the forest grower denser around us?
I touched you yes with my baton, trembled, like a newborn, in my heels.

Sundays, Broward Haynes staggered
In the Piggly Wiggly, bought a bottle 
Of orange juice, sat on a parking stop 
In the afternoon fade.  Said he was 39, 
A Christian man, could drink 
Any of us boys under the pulpit, 
With communion wine or Schlitz, 
Showed us two fingers he said he split 
When he built Hathaway Bridge over 
St. Andrews Bay, where he dropped 
Quarters just to see them twirl & shine 
In salted moonlight. Broward Haynes 
Said God held a key & a dust tray just 
The other side of the sky, said Jesus 
Talked to him as he slept.  What’s he say, 
Broward? Says this world’s as tired as I am,
& half as fucked up.  Said he was half-
Cherokee, half-Scot, an Appalachian
Hill-stomper who wound up in North Florida 
Cause shit obeys the laws of gravity, gents, 
Flows down, settles in a cesspool—you call 
That an ocean?  He flicked a burned butt 
At the Gulf of Mexico, breathed last night’s 
Thunderbird & Old Crow.  He looked up: 
Ain’t nothing but a toilet bowl God’s waiting 
To flush. Read the Book, gents, it’ll tell you all.  
We filched him Kools, slid him snack cakes 
From damaged boxes of Little Debbies, 
Traded shifts talking with him & bagging 
Groceries as the sun went down.  One night,
He said the sky reminded him of blood.
But Broward, we said, the sky’s blue; blood’s red.  
A steel-wool beard scoured his jaw, made 
His mouth seem like the drain at the center 
Of a butcher’s market.  It ain’t the color he said.

I’m reminded that every summer those hungry harpies
rupture plastic wrappers and caress spanking new
 
Maverick decks with ambitious fingers; shuffle, gently
divvy up the gambles’ potential, then slap the cards’ back- 
 
bones onto hardscrabble.  Every lady is a can-do dame;
each, a wrinkled cannibal who shows up with her wallet
 
ready to run to well-practiced ruin.  Their mottled hands
fan lost time and no sooner have two Jacks just missed
 
their spot, sulky twixt a ten of Hearts and Spade Queen,
then the six of Clubs breaks down too.  But for them—
 
firebrands every one—poker & pinochle defeat the ennui
and panic preceding every last call for the game of War.

Strange but true
that boys, or call
them young men,
looked at my parents
in an Armed Forces 
recruiting poster 
and then volunteered.
My father with sharp ribs
and wave of hair.
My mother’s blond hair
pulled back, toes 
curled off cement.
Towels over arms.
The narrowing lanes
of the pool behind 
a tribute to perspective.
August, nineteen fifty-one.
I wasn’t proud of how
gracefully they aged,
or of their later kindness,
but of those swimmers
before their swim,
not yet wondering
how to beat something
into a ploughshare,
or if a thing must be 
beaten at all.

hush hush the sound of the moon
                                                            budding on the float of its own white voice
 
each each the very very crickets
                                                            snug in the pitch of their stringing
 
a whorl I am a mouth for a bed
                                                            the music that melts with a quiver
 
nests in the eye a wooled story
                                                            the bone dreams in the body I am
 
up up a bird thinks flight so is
                                                            the sight of chirp and warble
 
the branch it lights is perch
                                                            as feather is a breath of color
 
down down is also under
                                                            where above is a quiet sheen
 
the night a page the stars stop
                                                            its black words drop in me
 
their silence a simple in in
                                                            that rests in rests and sleep

There’s really no difference between
a tongue in someone else’s mouth 
 
and a tongue in your own. I can watch
another version of myself pouring you
 
back into the decanter. When you left,
the bed turned into a giant lung beside
 
a window. I pulled my legs up into it. 
Those days we all needed something. 
 
My feet flung out the passenger window, 
soles black from walking the quarry.
 
I insisted you carry me across the tracks 
even though it was years since the last
 
engine rolled through town. We’d even 
tied my toaster to the rails to prove it.
 
Where did you go with your Indiana-
accent hasta maña, handful of Saltines 
 
and mayo, secret love of televised golf?
The way your hands shook even when
 
you weren’t nervous. I can’t pinpoint 
exactly when it started, who made 
 
the first move, whether we were in line 
at the bank, on a bus downtown, or just 
 
ended up naked and didn’t question it, 
set our clocks back two hours. Hot gravel 
 
whirled to the sky on the night you drove 
away, and I took the yard boys down
 
to my crawl space. A tornado raged
out to Garrettsville. Nobody noticed 
 
the shattered marquee lights, one white 
bass blown out of the pond, flapping 
 
on the hood of a tractor. Your baseball
cap nestled in between the concrete 
 
frog and rain-soaked telephone book.
There was one bird left for every tree.

They tried to create something called a Republic.
In the back seat of a white van with no windows,
 
they passed a styrofoam cup and wore wool socks
on their hands, as if they’d been raised in row houses

not the cool myrtle subdivisions of white eye shadow
and glossy overcoats, mothers who pelted mailboxes
 
with gravel, peeling out after martinis with Joyce, Ruth,
the other one with the frosted hair and the habit
 
reserved for bathroom stalls and wedding receptions.
They had to write their manifesto on a night they both
 
remained clothed. They stole paper from her uncle’s
butcher shop, running fingers along the Genoa ham
 
like it was a thigh, caressing the filigreed mortadella,
tagging murder on the sweaty refrigerator cases
 
then charging into the night with salty hands and dry
salami on their breath. She covered her sneakers
 
with quotations and burned the ends of her hair
accidentally, then called it intentional and ransacked
 
her sweaters in search of something torn, pilling
like her sister’s skin at seventeen, pasty behind 
 
dictionaries and other apocryphal texts that sucked
girls away from the highway overpasses and tracks.
 
Everything that happened underground was doctrine,
or at least subject to several lines of pink highlighter
 
and a flashlight beneath the chin, ghost stories over half-
eaten sandwiches. He stood still while she sketched
 
him in the nude, holding a can of gold spray paint,
a crimson vest hanging from the back of his chair.

How sad God was, 
and dare I say, resigned.

Wind fell. Sand fell,

and the blue night, 
an absent shade now,

a broken memory of sky.

His fingers sank through clay 
and clay rose, 

folding over like a tide.

This is called giving 
up, or it is called love.

He spat on his hands, 
cleaned them, called 

a boy alto from a distant cloud, 
newly dead, 

someone to hear his defense 
and sing it back.

Kepler used to say science was thinking
      God’s thoughts
 
after he was finished with them, 
      but what did God think 
 
about the Nilometer, meant to measure 
      the rising floodwaters 
 
in the delta, but useless beyond 
      the fertile plain? 
 
Everything I know about Egypt 
      I learned in school: 
 
a skull could be pulled intact 
      from the sand there, 
 
wrapped in tuile, its face 
      painted on the outside, 
 
buried beneath the point 
      of a pyramid. Not one, but many
 
who lived among them 
      believed the sun 
 
was the iris of just one
      God’s eye, unlike Kepler, 
 
who kept navigating the elliptical 
      outline of the universe, 
 
as concretely defined 
      as the moon-shell surface 
 
of an elephant’s pupil, or the golden
      nail of a fly’s cornea. 
 
Convex compass to constellation: 
      unaware how deep it ran, 
 
or to which country 
      he’d return when he set out 

to prove no God but nature, 
      the sun’s red collapse
 
into the river, the world 
      washing up on its shores.

She’s the patron of impossible 
cases, struck by a thorn
from the crucifix.
 
A child doesn’t know
what her mother was wearing
but her nails were bright pink.
 
After the storm, a caption read:
A pirogue sits at St. Rita’s:
but instead of a wooden canoe,
 
there’s a statue of Mary inside
the front door in her blue dress
as if she could be a boat
 
when the windows broke,
and those who couldn’t get out
of bed by themselves, rose
 
to the ceiling in the flood,
though first a woman saw water
come in through the air
 
like Niagara Falls,
and when it’s up to her chin
a stranger gives her his arm,
 
takes her to a boat and pulls her
in, breaking her seventy-five-
year-old ribs, but she lives
 
unlike thirty-four others
on mattresses like boats
hitting the hard sky,
 
swallowing like diving,
the effect of nitrogen
narcosis. Cousteau called it
 
the rapture of the deep,
when divers throw off
their masks and sink to the floor.

It was all about objects, their objections
expressed through a certain solidity.
 
My house for example still moves 
through me, moves me. 
When I tried to reverse the process 
I kept dropping things, kept finding myself
in the basement.
 
Windows became more than
usually problematic.
I wanted to break them 
which didn’t work, though for awhile
 
I had more success with the lake.
 
The phone worked for a long time 
though when I answered
often nobody was there.
 
Bats crashed into me at night,
but then didn’t anymore.
 
The rings vanished from my hand,
the pond.
 
I stopped feeling the wind.
 
One day the closets were empty.
 
Another day the mirrors were.

Any river carries the shapes of all the bodies 
only so long as the bodies remain.
 
Remove flesh from river, let the divers 
recover—and the river heals itself, 
 
refuses to imagine the next one 
who jumps or slips or is thrown—
 
In this way is a book like love: It will hold 
the memory of the bodies—be infused, absolute. 
 
Burn them, send the ash to fall from the sky 
and still—
 
Ash arrives at the river and the river 
makes way. The ash tastes of fire
 
and the river wonders about burning—
this thing it can see, but never have, never be.

1
 
What we have not heard
will never help us. What we have not seen
by now will never save. The city
 
drowned under winter sunlight like a bad
migraine, the bars shut down,
hint of a pandemic in the air, in wind
 
invisible, the guess and gust of wings.
The pigeons have come home to die.
There are corpses floating in the trees.
 
2
 
There are corpses floating in the trees.
High clouds roll over as on holiday.
The sun, impassive as a president,
 
palters for time and tide. Once we could pray
with honest hunger for whatever life
drew from its magician’s hat;
 
now rabbits sicken on the mutant vine
and hunger is our habitat.
We are hungry. We have never been so hungry.
 
3
 
What we have not followed
leads us now. What follows is a thing we never
dreamed. Prisoners storm the empty coliseum.
 
In its cage, the gaunt heart screams.
Beneath ground, gears and levers
issue another victim to the light.
 
The trapdoor opens: thunder
erupts like anesthetic through the night.
The bars swing open. We have all gone under.

  And as the intimate bullet enters
the kerchief pinned and fluttering at my breast
white as a moth, ash-innocent, I shall think
 
of the stars that doomed me, amniotic flecks,
flint-castings harrowing at dawn the iron
shell I cannot enter, cannot enter ever
 
again. For hear me, I was born
too far from beauty and have always been
away, a child who sought in soundless things,
 
painted butterfly or spotted mole,
the soul of beauty. They eluded me.
Man was the destiny I fell to, do not call
 
it fear that I refuse to put it on. Once
I knocked I heard the clicking shut
of doors down corridors forever. Hell
 
is like that. You can hear it in the dawn
in the dark disconsolate labyrinthine scream
of shells my memory’s almost become.
 
Hell is the echo of a quiet I dreamed
that haunts me nightly, dogs me as a child
will dog his mother’s shadow. Now we speak
 
of shades. I am becoming one with time,
the rifles cocked, my brothers in a line
like ripening corn—all ears, all ears—
 
I pity them. Would I were not the cause.
I would not add to this eternity of noise.

Once as a child and only once I walked
into the past time of their making, those godlike ones
 
so unappeasable so separate at one
in a tangle of sunlight on the riddled sheets.
 
She lay, open to my knowing. On her belly,
bare, his finger played. And the branch
 
of its shadow foundered to a darker shade
moss damp and pearled with honey.
 
I closed the door. The time was one o’clock
I noted on the garden sundial’s face
 
following its triangle of dark
down from the gnomon to the I engraved.

     1
 
As if a god washed up.
   As if a god
out of the blue, fin-winged,
   its great horse head
   wreathed with dark weed
 
            2
 
and the men came with tools
   as if for slaughter
hacked at the meat, tossed back
   upon the water’s
   receding laughter
 
            3
 
then piled the bones in dung
   the precious bone
let maggots have their say
   out of the sun
   for a season
 
            4
 
dug up, scraped clean, boiled down
   removing all
ribbons of flesh, sinew,
   the vital oil
   from spine and skull
 
            5
 
and the men made a rod
   the women spun
into a helix curve
and strung the spine
   like pearls upon
 
            6
 
it, so when hoisted up
   vertically through
the sunlit atrium’s
   translucent blue
   for all to view
 
            7
 
it seemed a thing of grace,
   it seemed a thing
swam over us in flight,
   some fluent being
   on bone white wing.

1.
 
One morning I came to a field of ruined iron and wilted steel. 
 
Cattle cars rusted on beds of flagstone and slag. 
 
Derricks froze in poses of dereliction.
 
Furnaces and flanges, old car parts and shopping carts and barbells gouged 
through an inch or so of fresh snow.
 
Near the perimeter, where fires muttered from scored canisters, I saw the 
narrow stalk of a larch trunk growing through the torn cockpit of a Mig. 
 
In the branches above, two crows slept in the nest of an overtipped pilot’s 
helmet—lined with rabbit pelt—perhaps, sharing dreams of flight.
 
2.
 
When I was young, I thought of travel as story of space:
 
One body moving along a continent’s rivers.
 
Dragging a rucksack across the plains.
 
Or falling asleep on a bed of cracked caliche, beside flowering chaparrals 
and roasted pines.
 
Now I no longer believe the body has a story.
 
But I think of it instead as an artifact of the spirit’s twisted curriculum 
and deprivations: 
of the longing for homeland, and then of the need for escape.
 
3.
 
A week later, when I crossed those junk fields again, this time heading west, 
I saw the crumpled husk of a satellite: The Minsk. Its foil border, warped 
with traces of snowmelt, mirrored my body into a saucer shape—as though 
I were some novel and perplexing vessel, so out of context in this world.

When I came to the new country, I traded my siege-craft for a dugout and 
a splintering oar, and I rowed downriver, toward the interior.
 
I didn’t know much about the innerlands then, but I knew about going, 
about wanting to be gone.
 
Once, I stopped for a week to trap pheasants and cut wildflowers for tea, 
to read the three books I had left to me, and to repair my body in the summer 
prairie.
 
On the morning I left, before pushing off from the rocks, I tempted a falcon 
with a scrap of rabbit meat to perch in my boat.
 
Afterward we traveled together, hooded and sleeping, or else in silent flight.
 
One year, we slept in the dented hull of a bus. The next an old hangar, 
scattered with bats.
 
Late in the winter, as the ice cleared from the river, we returned to the 
water to continue our drift.
 
Ashen, near ruin, like the burnt cities on the banks.
 
Which I named in passing, and forgot the next night.

He crooks my head
toward his lungs slowing
in the morphine
 
bed and then I’m there, 
at black of skull, 
in the rhododendron 
 
blooms where my dad 
is still pulling rope 
to cobble the trunk split 
 
down the crotch by August
lightning, shattering pink
flurries onto the steam 
 
of hemlock. On my back, 
in the mulch, among my 
tanks and soldiers, I squint 
 
through flowered arms 
to catch the leaking light 
of day and watch him 
 
sweat and spit and try
to tie off the wound.

That the greasy pop-pop
of a semiautomatic wrecks 
 
the air before I can get off
the couch, before my wife yanks
 
our baby daughter
from the new fallen flesh
 
of pomegranate and runs
inside before their car horrors
 
past our fence is true.
That this winter this town
 
has more bullets than rain 
gutters in truth but is not true. But the bullets
 
are true. Candles, rosaries, the roses
that shrine the street corner
 
are true beyond the next day stare
of faces watching me walk
 
behind a stroller. What’s true
is the wound
 
channel, that human tissue jumps 
from a bullet like water
 
from a diver. One
boy bled out where he fell.
 
The other on a table
at a university hospital. Drawn
 
blinds are true, checked locks. Smiles
have too much teeth to be true.
 
What’s vital is the crush
mechanism, the permanent hole
 
a bullet makes in that moment
I’m watching
 
my wife and child each time
they fail to reach 
 
the door. Noises at night grow
skin, grow fur, spring fangs 
 
that scratch and score casement 
glass and hinge
 
between what’s true. And what isn’t? 
That I wrote down the names
 
of the dead, though it should be.
What’s real are the costs
 
of moving, of staying, the recoil
from a too early doorbell,
 
the ten to fifteen seconds left 
to a body when the heart’s
 
instantly destroyed. What’s left
is our fence five feet from 
 
the street, the house thirty feet 
from the fence, the front wall
 
four inches of California
bungalow and then her crib.

We name the animals and then we name their belonging, 
for sometimes an animal is more itself when it is with its kind. 
So, there is a fall of woodcock, but there is an ascension
of lark; sometimes, when the numbers are many, an exultation. 
These are not mere flocks but charms of hummingbird, 
charm of finch, dule or clutch of dove. It is a mutation of thrush, 
a murmuration of starling, a descent of woodpecker
a richness of martens. Of stork, it is a mustering, and while 
similar, equally crane-like, it is a siege of herons.
It was their lost son I saw before I walked into the barn. 
He was nodding into his chest atop his crop. The water
rippled and sometimes he’d step over, still, and shoot his
beak beneath. Perhaps there was a bed of clams through 
that cloud of gnats. But then he’d perch again with nothing 
and I wondered if he was going to make it back to his nest.
            
And then to see him jump                    and float           and rise. 
 
I could be that feather loosed as the heron skirts the surface
over the badling and the bale. The very action, offshoot, 
outcast, seed of abandon. I could be that footprint in the mud, 
stepping tenderly out, amphibious its palimpsest, and gone.
Or I could be this farrier who holds a horse by the hoof
and tends the trim for pay. I could be the one tonguing 
metal into fire until the iron whistles red and blues 
beneath the hammer’s bruise. Each imperfection rings: 
“What is not our image shall have no dominion here.” 
Heat bends, water cools, my violence walks the beam. 
This is what I know: each shape more true than my design. 
So, I am gentle with the beast. Even the drift of hog, the trip
of goat. But the work will not be done until I touch the filly’s flank 
and send her bare, but for those shoes, back to her remuda. 
Then I’ll shut the light and hope they take her in again and run.

A girl stood in the doorwell. 
            Our car was nearly empty. 
There was an old drunk 
            with a nervous eye  
 
pacing up and down the aisles. 
            He lifted pages of newspaper 
and rested them again
            on other seats, the way one
 
might do with holy text,
            kissing each. The girl 
reminded me of you. 
            A single note rose, a horn after
 
some stranger has died. The ancient 
            poet Li Po wrote so many,
in his old age he would go 
            down to the river with a sheaf
 
and fold each page—the verse exact, 
            complete as nature itself— 
into little paper boats. He placed 
            each of them on the streams 
 
where he lived, until they sailed 
            from sight. And what I want
to say is that I remember you,
            even while I am going away.
 
Above us, sparks shower 
            from the messenger wire. 
Petals of light fall 
            to blossom on the tracks.

I cannot remember what I’ve done, but my mother is crying again
and it is out of her hands. Modest houses are generating
squares of light, a shallow light that is not there. I am moving
 
the corner of the curtain back, waiting, and watching the first snow fall.
The earth, its gray fences, the slack weight of tilting telephone poles, 
that earth, the one that should have been, is not there.
 
Just my father then returning, his body blue in the easy moon, 
first and last the man, his footprints filling with big flowers, and
their broken petals lie behind his awkward but certain way. 
 
It would be the first night my father beat me. He might have lost 
a wager at the bar to a man in a suit. I do not know. But I remember 
opening the door, stepping through, barefoot, to the untouched
 
powder on the porch, a straining engine down the street, a jangle of weak keys. 
In those days, I walked frequently outside of fate, but I could not 
have known that then, meandering through the heaven of my either/or. 
 
I could not have known before he slapped me, and before the hands 
then clenched, or before my head would buck and fall, as my teeth 
were freed from speech, as my eye would flame from wax 
 
and then to wax again, or before my nose, in the end, would break 
into the beautiful thing. I could not have known my body was more 
than a small sparse room of unsung leaves. More solid than that air, 
 
but less, solid like water, like ice melting behind the salt truck, this was 
his shame of me, and how could I blame him? My voice vanished, 
my mouth stuffed with frozen blood, and just the ringing of his fist 
 
under the single myth of the stolen stars. I could not go away for him
and I think, that is when he stopped, when cried not I the flowers under snow.
Nothing could have killed me then, though his other son was dead now a month,
 
a warm month, and though this night my father would simply pass, 
just as he would pass all nights, without a violent hand upon me, 
quiet as the clear sky, in the time when I could begin,

regardless of the specific nothingness and all invention’s else.

The trees on the lawn were drinking my air
                                                                       so I sought you out.
The last of the mice gnawed what grass remained 
                                                                                 from the drought.
And the sky was a bowl, was a skullfull of shreds—
(Why did you vanish?
                                     Do you wish me dead?)
 
—
 
My heart is a hive so the bees moved in.
                                                                  They shiver 
through my chambers, weird seraphim.
I’ve got birds in my head, 
                                           (their beaks are sharp),
and they call call call 
                                    when the sky goes dark, 
when the clouds are a wish, but no rain pours out,
 
—
 
when the moon rolls past and my eyes catch fire.

This is the pale-eyed beautiful-as-liquor hour when the sleeping
never wake
                        but curl over the pools of themselves
to drink.
                Among their sunken rocks, a bit of cloth, a glint
of metal, shrapnel, 
                                 a half-remembered thing—
 
—
 
the TV’s blue light, the news on,
the nurse-call button limp on its cord, and you, asleep.
 
The moon that had seen so much
                                                        pressed against the windows
while a gurney squeaked.
 
A nurse came padding down the hall, 
then, like a heartbeat, stopped.
 
—
 
And I didn’t want you to die and I didn’t want you to die,
as if by thinking it 
                              I could make it so.
 
The news was showing pictures of the war
and, Have you been here all night? 
                                                  the nurse was saying 
from her tray of shimmering plastic cups. She smiled 
like she had work to do and fixed the blinds. 
The television 
                        kept telling its story
like none of this mattered.

Oft has the warhorse, the wayworn widowmaker,
with wearied withers been dismissed
from battle, bereft of bit and bridle, 
saddened and saddle-sore, to survive
his final charge, his last campaign—
the paddock, the pack, the stall.
So I speak as a steed strapping in skirmish, 
stronger in winters, now without 
a warrior or a war. I was bred
a weapon, weaned for the watch-fire 
and the horn at dawn, the hoarse
cries of riders rampant in the rush
toward death, daring, undespairing, 
because boldness was their birthright
and their choice. From a colt
I was chosen, broken, raised a chieftain
among chargers, cruel of hoof,
a stampeding sword. Of slaughter
I am now deprived, and of my death-
friends, passed beneath the pastureland,
the bloodless grass that I am given 
to eat, and live. I love the balefire, 
not the hay-bale, the haw and brawl
of the hale champion, the split helm.
Where now the war-mare? 
Where the spur, and the spurnful 
stallion? Where the fight-scarred filly?
They are gone, my glory-herd;
they have galloped to the grave.
Now I await a drafthorse’s doom.
Fate has left me hoary, hobbled—
flouted by peace, and peacetime’s fodder.

My name meant sickle, dog’s claw.
I tickled the fishies with my toggle paw. 
I was a stickling sticker with an iron jaw:
 
I wiggled under their blubber, their muscle,
and took the first bite; I gnawed as I nestled 
into their flesh; I didn’t spit out the gristle.
 
I was the tackle that needs no bait on me.
My mickle tooth sufficed. While the sea-
beasts reared and rolled, I rankled like a flea.
 
A whale’s no tricky catch, once moored. 
But without a quick arm, a strong cord, 
any spear is broken, sunk, or overboard. 

That’s when my adventure started, fast
in the fish: my last run, my last 
kill: then began the course of rust
 
that only fishhooks and ship wrack 
fathom, a life unrecked to me on deck,
a life of salt, wasting in the whale’s taut back.
 
But it is beautiful here, though I erode; 
I hear the chanteys of the whale-road; 
the whale suckles me with his blood.
 
I skim the waves like an extra fin.
I’m an iron fish, a serf of Triton,
a barbed harp learning a deeper tune:
 
that of slow dying. When we emerge for air,
I like to glimpse the gulls. But of that far
world I once knew—when I was a shiny spur, 
 
a wand with a star—I want no lubber’s tale.
They can keep the force of gunwales and the sail: 
true power lies in death, and in the whale.

They put a noose in me—a knot, a nook 
for a neck to go through. Not just any neck,
 
but almost any neck of the woods:
north and south, west and east.
 
Not just one race, though one race
more than others; not just one supposèd crime, 
 
though rapists sell more papers than kidnappers, 
union organizers, seditionists, or cattle thieves. 
 
Not just men, though mostly men. I have held
the breath of women, too, and children,
 
whose necks are supple, who struggle more, 
who twitch the longest, because they harbor hope.
 
I nick the quick right out of ’em. I try
to do it swiftly, and I can, if the knot’s made fast.
 
Sometimes they’re dead—burned, bullet-pricked, 
beaten to death with shovels or with bricks—
 
before they get to where I’ve been uncoiled:
a cedar, a bridge, a telephone pole. 
 
Sometimes a crowd takes strands of me 
for souvenirs. In another life of rope, 
 
I bound saints to the stake. 
Twine wasn’t made for this. I should be baling hay.
 
I’d rather pull a bucket from a well, 
haul a rowboat to a dock, give an acrobat a path 
 
across the air. That’s a kinder life for a piece of string.
I’d like to rig a mast up, and hear the sailors sing. 
 
Take me from this limb, or if you keep me here, 
tie me to an old tire, and let the children swing.

Not the living dead but the dead dead: the righteous dead 
who have waited for the pale horse so they can stop being 
so dead. You call forth the callused fingers of Johnny Cash 
softened during June-less weeks to my deadened 
surface. Everywhere, my skin is whirlpools of fingertips 
regaining sensation, waiting. You bring out all of the 
dead white men in me—entire anthologies of them, my spine 
cracking like a loose canon. Whitman & multitudes of dead 
or dying soldiers, Keats & Fanny, Hopkins & God all crowd 
up inside me, electric wires writhing. You rewind me to 
the moment the dead first began to outnumber the living, when 
Lazarus returned to tip the scales back, to stave off the inevitable. 
In the invisible cities of the dead, I walk star-lined streets, 
multiplied beyond endurance. You have resurrected 
the Rita Hayworth in me, the Mae West. And we all rise up, as good as dead.

Big Man will play a king, he fits the part, his father
all swaggering before him. A small woman comes in feathers
for her cue, not knowing the scene eats birds. 
 
A few children leap through like sheep but we have 
no hillside, only cardboard refinery, stage left. 
They hide deep in its gloamy sulk. 
 
Would you have us play a tragedy
in which we know the words unholy?
They come to our mouths formed and ready,
 
like a salute, a march of men, that brittle dance
they’ve formed in the front. The legs lift together,
so clean, they are all clean and such men as they twirl
 
their rifles gentle in their hands. More swivel behind, uniform
all over the set—no men but guns, in shining 
dark rotation, gorgeous, bringing down the house.

Even the black is blue. 
Even the cargo ship, a shrimp or lobster boat 
or bigger, foreign to me, black-blue
 
against the fog and cerulean water. 
And the boys and girls running in the water:
bruise-glowed, five-fingered outlines paused
 
like bent stars, kicking at the ice-blue
froth of water, crouching for a blue-striped
beachball. It’s that line in the back, 
 
above the water and below the fog 
that draws my eye—only because 
the rest of the picture is so blue does this low air
 
appear white. A hollow-lostness white,
a pull to something distant, let’s say.
Truly it is blue, as wet and deep-evening
 
as the ocean, the sand, the steamer, the beachball,
or the boys or the girls or the shine of the picture 
glossing all their faces to blue. 
 
Only my want for contrast invents it white—
as when given so much of one good thing
my eye searches for the lack.

Take a deep breath: there, now you’ve stooped to doing what poems tell you. It’s all downhill from here: the sordid parties, the fabulous butterflies that winter in the brain, leaving it choked with newscasters and verdigris. When you obey the poem, you always find yourself, sooner or later, in the darkest corridor of the grand hotel inside the moon, looking for either a lavatory or else the misplaced wonder of childhood. Your slippers feel rough and scaly, as if they’d been manufactured of asbestos, or sharkskin. You shuffle forward cautiously. Somewhere inside this poem Albany is lurking, and the last thing you want to do is trip over it in the dark. From the ambassador suite, the voice of the poem commands you to breathe again, and you do: left lung, right lung. Soldiers have surrounded the hotel, but that’s OK. You saw them earlier in the bar, decked out in mylar and mufti. They simply didn’t look very serious. Now, in the hallway in the dark, you hear their voices shouting, and what might be rifle fire. Breathe, whispers the poem. And you do.

The paratroopers extend beneath Marie Curie, beneath the ranks of platinum bicycles withdrawing humus from the soil bank. The smaller the children, the closer the puddles asphalting into the Greek pyramid where theophany has gone into anxious hiding. The paratroopers consult their pocket chronometers and agree that the bicycles are sublimating into golden, glowing vapor at an acceptable rate, beyond which the manufacturers of bullets gyrate in delirious noncompliance with Darwin & Sartre. Marie Curie shifts her weight, just a little, causing the paratroopers to encrust the crowds of tourists & speleologists like dried honey strung in fire from one spectral coal train to another. In her sleep, Marie Curie picks up a paratrooper, studies its seven waving appendages, then places it to her mouth and ear. “Hello,” she says. “Hello.”

All the children of Pluto sit cross-legged on elaborately woven carpets of horsehair and liquid argon. They are stringing beads: hydrogen, oxygen, hydrogen, repeat. Once upon a time, water was made here, on Earth, until the hands of our children became too large and clumsy to handle the molecules; then Mars, then Saturn, and so on. Now only the children of Pluto have fingers small enough, delicate enough to thread the precious molecules. Our agents report they are reasonably well fed, reasonably satisfied, reasonably happy. They work through the short Pluto day and into the short Pluto night, which don’t differ much, the long, cold Pluto year.

A girl who would become a saint
 
sat without oars 
 
in a boat of hide—a coracle—
 
and waited for the gulls
 
to feed her fish. One bird
 
in particular would often take the gold-red hair
 
escaped from her braids
 
into its beak and work it back 
 
into place.  The boat floated up the firth
 
and when it was time for the girl
 
to give birth,  she cupped her hands 
 
into the water and aimed toward 
 
land through the center of each wave.
 
The beach where she lay after the boy
 
was born was called Culross.  The mute 
 
sometimes uttered words when walking
 
there; irrational folk experienced 
 
flashes of reason wandering that shore. 
 
And Mungo, the son, as an adult, 
 
became known by our crowd for bringing
 
my poor pet redbird back from the dead.

I kick at the fallen oak
to see if anything lives in the rot.
 
A centipede rushes out,
flies from the carrion raccoon
 
land on my shoe. The cows 
of the Mennonites—
 
black and white like their laundry
on the line. 
 
Milk-white water in the stills,
the lake full so far this year
 
sediment of leaves at its edges.
I think in quotes and fashionable
 
asides when in the city.  But
I’ve brought nothing with me
 
to these forty acres.  I’ll buy 
what I need when I need it. 
 
I take up two sticks,
one fits into the circle of an old dog
 
vertebrae, the other’s a vine 
light as air in my hand.
 
As one flies through fire, 
the other swims.
 
Thinking back to that first walk
around your parents’ farm, I was between 
 
knowing too much and knowing very little, 
two months before my thirtieth year.

In Georgia, RAs found a girl in the dorm 
                       bathroom, in bra and jeans, 
            arms a blood-lacquer working above a half-skinned 
 
road-kill doe. Her cheeks had the blush 
                       of a consumptive
            and two leeches affixed to the deer’s loins 
 
found themselves hanging—one from a scarlet ear,
                       the other from her compact 
            and sweating neck. Prescribed for everything
 
from obesity to nymphomania one-
                       hundred-and-fifty years
            ago, Gogol was treated for anemia 
 
with six plump leeches clinched to his face. He pleaded 
                       to have them removed; 
            they were hanging from his nose and slipping 
 
into his mouth. A man driving an empty highway 
                       bit his lip, decided
            to go—his first desire was to be a horse. And when
 
his compact Ford hit the concrete 
                       barrier he was thrown 
            through the windshield, skidding jean and flesh
 
from his knees so that they were the skinned heads 
                       of sheep shining 
            in the night, his left cheek ground to the pavement. 
 
Later, doctors placed maggots on the necrotic 
                       flesh of infected wounds
            and let a leech grow fat on his cauliflowered ear.  
 
Da Vinci was so mesmerized by the rippling 
                       of leeches propelling 
            themselves through water—like Papal streamers 
 
in strong winds—that he sketched them in red 
                       chalk, trying 
            to capture their motion (the fastest swimmers 
 
are the hungriest). On an Alaskan reservation 
                       a ten-year-old girl 
            was drowned on the banks of a pond
             
by a teen who’d been huffing gasoline—
                       he thought he was 
            riding a polar bear’s ghost to the sun; 
 
he wanted to beg it to stop shining 
                       so brightly. But 
            it was night and leeches swam invisibly  
 
beneath her flared nostrils. The year of the doe 
                       was the year 
            my roommate’s father pedalled a child’s bike 
 
down the middle of Highway Twenty through banks 
                       of snow, and sat down 
 
behind their horse-barn and let go—so that the soil 
                       there was reminded 
            of a red fox that fell into fur and a mess
 
of maggots, was reminded of Confederate 
                       Infantryman Abraham 
            Hinson whose body was dragged, still flushed
 
from a bog to that spot and left, covered 
                       in small black flags 
            that wilted the man, and when fat on him 
 
dropped lazily away.

He lay on the last stair, skull split, 
a blood hat; legs twisted
like locked tree limbs—this was the wreck 
of him.  And there was she
with lamprey mouth and skin 
of stump warts—so that she moved 
through the house like a steel door
scraping open—it was this 
that made her spring feral, bury 
her claws in, leaving him 
biled and marrowed
beneath the mahogany armoire.
She would have devoured him then 
but she saw him cloaked in blackest feathers
and knew his beak would not pass
easily.  He would have walked 
from the tunnel of unconsciousness
and plunged his knobbly thumbs
into her eyes—he would have
made mole-holes of them
but for a dream of an otter
steaming on a cold beach, collapsing
a crab, clasping then dropping it
again.  Instead, she slid 
her knife along the seams of him, slipped
his blood-moist hide over her,
and when his hand-skin covered her hands,
when she breathed through his narrow
nose-holes, she understood 
she could love him.  The otter 
purring the naked crab into death.

 powder, saltpeter
quick brimstone, camphire 
 
meal and pestle a little
                  oil of almonds
 
keep it close from air else 
it becomes of no use
 
to be mealed and mixed 
        the manner of making stars
 
little four-square pieces
 
rolling, make it round
               about the bigness
       of a nut
 
prepared as an ordinary arrow
paste it round
 
fill little by little
 
with a thimble 
    still thrusting down

Wren, warning
the world off, hops 
his roof, keeping 
the nest of cracked 
shells, twigs, soft white 
dung. His bug-fattened 
hatchlings have not
seen from the hole
through which he enters
their wooden home.
What they know 
of the world 
is a circle of sun 
and a tangled bed, 
and the feathered 
whirl that brings
inchworms, green,
tender. When
ninety summers
have fed and fledged 
and I still move
among the sticks, beak
open to a wooden 
sky, I will say this 
again. Wren,
perch at my door, 
and hold out,
through the circle 
of light, a green worm 
from gardens
outside of here.


Or They Might Be the Deer
that dampen the ground
and calm the scrub. 
The hunter drags them out
along a path. They let go their coats. 
This is what they give:
 
A little bowing underfoot.
A song of lost hair.
 
Or the dead could be buds that don’t open,
keep to their dark, fall off;
or blooms that have opened so widely
the petals splay like failing stars.
 
Go on. Collect hair for your soil.
Take bone meal, dried blood.
The dead lie on white cloths before us. 
They say, Eat, earth. 
This is my body. 
They accept 
no offerings.
They leave on the table 
the entire feast 
of our grief.
 
Here is what the living carry home—
the fall to laurel. 
The retrieval.
Soon the laurel shifts 
and tosses with a hopping thing—
a towhee, calling,
drink your tea drink your tea.
 
This is not an elegy.
I am not standing in the woods
gathering the hair of the dead.
I am drinking my tea. 
The tea is over-steeped.
The black leaves
keep catching in the throat.

How far from Ankara to this—a late 60’s Iowa midnight,
Johnny Cash’s Ring of Fire on the radio, my uncle Billy 
 
grinning.  He loves Johnny Cash, fellow addict, his pouch
smuggled under the strings through the sound holes, until
 
the cops nab him.  But my uncle’s safe now.  There’s no
more listening to the broken Russian sky, code layered in
 
code through his Army headset, no more pinching at the
cyanide  tucked in a front shirt pocket.  This is different
 
gold.  He purifies with carelessness.  He’s keeping me up.
The movies have charged him, Cash has charged him.  My
 
mother says he’s gone Asian and for a long time I wait for
that wisdom to show, the five pillars of Islam, so long it is
 
the future…  My uncle is dead in Denver in a halfway house.
Johnny Cash is dead.  There are no more drive-ins, no more
 
USSR, summer days at Lake McBride.  No more of Linda’s
laughter as light as a wren’s.  History resolves into a man’s
 
nose my uncle bites off in a Colorado bar, or so he says,
two wives lost, two sons.  Those long stretches of boredom
 
in the Army whitening to amphetamines and beer…
Years later, or earlier, I can’t tell anymore, it’s still America,
 
another war.  The men in my family perfect their drinking,
so when the accident occurs and Linda has to pack his spine
 
nightly, I want to see the wound, that openness at the base
of his nerves as if the wires there might be some radio to
 
God or Russia, or at least to KWWL, Cedar Rapids,
Waterloo on the AM dial.  All that sound coming from the
 
bottom of a tin well.  The car ads, the pitch for Hawkeye
Downs.  And then that open wound of Cash, us dropping
 
through the Iowa night, the flames rising, what I didn’t
know rising, 9 years old, ready for bed, my aunt’s good-night
 
kiss still warm on my cheek.  My skin alert, exhilarated.
Godzilla in the head or radioactive ants.  So when his
 
eyes ask me to sing, I sing.  I croon him Cash and
Tokyo.  I dance my raw American soul in his ring of fire.

Instant Ralston in a cold kitchen, my father at the
window,
 
the smell of Aqua Velva mingling with the pulverized 
mush so it was all I knew
 
of money,
the two bowls sucked down—no spoon—
 
over the sink.
Dish towel tucked in his buttoned collar.
 
This was work, his theory of work:  he shaved and did
not cut his throat.
 
And then the one slice of American cheese between two
pieces of Wonder bread,
 
a staggering paucity of spirit he ate with a cup of coffee
at his desk,
 
the quarter inch thick piece of glass
holding down the year,
 
the schedules, the trim margins,
with its transparent
 
press.  A receipt tucked in.
A business card.
 
While I spooned down glop in a lunch room cafeteria,
the daily human oil like Vaseline
 
in the mind.
On the trays, the spoons, the knives.
 
Or when I walked home, a fried egg sandwich
at the drop-down table
 
that folded like a bed.
Cream of tomato soup.  A split open column of crackers.
 
Was my soul fed?  Did the miracle
of love stick to my ribs,
 
half-breath in the aftermath of eating?
The feel of 1962
 
still in my mouth. 
A bird feel.  Dust feel.
 
My spit clogged.
And then later the majesty of the casserole.  A can
 
opened. The Spam diced.  Cream
of whatever vegetable smoothing the congealed mass.
 
It had a crust like earth.  It had edges.
Weird volcano of my mother’s making.
 
We prayed.  We gnashed it down and
swallowed, we coughed it up.
 
At the good oak table formica-ed
with a skim ice.
 
At the chrome steel table
painted the color of a One-A-Day vitamin.

I hold myself as if I am raw
silk—a slender shadow—
 
hand folding the soft blue
cloth, then unfolding a still composure.
 
I curve the back of my hand to shape
myself into a sparer mean.
 
What will become of me—my beauty, my howling
hurt, my pilgrim notes?
 
It has rained for days.  The door sticks in the damp.
 
I set the table with pink peony.
Flinched & careful, make a code for stitching
 
Flaw.

Like a floating
Restlessness, alive
& tender.
 
So this: in the flat.
Think of it as
Salt—
 
From stain, thin
And papery,
A splaying
 
Open into 
Stars, she, skimming
The sluices open,
 
Quick & generous, 
Her dress hitched
For give.
 
What if the will
were husk entirely,
and the husk,
breakable,
were broken open, to
where the seeds are? What
then? 
 
It is as they
Said it was:  the plowman
Sings of tether,
 
So pure, so bare, so 
Detached, it is 
Not prior to
  
Anything and  
Never no where
Without.
 
It is only that which
Explodes 
In the mouth.  You.

Do not think arrangement.  My mother’s mouth is full
of fingers, her wrist scraping a brute tongue and she has a throat 
 
choked with the black pebbles of Tibet. There is no sound
in this exorcism.  This is an orifice so suicidal it cannot die anymore.
 
In this house, another failed kill means a turning to the baby. 
Maybe I am to drown in the vomit filled bowl, maybe the bile
 
is my good Easter dress and I am expected to look pretty, to pose
my shoulders in a perfect ballet arch and pirouette face-first into the pool. 
 
Maybe these patent leather shoes are mother’s hands and my tiny toes
arteries to the heart.  Asphyxiation is a green fist coloring
 
the brain’s left hemisphere—one half of the world flushed down the toilet. 
Do not think brilliance. All this suffocation and regurgitation undo the mechanics
 
of any plan. It’s really very simple: too many lips slaying too much air. 

Beware the trust of the Lord: 
the snout cast down, deadened eyes back
in their slits—my father lifts
the twisted neck by the antler rack.
 
This picture was the last:
and, perched on the tailgate, a grin
for the flash, he commemorates
the body: whole, with its skin
 
tight over muscled flesh.
Held by its joints, deer skinned and strung
from the apple tree—we ate
the dark meat. Years from this, the tongue
 
of the tree-stand angled, snapped.  
My father fell, splintered his spine.
Buried by leaves, he prayed 
for mercy, for an answer, a sign: 
 
the voice from that whirlwind,
God gave His reason: Who gave birth
to the hoarfrost of heaven?
And from whose womb did the ice come forth?

God’s invasion has begun:
out in the sound, all manner
of birds tear south in swathes.
Above rough surf, a squad
of pelicans cruises shadowlike,
brant, in a line, swing inland
toward shallow marsh scruff.
A rabbit tilts his thin ears
like radar against the summer
and the moonlight. My faith
exists just above a wisp
and my body even closer—
a drawn out lingering
of warmth before a storm,
a silence at the center where 
a kernel of sand begins.
The inked ghosts of poachers
troll the inlets awake:
an explosive thrum of fowl—
all spirits, angels, and dead
from what must feel like
a million winters against
the grave. We’re all awake
in ways unknown, our eyes
(goose, outlaw, rabbit) all
rising blue and gray from old
sandbars and damned islands.
The hesitant squeak of an oar,
the stuttering hisses of torn
kite wings caught by a fence:
every last thing is an omen
overwhelming my spectral
breath, the raw concentrics
my listening unencumbers.
In one bolt, my blind eye
and my good eye (my bad,
as I’d say in mixed company)
become not ghost-flesh,
but quite suddenly present
and rotting. Even the sweet
nub of cigar I’d been nursing
when I keeled in the boat’s
muddy bottom as my body
drove my skull into the steel
of the boat’s lip—it reddens,
burns into currents. The bruises
ring back (a sunrise behind me
to match) and the feeling
in my feet creeps forward
until surely I am walking,
dripping from inside the sound
to see the dunes like wings
buckling in the wet heat.
God, this has all come on
so soon—one sin from hell,
one deed from heaven: the path
I’ve seen only yards of sinks 
away into western darkness
and never doubles back. 

At pier’s end the coaster’s warped spine
silent, deserted against the night.  And black-
out curtains drawn along the boardwalk’s frenzied
stage—ruse intermission, as if the play
went on while the ocean checked its watch.
Her job: to heave the arrow, call a number,
underhand toss the cartons to winners.
                                                               Somewhere
out there in the darkness U-Boats hoped
to draw their beads on freighter shapes against
escaping light.  Beneath her feet, determined
detonations, a chill between the planks
as pylons gutted breakers, people around her
hammering fists while the metal claw buzzed,
slowed to ticking, trapped between the pegs.

The town between their bodies 
is peopled at times, 
& the great yowling machine
roars its way this way & that,
impelled by friction 
& a wayward wind    the brightest
of reds    a fire engine on fire!
There must be a riot going on,
teasing the blood, riding
the bones to a frenzy.
 
*
 
When the city in his head shuts down
& the remaindered neon can’t save
anyone, he tries to make peace
with all their manufactured suffering.
No curation can recover
those conversational corners 
with tar paper & feckless railing;
she’ll harangue his way to the grave,
burning the bitter bridges through.
 
*
 
There’s a man in the trunk
who hammers & pounds, nails
like a screeching of tires
or whales, drowning 
off the coast of Nantasket.

 Untie the cotton gown before
the eyes roll back.

            Oxygen machines its breath
into your sleeping form.
 
            When I turn blue
remember me as sky.
 
            White I am sky,
cellulose, leaf-like.
 
            Membrane displayed as
a trail of snowflakes
 
            or row of skirted dolls
(with kissing knees).

            Days in a day. Hours
scissor through me.
 
            The promise of forever
at the end of every line
 
            my hands write, wait
many fingered.

The basement drops first, too heavy
to lift. Goodbye mortar and stone
 
with a penchant for mold. Goodbye
grandfather clock with your broken
 
gong and a piano missing half its teeth.
Boxes of books and baby clothes shock
 
from sudden light. Spiders cleave to every
fold, their hairline mouths and sticky sacks
 
shatter in a shower of concrete. The living
room refuses to land, a triangular cape

with shingled wings that cries from Calgary
to Cancun and back again, smashing windows
 
along the way, ripping free of the chimney,
its blackened brick and drag. Wires unravel
 
like veins across the sky, dance a secret
alphabet. Vertigo for the television
 
and stereo who bury themselves
at sea. The bedroom surrenders
 
ivory walls, splayed open, vulnerable
without curtains. The queen bed
 
slumps her bulk against an oak.
Crows shred her ticking heart.

Flip the switch—
            [for fire     for ice]
 
Flip the switch—
            [& I am a stone in limbo]
 
Flip the switch—
            [& I am all flawed form     blackedout bluelines     a blurry diagram of chalk]
 
Flip the switch—
            [& I am a flayed daydream     something barbed & luminous]
 
Flip the switch—
            [& I am immaculate     tessellated     a sheetmetal overcoat lined in long needles]
 
Flip the switch—
            [for fever     for tractorlight     for the cold compress of dusk
            watch as I dig the pit     to slaughter the horses]
 
Flip the switch—
            [for small miracles     for electricity     for the body open & shut]
 
Flip the switch—
            [& the buildings sprout]
 
Flip the switch—
            [for applause     for a tickertape parade     
            the cerulean sky infinite & without regret]
 
Flip the switch—
            [& I am invisible]
 
Flip the switch—
            [& the buildings crumble]
 
Flip the switch—
            [& they will kneel in the brightshards of glass     
            they will pick their teeth out of the ash]

Flip the switch—
            [for another rendition]
 
Flip the switch—
            [& some cover their mouths     & some cover their genitals     
            & some cover their breasts]
 
Flip the switch—
            [& some are in boxes     & some are in piles]
 
Flip the switch—
            [& my mind is a missile     a green light threading a sleeping chimney]
 
Flip the switch—
            [& my mind is a bucket & a board]
 
Flip the switch—
            [& I’ll put their eyes out with a spoon & a song]
 
Flip the switch—
            [& I’ll pour my cold blood into the astonished asshole of the mouth]
 
Flip the switch—
            [& they will mistake me for the sea     for something alive     
            for something that cares]

Here comes the boy again, dragging his death
by a string. Here comes the gun he waves above his head.
Here comes the light raked loose
like salted slugs, how it fizzes over liquor bottles
& magazine racks, & he must feel it, yes,
like ulcers puckering his skin, for he hugs himself
with his other arm, high-stepping in place, trying to hold in
the filthy, burst mattress of the soul.
But here it comes nonetheless! Christ, look at it!
It won’t stop jumping out
to bang on the scuffed Plexiglas window
of heaven. Here come the angels,
they hear him, those starved revenants
trampling the riverbank of his mind. But the gods,
they refuse to blink, he’s nothing more 
than a speck of shit on the eyelash of infinity, they say,
spitting sideways into the dust,
though they come anyway, like Confederate marauders
spurring their wormy, wide-eyed horses
up from the shallow graves.
They’re peatburnt & staunch, they’re flashing their bleary sabers.
One has a face that keeps fuzzing out,
& one has biceps like a pitbull’s flanks splattered with blood,
& when he shoots at them, wailing, bottles explode,
rum tumbles down shelves, trickles
toward the feet of Mrs. Wen.
Here she comes too, fumbling the keys,
trying to coax the register open.
Here come the five English words she knows,
flitting about her like flying mice.
Here come the gods again (they never give up),
& the boiling sargassum of blood she can’t hold inside her chest,
as some fusty, ferruginous fog blows in
from the backside of the ghetto.
Here come the dead, they smell it, waking in vacant lots,
shoeless & soft in the weeds. Here come
the screw worms & roaches, the black ocean seething in its bowl
& a whole century like a ship on fire.
In the park, where the boy buys his tinfoil surprise,
the severed heads of history nod all night on their rotten branches.
He blows the gates. He sleeps
his dreamless sleep, curled fetal beneath a bench,
his eyelids blue & blotched with bruises.
Here comes the poet (what does he want?).
He’s scared of the dark; he’d like to turn into a sparrow,
fly into a steeple, hide beneath a broken bell.
But a desiccated bat hangs at the back of his mind.
He keeps poking it with his pen until the god-awful
gods come again. (Jesus, they never quit!)
Here they come, galloping across the river
of a dead king rising, surpliced, bearded in flames,
blowing their battered bugles.
They want a word with the boy, they say. They take him
into the trees. & there he goes, still half-asleep,
dragging his death by a string.

We heard you once, here on earth,
                        singing from the icy turrets at dawn
            as the tarry wind whipped skyward & you swooped
 
from steeple to balcony to wire, over the hospital
                        where a pink glow pulsed in one window
            like the gummy heart of a mole
 
that burrows from the center of darkness,
                        from the center of stone & clay
            where your song went to perish, how in the end
 
it already sounded so distant, like the whispers
                        of a dying poet trapped inside a glass jar,
            or the sharp gasp of a ghost
 
bleeding through the radio in an apartment
                        where the ceiling kept coughing up
            a fine, stinging snow of asbestos
 
& we opened the door & heard an explosion
                        & we opened the door & the day
            was rubbing its forehead raw in the scalded parking lot
 
while someone’s mother wept, looking for her lost keys,
                        oh bird, what secrets we could confess
            if only you would hold still, but you keep punishing us
 
by darting into the gaping mouth of oblivion,
                        you keep punishing us, shy thing,
            by turning into a brittle leaf, or by leaping from the edge
 
of our sight into the cauldron of smoke roiling
                        beneath the bridge, punishing us in our dreams
            where you drift & pirouette in the makeshift air,
 
where you fly in reverse & sing so sweetly
                        that the batik of blood creeping
            over the sidewalk effervesces & recedes, flowing
 
backwards, & we wake remembering
                        our dead & the bright cafés
            & how we used to whistle a little crooked tune
 
over the sounds of the morning traffic, calling you
                        down to lift us off the ground a bit
            & bludgeon us with your song.

Your hands on this rail
poised like a pianist’s
 
are birds in the slow movies
my father shot with his Super 8,
 
jays that live now only on film,
hanging forever in the breezes of the ’80s,
 
the dust of those summers
that stuck in my mouth
 
like the retainer I’d pluck out
to point at girls on the playground,
 
a disembodied organ, pink as sex, alive
as the moths I cupped in my hands,
 
the pulses and smudges they left with me,
their ashy vanishings into that pasture
 
in Iowa, full of cricket fire,
that held my house and the day
 
in my twenties you lay on my bed,
peeled off your socks, lifted your throat
 
up to me, the image of your skin
folding in and in me where
 
it is still coiled, like a reel of film,
waiting to be threaded through light.

Just spent some time
poking around the internet.
             It looks like there’s a lot of new stuff
going on.
 
Threw away my Mucky Duck t-shirt.
Didn’t fit.  Nothing does
 
except this black polo
and these pleated white chinos.
 
It looks like there’s a lot of stuff getting worn out,
just judging from the dumpster in the alley.
 
If that’s any indication.
 
So dorky.
 
Got a note from a friend in Parsippany:
“No thanks.”  It’s OK.
I hear they’re having rain out there. So?
 
There are more than 300 million people in this
fair country, and there’s lots of rain everywhere.
 
Doesn’t it all seem just like scenery.
 
Increasing cloudiness late in the day.
 
Like, I might be driving along, and the
iPod might shuffle to that one Smiths song:
why now?  Here, where the road
   gracefully descends to Applebee’s,
where the trail ends
 
in
 
I can’t remember. That part is blacked out.
The movie ended without even ending.
I mean, it ended without music or credits:
 
a fluttering of film and then its snapping
    against the projector.
 
So I write back: “The feeling is mutual.”
 
    Or that’s what I’m of a mind to write,
but I have to assume there are more days ahead.
 
Lame.

Tell me
I am a garden, the odd path
 
out of the forest, thorns. The floor
of our stone house
 
loves you
as I love your morning
 
weight, evening lightness.
We harvest the mist
 
over four lakes. We envy
beech leaves,
 
which won’t escape their branch
and fall.
 
It is January. You dive
for lake pearls,
 
freshwater assassins. What
would you have me
 
tell you? The black socks
were a joke. The cork
 
dried out. The air
still wet after rain. We hide
 
the shoe in our sycamore
and feast
 
on solitude. We envy mallards
traipsing
 
the lake’s thin ice.
Last ice. You
 
unstitch
your shirt, my sheet,
 
this poem.
At midnight, we thirst,
 
we wake and pace the halls.
Rose glass, ache,
 
pewter, moss: I fail
the window’s art. You wait
 
out the frost. Tell me
how to undo you.

Here’s a small pond with its ducking stool
And one middle-aged witch clutching a broom;
Here the forest of satellite dishes
All covered in a late snow; here two peasants
Ass deep in the bowels of a haystack.
A whining dog rears up like a blinded horse;
A stockbroker sets out for the morning train.
I am that solitary, head covered by hood,
Who scuffs his feet in the tractless waste
Just beyond the left corner of the village.
I am hungry. A blue horsefly distracts me.
One day I may get out of my own circling
To watch villagers circle on a frozen pond.  

It would seem to demand the sonnet’s shade,
This creature of stone ground down to desert,
Whose granular arrogance wind mislaid
On scalloped rows of sand, just where Shelley
Left us staring: we boys who had to please
A bald teacher by memorizing art
As old as (if not older than) the sea
That roared in “Dover Beach” or fossil trees
Frost always blathered on about— birches?
On the green board some sniggering wit chalked
A noose above the line “One could do worse
Than be a swinger,” while King of Kings talked
Softly about the dance, the universe
Constricted to the coming night’s searches:
Fevered, hurried and altogether terse.


Lost woman of Lilliput,
   the witness, midwife to my agonies,
 
I have trapped you
   in one of Popa’s little boxes—
 
a shoebox painted black
   and purfled with many cottonballs.
 
How lonesome it must be	
   to stand there all alone, to do nothing	
 
but stare at this endless four-sided night….   
   With a butcher’s knife,
 
I poke tiny holes for stars, a larger hole
   for my blinkless eye—the moon.
 
Then I stand an Army Man inside,
   the one whose rifle is forever
raised to the heavens,
  most phlegmatic of mates,
  
but you only sit there cross-legged,
  nibbling your fingernails,
  
stroking your tow-colored hair.  
  In the meantime, I am crouched

in my ill-lit basement with one eye
  narrowed in your moonhole,
  
listening to my wife’s continuous
  clopping footfalls overhead….
  
“Just one more little box
  among an infinity of little boxes,” I say,
  
handing you one, which happens to be  
  coffin-shaped and just your size.

The first night after you smacked my face and I moved
out of your apartment, I walked down to the Ganges.
How could I just go back to my flat? I hadn’t changed
the sheets in three months. I couldn’t imagine
turning the key, pulling the fan’s chain,
lighting the stove for tea. The second night,
I walked down to the river again.
It’s so dirty, Savita. The air was fleshed
with the smell of burning carcass.
I could hear a mother keening up river.
A small funeral raft came toward me.
I saw embers, what must have been a boy’s ribcage
smoldering. And then it passed.
Why those people won’t buy enough wood
to properly cremate their dead children I’ll never know.
It makes me sick. I walked past your apartment building then.
And I doubled back and climbed the stairs past our—
your door, and climbed to the roof.
On the very gravel where we first kissed,
I stood so still and let it come, your smacking me
for staring at the waitress, my refusal to smack you back
like you asked me to, even then—
but it’s not as if I’m bleeding, Savita.
The next night, same thing,
only I didn’t drink any whiskey first.
I stood there until my fingers went numb.
Then, last week, I climbed down the fire escape
and stood in front of your bedroom window
on the rusted metal. But I didn’t look in at you.
You know me better than that.
Terrified of falling, I hugged the wall with my back.
I could hear you though, talking to Punjab
and then your mother on the phone—
both happier for you now, eh? Those same black flies
that would settle in our mangoes were a nuisance,
crawling to the salt in my nose.
Tonight it is my piss running down my leg
and through the metal grate that worries me.
Remember how Mrs. T banged on her ceiling that night
after the football match, yelling through the floor
about her ugly children trying to sleep.
It was after we beat Manchester,
when we fell off the couch fucking
and fucking. Tonight I can hear her sweeping,
humming. I’m afraid she will hear my piss, wonder
and look up and see me. I’m braced-up so hard
against the wall that bits of brick grout
have settled on my neck. But she hasn’t noticed me yet,
and Savita, I wish you could see this, I just—don’t—move.
Instead I stare out at the lights, the darkness,
and the Ganges. I think of the bodies of the untouchables
floating down river and the filth and the wood and the fire.

We knew it was a fault to love
a place, to believe a cure
 
for hunger lived in the ground.
In July shade, that dark torch
 
burning in the air between us,
you watered dirt, broke beans,
 
snipped leaves with your barber’s eye.
You said if we separated
 
magnet from root, killed
beetles and mealworms, slugs,
 
we wouldn’t fail if the rain failed
and moiled our furrows with guilt.
 
The moon warps vegetables
with its incubations and foils,
 
and to such elements I was
sensitive—the nipple given, half-wet,
 
the dirt that cries for its milk.
Years later, I still feel its pull,
 
and confess I want to return
to that place, sun on my shoulders
 
and face, where I might revive
that garden, channel to it water,
 
and tend it like a mother who stays
with her dead child, who won’t let go,
 
who will sleep in the same bed with it.

I want you to loot my point of view,
to hove my heart
                        free from its hived booth
though I know your smoke,
                                    its black blossom,
is a substance I’ll never become:
                        colors
            of plaster and grass I’ve prepped
flawlessly, rivers I’ve whittled thin.
 
It’s a personal matter to me, the wind.
But let it be our cathedral feeling:
                                                a sculpture
of ash
                        dragging its robe over
the hills because of us,
                                    because of me.
Yellow is hurried,
                        but red moves like a swarm
            through toothpick homes,
            pans over roofs,
                        where the ethos we child
                                    from the ground
will blacken to ruin.
Let’s glory
            this roughened nap
of landscape,
                        this parched Arcadia,
with one nude-struck match and a breeze.

Kathy says grief is like not having your skin on,
but I didn’t feel vulnerable at first, or angry,
and I didn’t cry or smash plates, and everyone
was nice to me, forgave me my general distraction,
made fewer demands on me than usual. I couldn’t
go to parties though.  More than three people
in a room and suddenly I couldn’t handle it.
Also, I started doing weird math with everyone
whose age I know, like that person has now lived
three years longer than my mother, or that person
has five years to go until he reaches the age of 
my mother’s death.  I kept my skin, but the world
had a new gravity, like my mother was now
the center towards which everything pulled.  I’d think
why finish this if Mom won’t see it,  or why
go to work if my mother is dead?  She had never
been the axis my world turned on, but suddenly
everything seemed to revolve around her.  No.
Not an axis.  A skewer.  A spit.

In her last waking moments she was crying,
humiliated.  The nurses had fucked up the
“cleansing” drink, and she had to drink it twice,
the part she hated most from the previous
procedures.  We joked on the phone about the name
of the drink: “Go lightly” – the unintended
Breakfast at Tiffany’s reference, poor pretty
Audrey revived as a gritty killer laxative.
After the second dosing, the smell in the ward
was so bad they put her in a quarantine bathroom,
the kind with a reverse airflow.  When someone
dies, I think it’s normal to be angry, to find
something to be angry about.  Well this is it.
Where I put my anger.  What I wish I could change.

If the best love poems have a little darkness,
how far down can I go? Thousands of feet?
The coelecanth is near, but it’s too easy —
the metaphor nettable and clear, the lost
link found, the beginnings of our own bones
in its pelvic fins — and I want to write about love
 
with depth to hold the unverifiable, the oarfish
that survives with half its body gone.
I want it to hold the giant squid no one has seen
alive, strong enough to scar sperm whales;
sailors have claimed its tentacles unfurl
from the night’s water, taking down their mates.
 
But can such poems survive these confused witnesses?
Can they handle the scanty evidence that surfaces:
the mottled sick and dead, the night-feeding
viperfish impaling victims with fangs
at high speed, its first vertebra designed
to absorb the shock? And how much horror
 
can this poem sustain before you forbid me to say
some call this love, the hagfish that bores
into the unsuspecting body, rasping
its flesh from inside out? Am I making you
uncomfortable? The pressure at these depths
could crush a golf ball. Are you cold?
 
Or is it enough to be awed by the blue-
green photophores of the lantern fish, the brief
and brilliant light displays? What the lights say:
I want you. Not so close. I am moonlight;
I am not here. I would eat you raw —
tell me if you want me to stop.

The composer working at the artist’s colony had watched her
            for a week. The night it looked as if something might happen,
                        a pool game was going in the main hall,
someone had built a fire in the fireplace, it had
            begun to rain. There was the clack, the strike
                        and the painter unpinned her hair. She
and the composer sat on the sofa, stiff, not looking
            at each other. Someone was sitting
                        between them. One of the pool balls
met a corner pocket, and she didn’t realize
            until after she pulled out her comb and
                        shook her hair what she was really saying.
Earlier that evening, when it was still sunny,
            they had walked the garden path. He had
                        opened his mouth, smiled, Would you look
at that, and when she confessed she needed her glasses,
            he said, Three white-tailed deer. And over there
                        (he pointed at three writers they both knew)
that’s three humans with a stick. She laughed.
            If it had been a date, she might have brushed
                        his arm. But they were both married
to other people, and now here they sat, someone
            between them on a sofa, not even looking
                        at each other when she unpinned her hair.
The clack, the strike. When the fight broke
            between the two guys playing pool,
                        you’d think the first blow came from the sculptor
who did nothing but work and smoke dope,
            but it was the bigger one who finally felt
                        he had been taunted enough, and when
the caretaker ran in out of nowhere to break it up,
            his hat dripping rain, everyone was surprised
                        when the caretaker began to weep about
the wife they had thought dead, not gone.
            The green felt was spattered with rain,
                        not blood. The deer had slipped in
to a pocket of trees. This is as far as the story can go.
            Someone was sitting between them.

Those days, we never saved. We never went to a bank except to rob it. The getaway car had no parts to control smoke, our escape route lost in a plume of poisons. We hid on a hill where nobody went; it went straight up. Even animals were winded when they got to the top—raccoons, red foxes passing out on the gingerbread porch. We let our hair grow wild, we never paid taxes. There’s nothing that wouldn’t grow there, soil seething with worms, fog slithering over the oaks, sun going and coming erratically—an occasional god. It was warm sometimes, dogs snoring on the beds, on the green couch stuffed with surfaces of birds. Like the children, we were naked: it gave us time to read. Not having to dress, to do laundry, we built silos of time in which to drown.

Waking sweat-sour and stiff in a landscape of abrupt articulations, I remembered killing her. How sudden and how slow, the blood growing across her bra, her white eyes tilted towards heaven. In all my organs a terrible philanthropy and looped in my mind, incantations of the profane, processions of language, mangled, eternally circling wheel inside a cage of phrases as granite peaks slashed sky beyond the fire ring: junk-black wood, tin cans, litter of eyeglasses crushed in the night stupor. Barefoot, shivering in my underwear, abased in the blur of the Superstitions and the vacuum of my years I dreamed on my feet—of sanctuary, incarnation, any species of belief.

Meanwhile birds are singing in their Greek,
trees stir and chirrup, the darker veins
through buttery leaves like maps
of the routes of medicines or poison.
 
I am not insane
yet I am out of breath waiting for him to be out of breath:
waiting for the curtain, the rupture, tactile fact.
 
To be compelled into acceptance,
prone among blossoms, carried by water warm as a body
away but not drowning, mixed with lace spangle
of light on the leaves and the river,
 
one with a scatter of flowers, not drowning, not dying
but entrained—-a sleeper who knows she is flying
and does not question.

This fruit, of course, was rotting
while the painter painted. Do not mistake me;
these were not the strawberries daubed
with fantastic mold in the glass museum,
not even the rind, with its coat of wax
and fruitflies, of the cantaloupe I failed to eat
all week because my lover had not come.
He had those perfect curving brows
of the Caravaggio boys, the thick pink
lips, the heavy cream skin. Young and broke,
he occasionally sucked sweet-vinegar
juice from an overripe matron in exchange
for rent that winter in the warehouse
of the local art league. It was cold. The windows
cracked like loose bits of lace, and every day
the same knife sank into the same fat slab
of plastic-wrapped cheese. Then you would
have done it, too, lubed your asshole, rammed it
with the blunt point of the difficult sculpture
no one ever came to see—a pure aesthetic
response to that something cold in art
that does not care for us, as after our supper
of milk and peaches, he stood behind me
at the mirror, laced our fingers, traced the line
running down to the mons veneris, stopped.
Why put yourself at risk by becoming beautiful?
The Arab in the overcoat was not an angel;
when they found me naked in the field,
that much became clear. Picture it
and try not to think of a Renaissance still-life:
blue bruise on the bare plucked thigh.
A teenage girl is just another sort of game bird.
And as for this terrible gorgeous fruit,
the resin-hued grapes and pomegranate, sour-apples,
plums and peaches and pears, the blood-red gape
of the fig-throat, the melon quartered, splayed
open with rot—it is only the most expensive
form of riot the painters knew, the one the body
always already is yielding to. And the scent
in his studio was the same rich perfume
of decay that hung thick and sweet
in his lungs, in his heart, in his humid blood.

The stranger’s     fist packed
            with sweets     his breath
basil     you’ll want
            
            always     to be held
by him     water
            in a jug     which holds inside
 
itself snow     melting slowly
            to wet     in his hands
promises     nougats
 
            his lips     lemons
you will know     it never
            lasts     forever
 
you will lay     down with lions
            happy     to be prey
your men     will leave
 
            behind strange coins     sick crops
violet eyes     left hands
            right     fingers
 
thumbprints     your father’s
            blade     you will lean
morning over     the glassed
 
            river     reflecting
your dead     mother’s face

How many bees     for this came
 
            to their deaths     how many whores
 
stroking pink candles     with oil
 
            lips blood-bloated     kneel
 
to your grandmother’s     grave
 
            in the gloaming     knead
 
dough with spit     fingers
 
            backwards     Paternosters burn
 
incense and breadcrumbs     make
 
            the men come     even
 
the regal     well-weaned
 
            and rutting     women wanted
 
me     to gift them     signs will he be
 
            grain     of salt     or sea
 
winds lifted     seagulls 
 
            circled     his leg
 
severed     floating a small
 
            boat in the sea     how
 
seldom I told     them what
 
            this world     really tells
 
what flesh     tells bone

Before the sandstorm in the bell tower, 
but after the child covers her ears to make the silence 
louder, you will find my story in the book of fires. 
 
Here, where all love ends, in a house 
that is no longer a house, where I found the devil 
on the stairs. I put my head in his lap and cried, 
 
Deceive me, O ruined angel. Once, I had to choose 
between an honest widow and a lying orphan, 
and I chose the coyote nailed to the fence.  
 
Once, I thought the wound was a mouth, 
so I kissed it. And the devil said, Why are you afraid? 
A good fear is useful if you find a changeling 
 
left out in the wilderness to die.  I tried to touch his face, 
but he had no face, so I kissed his eyes 
where there were no eyes, only burnt skin.  
 
The devil said, There’s no use lying to the dead. 
They have no more need for beauty. But I need. I lie. 
I mean everything I never say. Sometimes I confuse my fears
 
with the names of my children. Sometimes the name I cry
into the darkness is my own. With the garden on my left 
and the singing bones to my right, where can I go? 
 
If the lamb tugs milk from its mother’s body, then 
I can take my hand out of the lion’s mouth.
If night forgives the sun its eagerness, 
 
then I can burn down the sugar cane, I can take down 
the plantation brick by burning brick, I can fill in 
the dry well where I hear a child crying.

I’m not greedy, but the night bear is.
Both of us come in the dark to your window. 
You’re dreaming, sleeping 
mouth open;  
the ripe yellow guavas in the window tree 
must be in season. I love 
ripe yellow guavas.
I don’t know about that bear though. 
Best be careful. Really, Honey, 
not to be greedy, but 
we better eat the guavas 
while we have the chance. 

Do I lie in bed and listen to the morning dove coo?
No, as again the men next door have started
without me. Alarm at dawn: chorus of percussions 
tempoless, directionless. Shingles busted up, 
their brittle plates dropped in avalanching fizzles
—all below my lazy golden curtains. Hammer falls
echoing syllables—present, present—a roll call.
So quickly I get up and put the kettle on the stove.
 
Late, guilty, a teacup in hand, I add a bag of soil, 
a glug of primer, a shovel-full of white sand.
It’s not the first time; the guys won’t mind.
I’ve yet to meet this crew, or even see them, ever, 
but there’s a friendliness about these messengers
flailing crowbars and nail claws to pry loose 
wrecked feathers of paint-bubbled asbestos.
Under moth masks their tongues are on the run 
in a language my grandpa could speak in a jam, 
though he never dared be overheard, afraid
to be mistaken for a liberal.
                                               At the table now, 
in my steel toes, and rubbing the rust from my knee, 
I await the late whistle and review the schedule. 
Today we’ll strip the old fisherman’s house
to inoculate the sight for the demolition crew
set to arrive, ten strong, within the week. 
When the teapot groans I lift it to its labor
 with a grace unfathomable to laypersons. O,
 but have mercy, for not until my fifth gulp
 is it rendered unto me
                                      that I’m not a carpenter 
 nor plumber, mason nor electrician, and there’s 
 nothing wrong. 
                           I’m a guest in a hostel on a hill 
 named Happy—a Chilean vacation in my twenty-
 fifth year. It’s January, the dead of summer here.
 I can go back to bed, 
                                    back to Maria of Valparaiso, 
 who I met in the park yesterday, who called out 
 “Americano” in lieu of my fine Christian name.
 She’s still asleep
                              undisturbed 
 by my gallop out of bed 
 and the spooking of the sheets.
                                                   She knows of me
 as little as she wears—this absolutely nothing 
 she said she prefers, even at the dinner table
 eating empanadas.
                                From the foot of the bed
 the sound of her sleeping is the hilltops humming 
 in a glance above the city.
                                             But as I lay me down
 I go forth in penitence, my ear newly attenuated
 to the real in the next noise heard
                                                        —There! 
 far off, another host of hammers—but from such 
 a distance it’s impossible to know
                                                         for sure
 the story I hear: is it nails pounded in, building up;
 or glass panes smashed, tearing down?
  
 Voiceless but not songless, 
                                              a cadence floats up 
 on a brightening tide in the day-lit window 
 of her shirtless chest.

Small wonder I recoil
      even from my own
worn image looking back
 
where I always find it
      looking like it’s trying
to warn me something
 
unspeakable is coming:
      Item. I stand before me
in a haze where people
 
can be made to want to
      make people stand
precariously on boxes,
 
arms wide open, strange
      hoods pulled down
over human faces, little live
 
wires hooked to various
      parts of the bodies
ridden on like donkeys,
 
smeared in feces, stacked
      one on top the other
for a photo to prolong
 
the swell an accomplishment
      like that engenders. 
Item. What kept us from
 
discovering our selves’
      worst wasn’t the lack
of evidence so much as
 
a failure of delivery, a kink
      overcome through
the push in technology
 
we’ve all had a hand in
      one way or the other.
Item. Looks like anyone
 
can be led as soon astray
      as to slaughter, disappearing
down the long ill-lit
 
institutional corridor
      misadventure unfolds
one synapse at a time—
 
and to presume immunity
      may be a symptom.
Item. In time I begin to
 
lose sensation, thoughts,
      I’m not complaining,
dropped a sedative in
 
tapwater and watched
      its demonstration on
what we have in common
 
with a sunset, gradual
      change and all the rest,
difficult to paraphrase
 
to be honest but I’m not
      complaining, it’s like being
detained indefinitely
 
but with three meals a day
      on a tropical island!
Item. Looks like what’s
 
done in my defense, or in
      its name, or in my
interest or in the image
 
of the same, no matter how
      distorted, fattened up
for laughs or plain dead-on,
 
connects to me by virtue
      of an invisible filament
over which I can claim
 
no know-how, no management ,
      no muscle to speak of
(anatomical or spiritual),
 
what can I do, I can feel it
      tugging again, what have I
done: rotisserie chicken,
 
homestyle gravy, mac
      and cheese, a hot biscuit,
sweet potato casserole—
 
admit it, I’m on the fat side.
      Item. As when a putz
collapses to the dance hall’s
 
floor and the pianist stops
      his performing mid-
waltz, always an angel
 
in a large brown gown
      bends over the slowly
reviving body and says
 
Don’t stop Paul we need you
      now more than ever,
whereupon Paul, without
 
much thought, without
      the burden of thinking,
sits back down, picks up
 
where he left off and plays.
      Item. Or say a dream wolf
found my room by scent,
 
entered it, climbed upon
      my sleeping throat
and camped there just to prove
 
its point, and when I woke
      up I feared I’d never
save myself or even under-
 
stand what from without a little
      alteration, meaning I
myself must somehow be
 
the wolf, and all the rest
      must just be television.
Item. Only in the ion-
 
rich atmosphere around
      a waterfall too immense
to be nostalgic did I feel
 
what I now know to be
      “the feel of not to feel it.”
Item. Actually I’m doing
 
much better now, maybe
      a little, what’s the word,
soporose, I guess, I think
 
maybe I just needed to
      work it through and now
in its wake I feel a little
 
what was it again, a little
      soporose, that’s right,
that captures it in a way
 
no other word could ever
      even hope to, I suppose,
I just feel soporose, so
 
soporose tonight, uniquely
      soporose. You think
I should be concerned?

We nicknamed your dog Sparky
after she followed us into our apartment.
 
You’d been separating real mail from junk.
We don’t even live on your floor.  
 
You invited us over for dinner. We’re vegetarians.
Veneer, you say, is a modern material
 
and I sit on the one-arm bench by the balcony doors.
The apartment twinkles 
 
with your great view of the bridges.
We are both afraid of the off-white rug
 
and cup our hands under our glasses.
Yours is the only one
 
to have an architectural wall treatment
and it took damn near forever to find
 
a sofa to fit into this space.  
Red upholstery is obvious—
 
don’t you think? Strong splotches of color 
make the place truly modern.
 
Something about this life is happening in an order.  
I don’t say skiing is a yuppie sport.
 
You say we should see your country house—
it’s more comfortable, but the art isn’t there 
 
and your accent is a shock of caviar and mold.  
The dog spent the night with her walker.
 
I read in the New Yorker  that dog walkers
make good money.  Should you have 
 
a new piece commissioned, to match a silver frame?
You were sure to hang the Picasso low, 
 
so you could reach it in case of a fire.  
Everything is an extension of the self.  

When I tell you my childhood was wasted
at sea, you should bear in mind
I may be an unreliable narrator. 
 
When I say I spent a year
in military school, disguised as a boy, 
be skeptical—though in fact I did. 
 
Each morning we polished our boots 
to an oily sheen and ran through the spruce 
woods with empty guns. When I tell you 
 
I love white wine, it’s the plain truth. 
As is the fact that my mother
was a painter and my father a cellist—
 
or a physicist. I get the two confused. 
I get confused about the relative 
weight of my loneliness: it seems so heavy, 
 
but where is it? Did you know I survived 
shipwreck? That I was marooned 
and lived a long time on the island? Surely 
 
that explains this hook-shaped scar, 
my love of salt. I ask for no help 
with these burdens. The earthquake rocked, 
                        
rocked the building’s foundation 
and the bedposts swayed
like masts. We set off from port. All my lies 
 
are like that: they travel 
so far over the horizon, then finally 
come back: my sea-weary, long lost kin.

This is the trick: Get out of where you are
in your deliberate home—kitchen gestalt
 
in paring knife, colander, clocksure ribs
of juicer, every perfect thing in synch
 
and place, spigot and looking glass; bookshelves
that loom the living room—and limn yourself
 
into the doorway, a safe place to fail
against, neither this room nor that. Now splay
 
soles into dovetails, hands to jamb. Exert
flush full against the frame. You will yield first,
 
but wait—hold it a spell. Hold hard. Quake. Tick
off sixty down to naught. This is the trick
 
the young play on themselves, seeking a swerve
from known to nigh, ceding to ghost stunt, nerve
 
and reflex. Once the countdown swoons to none,
release your stance, loose self, tilt shelves, welcome
 
the phantom rising: two freed arms in flight
from sill and you, will shilling its own sleight.

Her flesh finds fissures in the ocher, mask
and mantle, lures—a flushed cheek through the eye
hole, tapered chin in wide glazed ruse of mouth.
The girl she wears is headed for the low
world, other shadows; here, takes two cloaked men
to swagger that three-headed dog, four blue- 
jeaned legs to stomp and fume the master’s lust.
Big figures, epic craft. And yet, enshrined
in plaster, gesso, pulp, each glimpse of skin
bares elder mysteries—that slack male arm
up roan Demeter’s sleeve, an elbow’s crook
askew in indigo. Huge armatures,  
tall tell. But through those gods, small hands charm far
within, far stranger source: a girl, the dark.

Jesus has taken residence in my heart. He’s a tidy tenant, wipes up the stubble from his beard after a trim. I feel the shake when he brushes his teeth. He must be the size of a G.I. Joe. Why he’s attracted to my heart, I’ve no idea. It’s lonely in there I imagine—dark, damp. He’s given to bouts of bloody sweating caused by enormous prayers. I’ve not seen him, but I’ve felt the unfolding of a futon at night, the scrape of chair legs at breakfast. I’m careful when I walk so as not to jar him. I’m told he lives in the hearts of others, too, but how he manages is unclear. If he’d ask I’d say go on, take a break. Go out for coffee, maybe a movie. But he stays silent. There’s so little to do in there, I’m sure he gets bored. At times I have felt nails. Maybe he hangs pictures. Perhaps he writes on the walls, divine things meant just for him, or maybe my naughty deeds. This hurts me, but if he didn’t write something, if he left the heart just as he’d found it, unscarred, how might he ever recognize it again? If there were a trial, say, a dispute of some sort, and he had to prove his place of residence? If he met it again, how else would he be able to attest that he had been a lodger?

He sits me on the edge of the tub in the dark house
            extracts a fang of beer glass from my foot
It’s so warm the smell & hiss of peroxide is promising me
love, love                      it’s always the same in the dream
                        he is tending me, or relenting
taking hold of my paw in some public way:   alright, stop 
 
The summer I drove up the Pacific Coast Highway
            the splendor kept buckling impossibly on itself
 
Between the ocean and the poppies on the cliffside
I remember thinking: now, now is the best moment of my life—
and then I would round the bend—no, now, it’s now 
            nature kept trumping herself endlessly—
                        can I say I thought I would die of pleasure?
 
In the dream I slide like sand from a hole in a paper bag
                                    he can’t remember why he’s holding
 
In the dream? Even though I’m losing I say connect four—
                        
but he just smiles, incredulous, at the black out 
                                    around my little rebellion of red 
where
the night air slides in on rails to feel his knife in my foot

   This isn’t about the live oak
outside my apartment that begins
to slowly disappear one morning. 
 
                                      This isn’t about the collection
of tanned men who had chainsaws and a compact 
front end loader. Hanging by rope and rooftop,
they start at the top, put down arms
this wood octopus had spread over and between
brick buildings, as if someday it could push
itself free of the soil. 
 
                                      This isn’t about the loud thuds
severed branches make on my porch roof 
or the right balance between swearing and work. 
 
                                      This isn’t about the workman, who hangs
from the tree’s remaining branches,
uses them as pulleys to let down sections slowly. 
His silent chainsaw dangles from his belt,
the way someone might let keys dangle.
 
                                      This isn’t about the front-end loader’s scoop
or its two metal fingers that close on tree limbs.
This is not about its struggle in the mud,
leaves, and sawdust, or the way it tears up
now superfluous tree roots, the same roots I tripped
over late one Friday night, tearing ankle ligaments
on the way home from your house. 
 
                                      This isn’t about the stump grinder that overheats
every hour, a few tacit minutes suggests something of the tree might remain,
before the cacophonous removal continues. 
 
                                      No, this is about the new blank 
blue sky, I glare at dazed, through porch windows.
It spreads sunsets over rooftops in slow procession. 
It’s about how a late afternoon thunderstorm fills
mud tracks that say something big came and took it all away. 

An astrologer told you: a glorious son and a darkening daughter, and there she was, our R., for the fourth time that dinner hour filling to the brim a tall plastic cup, then sweeping it full to the floor; the night you were dying (though no one knew), hurling cups of ice at each other until you gasped, doubled-over: you never missed a fight, drowned girls who yearned to talk to each other—
She was autistic, fifteen, a torment, and you were her mother: elephant-legged and kidneys failing, twenty liquid pounds in each thigh; R. fills to the brim a tall plastic cup. The drowned speak through the water.

Mac says it’s easy
            you can grow anything 
inside anything: 
            a bright green pear  
swallowed by glass
            and alcohol.  His gift:  
l’eau de vie, water of life 
            for the housewarming
which turns sloppy 
            then brilliant.  
To the backyard willows!  
            Empty wine bottles
tied to branches.  Translucent 
            and bronze blossoms 
clinking in the wind. 
            Rich says we’re growing 
fresh mangos. Jack says
            it’s moonlight, moonlight 
smuggled down to earth. 
            Mary says an orchard 
of chandeliers, a ceiling 
            of ribbon and glass. 

I am precise as a paper cut  
My hand on your hand  
I am an awkward palm reader 
 
Reserved as a pocket watch
I am not very tall or old 
My work shirt untucked
 
My part is uneven
I know my duty    
Not too much small talk
 
Not too much delay 
I hang quotes on my walls 
Don’t ask me to explain 
 
Li Po: “On a narrow road every man is equal” 
Bobby Fischer: “Chess is war 
Over the board.  The object 
 
Is to crush the opponent’s mind"
Proof, the object of a fingerprint 
Turns, loops, arches, whorls
 
You are who you say you are 
Stand here and give me your right 
I am your groom, you are mine
 
My faith is in your hand

In cords of white heat   birds fold,
            wither to water like bits of stray  paper.
 
            A gesture worn thin    as a sequence of poses,
the tide’s  slow pull, tracks of waves  in the lake—
 
                        I sprinkle bread from the pier
                        & watch the gulls dive; their mouths hinging open
 
                     pops of pink against blue lake / white sky.  Color theory
 
broken down to the damp loaf
I scatter between fists;
 
treasure of gray gulls,  their star-shaped mouths

the beloved, beveled water: kissed & kissed.

That’s an exaggeration.
There’s only one live girl
upstairs, and she barely moves.
Instead, the students move
around her in the life
drawing class, dragging their easels,
so from downstairs it sounds
like children pulling heavy
wagons without wheels. Downstairs,
the invited luminary is trying
to recite poetry about death,
but constantly stopping because
of the screeching of easels
from above, which may remind
her of fingernails on a chalkboard,
of an episode when the class clown
erased her sonnet from the board—
a piece about a dying horse
which the young poet sensed,
even then, formed the germ of her oeuvre.
But this is conjecture, and further
distraction from the luminary
now darkening the stage, the fright
wig she is above the podium growing
more frightening as she glares
up at the ceiling, as if
her wrath could bring it down.
She does not bring the house down.
Her arsenal includes death and more death—
child’s play compared with the live girl
upstairs, the girl with fleshy folds, nose
ring, a lizard tattoo you’d swear
not fit for refrigerator art but which, on her,
becomes unspeakably alluring, as the students,
circling, edge nearer, the way two newlywed
brides, holding hands and cell phone
cameras, having driven all night from Nice
to Paris, advance on the Mona Lisa.
Like us, they’ve heard:
come close enough to the bullet-
proof glass and you can see breath
fogging the case’s interior.
You can take a picture of it.
But this is a case of mistakenly
talking about the Mona Lisa
and French brides and the live
girl in lieu of focusing
on the famous poet, who abhors
distraction, unless it involves looking
away from the wan vase of irises into her own
eyes, which are watering as they recite
her swan song of irises, a bouquet
she’s slaughtered by merest mention.
Meanwhile, the live girl scratches
her nose, the teacher closes
the window (more noise), and the Monday
night class advances its easels in a circular
fashion around her, the way the restaurant
atop the Hyatt Regency rotated beneath
its blue glass dome in ’67, when that blue
dome was the Atlanta skyline, before a whole
glass forest grew up around it. This too
is a diversion, but my father took me there,
to lunch at the Polaris, decades before we’d ever
tasted loss, and I’d like to take you there,
to where I placed a sugar packet
on the ledge at the edge of the table,
and after an hour of oyster Po-boys, Coca-Colas,
Take the “A” Train, and a dizzying
vista, the table had returned
to that packet. I want to believe
we’re on a journey that returns us
to sweetness. I want to believe that when
the famous poet insists she will never
read here again, she means it. This
is a humble venue, painted a deep,
strange green and she cannot compete
with the ruckus even one live girl,
barely moving, makes, as even now,
after the girl’s left the room
for a cigarette break in a blue
kimono, the students close their eyes,
re-position their easels and try,
with charcoal stubs,
to approximate that glowing.

It’s redundant to say
two red cardinals,
 
but their fire inside
the privet’s first buds
 
bears repeating. Spring is
the cruelest month, a man

waking solo for the first time
since Coca-Cola first came in cans.
 
You can’t bottle
happiness or its sad kin.
 
But Spring comes
back in the twin
 
reigns of two
red cardinals.
 
The furnaces of the world
fire up once more.
 
You breathe deep and drink
what the branches pour.

I built another bird with cages within—
some level of amusement—
a private glow.

These cold days and the magpie catches my eye still;
marvel of my creation—I can hear its hinges creak,
which the unobservant mistake
for a caw.

I watch it scavenge—a consequence
of careless programming—
too busily loving my tinker-hands
ticking the gears and springs
into place.

Someone once said, God loves a flywheel,
and that is the only god I can believe in.
Loud cries for grease—a prayer
unless the voice is so lovely in song
that even the sweet-whispered snow,
the long-breathed whistle of grasswinds
is no competition for the divinity of an ear

—though I have it to spare, I cannot bear oil.

Once I made poems of glass, crystal pitchers
For wedding gifts, that sort of thing—very fussy…
That was two hundred years ago
And also perhaps tomorrow— Who knows?
 
Now, though, I try to fill them up: You see,
We’re fucking, making love, I mean, all across America;
She’s on top, humming, dancing some late-seventies
Disco thing, which is hilarious and a little scary,
 
And then (I can write like this, too): the agonized aspect
Of ecstasy familiar from our saints, our porn—
Then a little blood, semen, a taste of iron
On my tongue, stains everywhere, life!
 
Would you have some?
 
Then a hammer comes to shatter the glass.

In some sense, the dead are easy to bear,
to order, to understand—We find a name,
a company, carve markers, line them
in fields as straight as corn, shoulder to shoulder,
trench, spade over, and wait for them
to be claimed or not, or years later, moved
for this or that town’s shining ceremony.
But two thousand shattered horses and mules
make hard work and, burning by the riverside,
weigh even the air as they leave us.
The wounded bear harder still,
and many—nearly twenty thousand—spill
from our houses, from beds or blankets,
from flat-on-the-floors, and ravage the gardens,
feed as if there were no end, and, soon enough,
everyone starves....  This is my house for hundreds
of years to come, and these are my fields,
and this is my night and my dark lantern
that leads us, then and always, to the second growth of cedars,
where robins roost, where we tap them from the trees—
bushelsful—boil them with hulled barley and eat.

Ages ago, in hospitals.  Now too. And later.
Machines blink, shuffle, heave this or that matter
On beds of steel or straw.
 
One day you have arrived at the foot of this bed
And find, somehow, your father, or
Someone, dying—and everything shuffles
 
And blinks to fill him, to heave the matter,
Startle the phlegmy eyes that—should you even bother to leave—
You’ll see through once...
 
But you must go, you do: the breath reaches you
From the bowels of his mouth: it hisses something
Familiar as rotten straw, as a bed you woke in once....
it is ages ago now, and you’ve long ago left what you had to leave.
 
Something is here, though, now, and later, and ages ago,
And among a thousand thousand pinnacles of corn,
it stands at a kind of attention before these paled generals of time.

And the buildings missed it as well, the overgrown war, the war
we couldn’t find
no matter how we looked.  We’re missing it again
as we speak.
 
“Do you hear that,” we say back and forth,
as it begins to sing, thinking maybe
that’ll help us find it.
 
Later, questions begin.  Which war is best for crossing,
and which for crossing back?  This,
the crossing-back war, is directed at time.  We say this
mostly to make ourselves feel better.
 
And maybe they’ll find it,
and maybe I’m not there on that day.  Maybe I’m off
fitting myself into this other war
I’m trying to find, and lying about the future,
the way that doesn’t seem to matter,
as the lie doesn’t usually end up any more wrong
than the truth anyway.
 
“After the bit about the leaves turning,
we will fall on top of each other,” they call out
from the loudspeakers.  And we know
we’ve left the war half done, wherever it is.
 
“First you’re there,
and then you’re older,” we paint on the signs,
and then on the other signs across the road
it’s, “We laid there for a while
pretending we were dreaming.”
 
Much as if that’s exactly what we want to be looking for
right now, so that everyone will feel welcome.

As heat, the thief you wake to
 
Not the first, of mice and—whispers
 
Who will carry radiators
While circumnavigating
 
Who will loosen ferules
When you prepare for meteoritic
 
Nights, our own imagining
 
Taken not by proportion—colorless
 
Like other valuables, crosses
Meltable on their strings
 
Who will gnaw each piece, toss
These lightweights to the sky
 
(A glue of mood, of glass eye)
 
And catch this child, flung
Imperfect seeds, planted in
 
A blackness—unopen, raw—
 
(Wider leading & beast filings)
 
A star further than touch-what-you-can
A depth you can hear in no palm
 
No, in a kinked chain of wrangling
 
No, in the triangle scrap of lesser crowns

Little sister, little fiddlehead, you unfurled early in me,
your leaflets and blades swirled in my cerebellum,
though I would stand in the yard, muttering
 
Do not forget the plum blooming in the thicket!
 
When I’d slouch out on the longest legs in town 
I knew it was true 
what our Lithuanian grandmother said:
 
there were no other giantesses here like me, 
though she watched for Cossacks
from her jalousied window, afraid for us all.
 
I wore our brother’s shirts, mother’s skirts,
outsized shoes, my darling Clementine sandals—
“herring boxes without topses.” Dear homuncula, 
 
if I was fated to be large, I wanted not to live 
in the shadow of something small,
but to be the flamingo flaring on the lawn, tropical,
 
not the hermit turtle aestivating in pond mud—
 
What I wanted: flamingoes, and the world 
in my little radio under the pillow, 
all the lights out, you asleep, my soft-boned other.
 
I wanted music, jazz, comedy, Allen’s Alley,
Digger O’Dell the fr-r-riendly undertaker!
Intoxicating jokes in the nights!
 
And blues in the swooning nights, and Frankie Laine 
crooning to you and me, No tears, no sighs, 
we both have a lifetime before us and parting is not good-bye,
 
We’ll be together again. O Timidity, 
we were together, you, my piddling self, 
fermenting resentment, you, pissing on my desires—
 
like those murderous shy people of the bayous, 
crouching with their muskets behind the cypress knees.
—Even now, the memory of you shames me,
 
drags me back to our twinned days, swamps me 
in its black waters. Sister I abandoned, little one, 
in the day-world I pretended to be you, flaunting nothing 
 
in the no-privacy of our body—but in my internal exile, 
something else, a body steered by the rocky story
of its time, wanting the hula hoop, the hullabaloo, 
 
wanting the flimflam of flirtation, then wanting more, 
high-stepping through the muck away from you,
night after night, to get more, leaving you,
 
you—square-eyed, despairing, watching me go.

I’m beginning to understand myself:
I exist in the space my cells leave behind
every seven years when they make room
for a new set of pixels to move in.
Myself: a fleeting entity, made of fugitive parts.
In the first cycles, the transitions refreshed me.
Now, not so much; now,
I make the most of my territory
while those mites rush past me, their time up,
and the next crew of aliens debates moving in.
I’m tough, that’s what I know. No matter what
molecular stuff’s shuffling through the door,
it’ll leave me alone soon enough,
so I kick my slippers to the floor,
turn off the light and ignore what’s coming.
I relax—I’m introducing my mind
to my mind again. In an incognito world,
it’s not myself I won’t know.

Sweet carcass of an ark, the past’s oaken belly—
what the sands had buried a storm uncovered
high on Newcomb Hollow beach; a hull,
 
round wooden pegs, tool marks that tell
its serious age, ribs like the bony cage
of a Great White whale, washed up
 
on the shoals a decade after the Civil War, a schooner,
archaeologists say, converted to a barge—
they think she carried coal up the Atlantic coast
 
from an impoverished postwar South,
coal that washed ashore on the outer Cape
to the hardscrabble townspeoples’ shivering relief.
 
In a few weeks, they’re sure the tides will resettle her,
she’ll be washed back out to sea or she’ll merge again,
fill with the coarse sands shifting beneath your feet.
 
Homely, heavy, sea-scoured, why should she seem
a venerable thing, spiritual, why should you long
to touch her, to stretch out under the March sun
 
in the long smooth silvery frame of a cradle
or curl like an orphaned animal on the hand-cut planks
and caress the marks, the trunnels, with your mittened paws?
 
Is it that she hints much yet tells little of the souls lost
with her, the mystery of survival,  the depths she’s travelled?
Has she heard the music on the ocean floor, instrumentation
 
of Mantis Shrimp, the bong bong of Humming Fish?
Why does the day, all blues and greys, feel transcendental?
She’s a remnant, a being almost completely effaced, yet to you
 
still resonant—can anything this gone be consecrated? Experts
have examined the braille of her hull, weighed the evidence,
and they declare, It’s another secret the ocean burped up,
 
nothing but a blip, a brief reappearance, once rowdy,
rough with purpose, now not even a container, holding
nothing, revealing nothing....But aren’t you also a singular secret
 
Nature burped up, hurled flailing into the air from the start,
hungry for light, holding onto whatever buoys you,
alive, kicking, even when you know you’re going down?

When I first read the phrase man’s inhumanity
to man in the other world I found it elegant
but inadequate though I was moved by it
 
In the beginning the five of us were angry
then frightened—those sooty days still
days of hope and imagination
 
Hope and imagination
each one necessary to the other
that is what I thought
 
Then we had a sheepish sense someone would come
to feed us to organize our group
to herd us to a city with parks and fountains
 
For a time I would repeat my favorite words
and my mother’s choice unprintable ones
and my uncle’s forbidden ones
 
my children’s exuberant babble of wonder
none of the others shared my interest
but I would recite alphabetically for instance
 
my favorite adjectives all the birds
I could name authors from seven continents
for Antarctica I invented the author Per Mission
 
just to live in my mind in the gone world
 
Still most mornings
or what I estimated inside our noxious cloud
was morning
 
we’d wait together we were very hungry
small starving animals voles and mice with round ears
feared us as we feared them
 
because we’d lost confidence in ourselves
and shared no vocabulary to discuss
what we’d been severed from or where we were
 
 I lost one then two then more Latinate
or Indian-rooted words I remember liking
and slowly the names of invisible constellations
 
If there’d been wind they’d have been words
in the wind after some time the acidic air
ate them all then I spoke no more
 
because there was no one left no one to listen
no one but me to care and I don’t know if I care
every stone here at the bridge is coated
 
with the salt of my people’s unshed tears
what is caring anyway but clinging to hope
which also clung to me so under the broken stones
 
I could find this package of white chalk
each cylinder perfect whole and my dream
became not that we’d talk again
 
but that you would arrive and you would know
how to read my dead mongrel language
and you would read it my message before
 
the great rain erased it
before the trestle disintegrated
after I was no longer hungry or waiting—

Meanwhile the silence. And the spruce.
And a long, gauzy silhouette. Meanwhile freshwater
 
learns the omens of cormorants
and salt. Somebody’s excited about the long days,
 
maybe the breeze, which comes & goes,
planing the sails, sanding the cove.
 
Darkness is easier than light, if you want to know.
You don’t want to know. Crab husk,
 
kelp-lick: again the spine yawns at its pain, chisels
grow dull in the quarry of the brain.
 
Always a step away, the sea, moving out,
then in. Today I’m going to snap
 
a line on quiet’s inner ear and lay
some shingles there, as if anything could chasten
 
summer’s sweet rain—even now
as ants pepper the peonies, as hammers
 
beat anapests, the tide gurgles
through brakes in the mud. Or is that clay?


A-Fib
        lives inside this lie:
 
heartbeats simply sync
up the body’s clock
 
and repeat in one
direction. Truth is,
 
like two boots in snow
retracing their tracks,
 
every ticker tip-
toes over ground once
 
covered, till each beat
flips to face what path
 
its tread and sprints home-
sick toward beginning—
 
marking, as comets
do, its pinnacle
 
by all it burns off
in turning, the skin
 
grown hot cooks layers
it forgot to shed,
 
till the flesh is lens
our blood pools under
 
like a stoplight sunk
inside the body—
 
a rewinding so
gaudy it blinds us
 
to the future, days
of which simply drift
 
away unnoticed,
beats we bargained off
 
for a less distant
dark and this thought, small
 
enough to carry:
between two unknown
 
points the shortest walk
is always the one
 
already traveled.

1.
 
The fisherman loved to frighten them
with stories of a fighter squad of flying diablo squid
                        like alien jets of red
 
flesh, flashing madwhite & arterial, who would steal
a man from the boat on the night seas of Cortes,
 
spearing him with their cactus suckered tentacles
shot like a policeman’s electrical tasers, to disappear like halos
                        from this dimension
 
lightning-pricked into nothingness-like Hell.
It had been nine days
 
since they were sealed in the back of that truck
filled with Tijuana livestock, heading for Tucson. The fisherman said
                        one had to become a devil to travel
 
between darkness and flesh, hunger and immortality.
One had to cross children selling imitations of the Virgin
 
and diamond-shaped chiclets, packets of colored chewing gum
and blankets with the Aztec calendar’s inscriptions
                        and then swim through the desert
 
of nopales like strange sea creatures
crucifying darkness
 
sweating hiding
in your thirst, fugitive like the future
                        until salt in that darkness saves you.
 
 
2.
 
Tijuana was bright, glittering red green and goldwhite lights
like a space station at the center of the galaxy.
 
Haunched in the blackness with chickens, watching
a grown man pissing
 
into the cup of another man’s hands, I heard cries
fugitive for any future
 
from the bodiless dark
scuffling like a coyote’s
 
across the wet, warm neck of the white
sacrificial rabbit’s
 
shallow breathing: my mother finally collapsed
and did not wake up. In the truck, her shriek
 
smelled of torn oranges
like black sweaty churches in the dirt. Now,
 
high on the turpentine fumes of night creosote
I think my blood is like a sunshine I will never see.
 
Lost in the desert, stumbling alone and laughing
how madly I rip the new cactus blossoms opening
 
like thirsty suicidal moons, and I eat them.
Earth, I am an Illegal
 
Child who will die of this thirst. I am eating your fucking dirt.
Scratching myself, I fall against these cactus thorns.
 
I can’t believe all the ragged moonlight
bleeding and flickering down my face and arms. Like a priest in church
 
I laugh and touch the penitential torches
of the brave hearts of the foolish, hot, faithful human beings.

I go out.
To the weather
 
shaped like shadow,
body without
 
blood without body.
It’s perilous
 
charged velvet and hard
the way the
 
breath-shadow never hovers
but darksomely. It’s cold
 
I like it
licking me. What disappears
 
more than the
muscle-like greening
 
falsely above? I like to
dare to despair in thee
 
sun-crazed little brain-
less Sea. Mindfully
 
red orange
the gulf octopus attaches blisses its
 
hundred thousand sharp-plucked kisses
before I rapture
 
him armfully
opposite me, my doppelgangering
 
muse-
like
 
man. We float
apart so randomly.

Lonely for sex
the light has
 
a blue fume.
We skinny dip
 
& kiss in the pool
shaped like a monkey tail
 
canal. We name
her Frieda & whisper as we move
 
so a rent-a-cop
from Cuernavaca can’t see
 
our amoebic secrecy.
O what is
 
shadow
at night if not our vast reflected
 
barbed-wired
paradise. Filthy dirty
 
like two
moon’s fugitives. What is
 
this about the Yucatan
Peninsula so you
 
feel free to be
with me? At home we fear
 
such nudity.
Here, we’re once. We like the radiance.

This is the part I wanted to replay over and over until made
to stop: his body falling away
 
like some trick shot, a dissolve into a scene I could deconstruct
until it was no longer pivotal, only the slow
 
dénouement of a figure moving out of view.
I wanted to watch until the window is no longer
 
a window but a cut from an alternate ending, in which
he is dancing: alone in the yard after a party and all the guests
 
have all gone home.  Some unusual soft-shoe
to Daphnis & Chloé, stereo like neon illuminating the gray evening
 
and him, dancing a marvelous circle around the mulberry
like Fred, doffing berries off of his Sox cap.  How he relates
 
to the old lawn chairs, his disaffect, until he lifts them one by one
and carries them into the shed like the broken
 
lovers they’ve become.
To be able to watch until the window shifts toward
 
another season, in which it is snowing, in which we might
build a fire and draw a circle around each other
 
for safety.  Our forms, latched together and present, a room
somewhere, a tall building, his body wrenching
 
into mine like a stutter.  I’ve conjured the room.
In it, I’ve placed blankets, a bed, his side
 
of the bed and mine next to it, the window overlooking
a street below, traffic paused for a moment, the snow
 
coming down almost pathologically and we would not notice,
would see only the flakes suspended, balletic.
 
I’ve been unreasonable, I know I have.  I’ve rehearsed
a dialogue to arrive in the ideal place and not
 
where it has appeared, on a delay, as subtitles, poor
translations of another mind’s intent, the scenes shortened
 
and out of sequence, the order unimagined
and true.  I’ve pictured him turning back, to come upon me
 
like Ravel after a fistfight, reveling, the distance
I perceive in his body now my own distance from it, controllable,
 
an hour before morning, his face so near I am unable to focus
so I close my eyes.  It’s that simple, really it is.  Here
 
I am plotting the circle, the fire, a desire
to catalogue together the snowflakes as they collide in miniature
 
white explosions across the screen, the traffic below us,
the exhaust, the city
 
all palsy and burn, here his body still
and still next to mine, not falling, not going anywhere.

The wilderness at the end of the road
was sumac, cattails & poison oak—
a susurrus of ghosts in my head,
 
a smoldering dusk of livid blood
above the faded redwood decks
of the brick tract homes on Highland Road.
 
I knelt beside the creek, & stared
at a single, pristine raccoon track,
till something snapped in the back of my head,
 
as a transformer on a pole exploded
there in the sky—with a fiery crack—
a ball of flames at the end of the road.

Then I ran home to tell my dad
(adrift in a haze of cigar smoke)
before I could think it was all in my head,
 
& led him by the hand outside,
& pointed westward at the smoke—
still hanging there, at the end of the road—
but it was gone, it was all in my head.

Like the throat of a deer arched back,
truck struck,
fit for the jaws of a tiger
but set instead for this mediocrity—
            guard rail and gravel, a grocery bag kiting high.
 
Hell, even the workers paid to pick her body
off the interstate are on furlough, so she’ll be there
today the same as tomorrow,
and in my sorrow or is it
            conceit
 
I think it is only me to notice, to nod
                        yes, baby.  Don’t I know it, your neck,
her neck—bone white, no note to play without the string
attached
but still
                        touchable,
                        wanting to be touched,
 
or at least I want to press that silent piano key,
that soft blanch
of exotic tusk and tooth, that pelt
                        cooled to zero
and colored the illegal bone white
of antique billiard balls and dominoes,
but instead I
keep driving, talking to myself as if I were
                        talking to her.
 
But don’t we all keep driving? Isn’t it dangerous
                        to stop?
What we don’t want to see is
that glass-eyed reply—
                        not a fuck all but an oh well,
 
the sigh of each car passing by.

Even in this drabbed-out winter landscape a spare, scoured elver-gleam and dazzle still stands out. You can see it in the excitations of a scatterflock of starlings—a crowd becoming the one risen body of a woven net as they close and open and light again on ground they’re gleaning the last spilled seeds from. You can see this same late glaze of the possible even in the dour Franciscan-brown last leaves hanging; see in the sheer tenacity of their attachment a wind-shriven liveliness, the sort of head-in-hands lightening the spirit might feel in the old dispensation after a cleansing confession: bloodless and bony, they’re still matter, and matter still, alive as any last-ditch detail in the big picture. What Cezanne made of those cold winter remnants of his, the stone wall and stark verticals of his homegrown grove of trees through whose bony bars he took in again the mountain. As you might register in the rearview mirror the sun’s flattened soft-pat of nuclear blaze-butter melting into moontime, or the brazen body of a small pond snapping at daylight, or that set of purple antlers the leafless sumac is, pointing its taut seed-packs at your passing.

1.
Because as a child you lay alone in the dark waiting, counting, aching till you’d hear the hall door pushed open, your father safe home again no matter the hopeless state of him, it’s impossible not to think of your youngest daughter abroad alone in the dark on unknown roads when you see the straggle of homing crows overhead under slate-grey broken cloud, scattered but knowing their way, impossible not to feel the heart-ice in your chest while the anything that could happen steals your breath, and nothing to smooth away the thorn-spiked edge of anxiety till you hear the door pushed open and there—safe home like your saved father—she is.
 
2.
A world of black branches, blue sky, cloud scraps head over heels in puddles after rain. No words to reach the wild anxiety of things any ordinary Saturday—families tumbled tooth and claw into their own nest and bosom. Nerves go electric, blood seeps drop by drop, staining the frayed foot-of-the-bed Karaman, bringing its muted allegories to light. Air remains radiant, a mask of gold we shiver into, feeling the fall in Fall, the smell of vallied apples, small signs of this-world absolutes, though still no hint of absolution. Cross your fingers, so, into hope’s own plaintive, dream-lit cipher.

He saw a dead man for the first time.
            And took off down.
                        The steps out into the field out.
 
Into the woods the people said fine he’ll.
            Be fine let him run.
                        It off let him run he’ll be fine.
 
They set out in the morning things falling.
            All over his mother sleepwalk.
                        Shipwrecked in her black dress spine.
 
Twisted from sweeping the porch her wings busted.
            Heartbeats run out of numbers.
                        A throng of hankies on their necks all the men.
 
With a tendency to beg your pardon each step.
            Repentant crumbling into another.
                        Hour of toppled houses people drained of a grave.
 
And their medicine sounds for days they walked.
            With dogs even flashlights at night.
                        Insides white from the weight and somewhere he limps.
 
Dressed in corduroy pants holding ear to the tracks.
            Refusing to come back from his own sort.
                        Of search for interstellar gossamer for concrete.
 
Grief the house won’t breathe the day of rain inside.
            The kitchen the powdered light.
                        Like sawdust dawn like well water through fence wire.
 
An airplane of angels storming the temples.
            Saying here he was here.
                        With a mountain in his mouth he was seven.
 
Hundred berries holding breath dragging buckets.
            Of mud the riverbanks licked.
                        Dry his lips singing here he was here he was here.

Would you miss me less if I took up
in someone else’s bed, left more
room inside the dream but this time
 
in disguise? Could quit anytime
 
you said, a pinch inside each cheek
just to piss me off—stinky chaw
hawked to the corners of our house.

I’m a riddle in eleven syllables.
I’m a lover with seven laughs, each hoarser
than the last. I’m a pun, a jokester, my kid
self pulling my leg—stretching denim and time
to a vanishing point on the horizon
of a straw-filled plane. I’m gravity. I play
favorites. On Einstein’s Cross, I’ll bend light just
enough to catch your eye. If you look closely
(you won’t), I can’t be what you want me to be:
the coarse burlap of space starlit just enough
to illuminate worn threads that need patching.
 
It doesn’t take your living eyes to see I’m
not made for such sublime hanging. Of nimbus
and thorn, I am divine. Crows circle through my
parts that are sky rejoicing in my beauty
as fields go barren and drift under washed out
clouds. Please forgive me for pretending my hands
don’t have previous lives. I will forgive you
for asking why I hang here, why I struggle
to be less beautiful than I am. I won’t
succumb to grace to make my life easier.
I won’t fail my only purpose for being.

Quit is the long crow’s advice.
It’s silly, after all, to dig a grave
for a turkey buzzard
when real work waits
& real funerals
& when the forest already hums
with the loam of burials,
& this bird that’s so ugly
little girls in church dresses
throw rocks at it,
this bird that eats so much
it can’t take off,
that wastes not, but wants
just one more meal
& bald & wrinkled & stiff
& lost in road sedge
& quit insists the ticking emergency blinkers
& quit insists the hard clay earth,
the earth that has always been,
of course, a grave for even birds,
for even wings,
for even evening’s
cold, severe wings.

You have to have a plan
for unrequital. What if
the cold light of your center
attracts no one? The dark
can sense a lack of defenses
& fill it like an orange sled
stuffed with sudden November snow.
Not everyone gets picked.
There are those who sit in cars
late at night with the interior
lights on, some desert place,
simply waiting.

We are lost: the destination, it seems, has been misplaced.
Trails switchback up the foothills, snarl at the summit.
We hear the cry of the wind’s bride, the hummingbird’s alibi.
We speak as one voice from a mutual vantage point.
We speak with two voices, back to back: echoes wrought by distance, by time.
In the well, we find only depth, only hours muddled by wine.
How many tons of tailings for the thin bronze of our bangles?
How many times can our four hands exchange the frayed string of a cat’s cradle?
The city, ravaged by flame, heals over with nettles and bindweed.
As flood water channels into fields, a burnt trunk exudes perfumed resin.
After much racket, the crows leave, appeased, or so it seems, but by what?

Muck spectacular!
In the ankle-lisping scrub-shrub
I test the delirious
trees.  How long
 
will they clamor to embower
me?  The rain
equivocates, wanting to rise
as steam before it falls as water
 
& extracts my promise
to be hotter after.
I promise to be hotter after.
I gather the willow’s weepings
 
in my sleevelessness &
discipline myself to believe
in a destiny they sketch.  In
this first dalliance
 
with the capacity to leaf, my waist
plays celibate.  Into
the piney widowmaker’s warning
that lust domesticates,
 
I infuse my haze-day
dream: This rain is a home.
That lake is a room.
The minnows are windows
 
in my every wall.  I swoon.
How will I ever set fire
to the woods
if it continues to be as wet
 
as this?  Winsome
duplicity!  Around a twitchy center
the willow branches
steer & swat me.

Pretty wrong, that she was forced to wash, hang, and iron
her brother’s life.  In church, her teeth tingled. Ancients
measured bounty by stringing youth with lead or gold,
their quiet everything. Straying from these hurts, her
thought antlered to a four-pointed idea. One: dwell
in a woe, or forfeit four walls’ benefit. Two: whiskey
leavens. Three: if God is love, are tempests naughty love-talk?
A bumptious start to a bad-ass sail into ontology, she knew.
Four: she baked for buttered night, still thin and fallow.
* * *
[FIRST LOVE]
A rooster’s topknot tours the rugged wind. A hound
ripped its face. Inside, some mirrors err. When ceiling
tiles like maps of France dapple silk bed-lace
 
with a water stain’s mock-sweat, who’s the booby?
He’s nuts for you, his warm thin hair
surrounds you like a hoop skirt. He willingly
 
directs harpies to refrigerated trees sloughing
their snow-skin just when they run under,
vile as a dog pack. Each chick winces in the factory
 
when a handler sears its beak, you saw that
documentary. Their hands have to be gentle.
* * *
Like a granite island quarried to oblivion,
her husband’s memory chips. Time crawled
with hammer, auger, chisel and maul—handed
Eve a blunt drill bit, broke her old man
to paving stones. Nearly in tune, his jazz
guitar changes chords; that meander
can corrode or flutter hearts.
                                                Men auger
shame from a tin nonentity, pot whistling
to the kettle, naming each ruddy organ
wrong—profound baptism into nights
without work or love’s
leviathan hum.

On Saturdays I drank pilfered liquor,
kissed boys in backseats, in basements
 
where the parents were always
out of town. Spent Sundays
 
penitent at mass. The slender
marble aisle. The cracked leather kneeler.
 
The congregation sitting and standing,
kneeling and sitting in a stuttering unison
 
as I replayed the rhythm
of hand on—, tongue on—,
 
my prayer-bent body arched
with aimless lust. I knew.
 
I had learned in church: to be bodied
was to be sinful. I gave up milk,
 
gave up spoons, shaved the thumbnail
down to meet its fleshy bed.
 
Gave up chicken and carved each night
the pan-fried meat from thigh-bone,
 
fork-stabbed the knobby joints. Wished myself
up out of my limbs and aches.
 
Watched my hipbones rising
like the crescent moon. But if this
 
was wrong, why had they made
Christ’s body so beautiful?
 
He hung there,
an object lesson in desire
 
and its aftermath. I listened.
Christ said, put your hand here.

Children. They are a creature with a mind made mostly of water.
And simple impossibility. And instructions that don’t lead them anywhere.
The weight of rain, if you could keep rain in sieves, or carry it in cardboard boxes,
or even just pour it through a bucket of sand.
 
I was a child, and I made a home by pulling garden slate onto my chest. I was hiding.
The way words can hide if you’re careful with them.
A kind of together.
 
Like when water pools below a row of stained glass windows. It’s peaceful. And breathing.
I was meant to be breathing.
The inside of a cave at night, how it feels like it’s circulating.
The inside of anyone. The insides of people you really like.
 
I was a child, and I was looking to build myself into a sturdy home.
But, oh, soul. Oh, edges of soul. Oh, souls that make the people we don’t understand.
I invented sadness instead. And I’m sorry.
 
Constellations move over the night sky with a predictability we have learned to value as a civilization.
The pure logic of it. The mathematical probability.
The tendency to be something invaluable without even thinking about it.
I built an octagonal freezer, with brass plates to tell people what mood I was in,
and bright copper tubing, and plexiglass. There had to be windows on all sides.
I was a healthy child. I would close myself in and then breathe, the way water breathes when it’s restless.
 
There’s not much else to do growing up.
I stepped inside. I sat on my little bench, and I looked at my family the way that men do.
It was so logical, really.
 
Ambitions can be logical if you hold them in one place.
It’s like what happens to water when the water can’t breathe.

We were told there would be aluminum cages right over our heads.
As if we were standing in a well-lit room, at a museum,
with just the tiniest figurine of a cage attached to the ceiling, except there’s no ceiling.
It’s the sky.
And you have no idea how the cage is being lowered.
 
Remember when the millennium was this thing that we referred to in the future tense?
How it seemed like so much was going to happen before it was here?
And then we were in it. And that’s all they could talk about on the radio advertisements.
 
The cages started out, and we didn’t really think about them.
Then we finally saw them, and they looked like les boucles d’oreilles so high over our heads.
A handful of syllables, charming, when you can say it in French.
At that point, we knew they were getting closer, and we had nowhere else left to go.
 
Nothing is supposed to be easy.
Dinner. Breakfast. Taking a phone call from your aunt.
This was the summer that felt like that flat stretch of highway leading out of a Midwestern town.
With fields of mown grass. And winds. And our houses.
And the only day you can remember happening was Wednesday.
 
A grown man learns to take measurements of a cage when it’s being lowered over his head.
Such is the advice of my Father. And other mathematicians as well.
To calculate is to logic. To prove an inside to things.
There are many dimensions of an inside.
 
Like getting trapped inside one of those long math equations.
Try when you’re calculating air to keep breathing.
Try to make sense of an innumerable height.
 
My Father was a mathematician. And he was a man who dwelt with despair.
Mathematics, mathematics. Let my People Go!
There is a pressure to water calculated by the depth of the water being held over it.
Nothing is meant to be easy.
Something was lowering the cages from somewhere. What am I supposed to be hoping for anymore?

Consignment to generations of extremes (hell-
acious attics, flooded basements) split its
maple carapace, warped the fingerboard.  To sell
it, we’d have to find the bridge, other bits
of ebony.
                 My wife’s aunt played it as a child,
the nurse whose snagged scarf dragged her down
a Manhattan subway tunnel.  Or was it the wild
one, failed nun with her hats, flowered gowns,
and cruise ships?
                             Mittenwald, 1820
and Mathias Neüner’s signature staring out
the f-hole.  Because the bow is stamped Otto
Wünderlich, it’s worth more—the hundred and fifty
(exactly) horsetail hairs sprung like the plush
frizz you’d pluck from an older woman’s brush.

A golden scorpion skewered
like a scrawny prawn—
that’s something I said no
 
thanks to. In the all-night street
market—the streets still shiny
from the evening rain—a guy
 
flipped yellow-breasted buntings
on a charcoal grill. “Buttery,”
an Australian told me, taking
 
two. “Melts in your mouth.”
Also snakes skinned and milky
white, fried beetles, a vat of lumpy
 
horse stew. But I don’t remember
sparrows—either on the grill or in
the air. Were they ever re-introduced
 
there, after Mao accused them
of stealing grain and people
stayed up all night banging pots
 
and kettles to make them flit from
branch to branch to branch
till every tiny heart gave out?

Looking like Lady Liberty
            in a mud mask worn thin
that the cosmetologist prescribed
            for combination skin,
 
wearing a slip she calls a dress
            (it’s clearly not), one sock,
one shoe, her hair heaped up, her free
            hand covering the clock,
 
Wynona drives a loop around
            a town two towns removed
from Pleasant Bluff—just up and left
            tonight as if that proved
 
she isn’t stuck. Yes, see how stuck
            she isn’t, unconcerned
with the vaguely British voice explaining
            where she should’ve turned?
 
She used to choose the scenic views,
            parked, flinging cans or matches
over the edge, relieved at last
            to see the purple patches
 
of sky go black; she used to feel
            half-holy, set apart
from the tangled arteries that fed
            the city’s ill-lit heart.
 
Ah well, Wynona’s older now
            and holy’s flown the coop;
she hauls her fat soul down the road,
            grown sick of chicken soup
 
and goodwill. These days, sleep’s a hint
            her body doesn’t drop,
and bloodshot, spray-tanned, flaky-faced,
            Wynona drives to stop
 
the endless spinning; nothing clears
            her head quite like the fogged
observatory of her car.
            Considering she’s logged

a million miles on the stretch
            connecting Back and Forth,
she knows this much: from plate tectonics
            to magnetic north
 
the earth is shifty; like the dead
            GPS in her lap,
the gods, those bum cartographers,
            are all over the map.

Pink perm rod puckered like a cigarette,
she lisps a little as she combs and rolls,
and doesn’t care who waits. She’s overbooked:
one in the chair; a row of patient souls
 
with heads in driers; several draped in smocks
like mutant jellyfish. The rest, sardines,
fill up the wicker loveseats, glad to chat
or eavesdrop, scanning last year’s magazines.
 
She’s talking to the mirror when she talks,
its surface framed with photos: kids as cute
as tutus, kickers, cloggers, dough-faced babies,
bow-head babies, babies dressed like fruit,
 
all wallet-sized. A sign above her lists
the fees for cut and color, manicures
and waxing (“brows and pits; bikinis extra”).
She draws good tips, although the job secures
 
itself: the do’s must be redone, new shades
of blond or bronze (“If you can’t tone it, tan it!”).
In here the atmosphere, abuzz with heat
and aerosol, suggests a cozy planet
 
outside of time. Forget the yawning gods,
she plugs a clear cosmology: big bangs
are out, she says, try layers; fringe benefits
a puffy face, revives a mop that hangs,
 
exhausted. Mostly, though, she helps control
old damage. Sure, she’ll hide dark roots or chop
dead ends, but she won’t promise miracles:
nobody’s reborn in a beauty shop.

The days of dainty napery,
            salt bowls, and centerpieces
are done. Foreclosed, a home’s a house;
            the signs say short-term leases.
 
The royal treatment? Who has time?
             Boxed wine, a deli platter,
and it’s a party—not to say
            decorum doesn’t matter
 
in Pleasant Bluff, just people’s sense
            of reciprocity
has changed—from canine palaces
            complete with filigree
 
and eaves, to little knitted caps
            fitted to pickle jars,
sympathy hams, or Christmas wreaths
            in the grills of burnt out cars.
 
That’s why, despite her wild hairs,
            Wynona aims to bring
a sense of old Colonial style
            to the latest next big thing:
 
when others at the beauty shop
            choose lighting bolts or hearts,
she asks the cosmetologist
            to wax her lady parts
 
but leave a pineapple design
            (which, once the splotches fade,
looks something like a monkey paw,
            maybe a hand grenade).
 
But either way, Wynona’s lover
            doesn’t say a word,
just flaps himself against her lintel
            like a manic bird,
 
until she understands he’ll never
            give a hoot about
the logic of her welcome, though
            he gladly wears it out.
 

When my sister got her diagnosis,
I bought an airplane ticket
 
but to another city, where I stared
at paintings that seemed victorious
 
in their relation to time:
the beech from two hundred years ago,
 
its trunk a palette of mud
and gilt; the man with olive-black
 
gloves, the sky behind him
a glacier of blue light. In their calm
 
landscapes, the saints. Still dripping
the garden’s dew, the bouquets.
 
Holding the rough gold orb
of a potato, the Child cradled
 
by the glowing Madonna. Then,
the paintings I looked at the longest:
 
the bowls of plums and peaches,
the lemons, the pomegranates
 
like red earths. In my mouth,
the raw starch. In my mouth, the dirt.

First I denied the no-seeums speckling
my dead boy. Over here, they called.
I overheard there. My shoulder thawed,
felt fine. I exhaled my unson’s song.
 
Then came blame. Used up, I sued it. 
Anger management? I nail-gunned
flies all over drywall. My tantrum
plucked a geshrunken dish; threw it, it
 
pitched back, thew! Pawed hardball,
return me his birthdays. I’ll be prompt,
promise, to Commencement. Unkempt?
I’ll kempt. But worms don’t dicker a deal…
 
I resigned my shift; I mean, took a break.
Blanket our dog wouldn’t even adopt,
I laid off apostrophes to the teardrop.
His name sank, forsook all heartache—
 
no more pantomime palominos.
If you can’t stage miracles, curtain.
It’s not like you become Adam, even
whistling to the herd in widow grass.

I hear, in my phone, vocabulary where
he’s not there, and head for a textbook.
Unless I leave him be I’ll get a smack.
I leaf through movies, see smoke and fire,
 
race round in rings, get woozy and fall
asleep, dream up an exit. You would too.
A burned man gripped straw. People do,
you know: water their palms. Big deal.
 
What if your brother was a child of five
and cried the eyes nighthawks hunt with?
Once a babe in khaki shorts gave birth 
to ashes in a lobby. Who’d you save,
 
stuck on a horse, your recourse a pony
to the circus?  Bottom-feeders suck it to go,
till their guts sag. “How was the show?”
asked a toucan. What would you say?
 
Dear ears, his eyes kept peered for you. 
There was stereo, no paring needed.
He seemed so healthy, witty, so glad
with all the tripwires we’d run through.

Back on my wings, wings became me.
I banked, broke, beside myself. Besides,
honeysuckle sang, and brooked words
overran beds of pebbles, but see?—
 
no meadow. Never was a meadow.
Lots of long division, and times tables
where once there were standing pools.
If you played into them you got polio.
 
Polished glass wading downstream,
oaks barked spells, and hexed books
cracked, spine-open. Those are facts.
None of that sailor-ruby-sky eventime.
 
Red robin, red robin, bash again, again
against my window, feathers in flame
—a fireman’s?—to get in. Or be calm.
With lunatic squires in your bloodline,
 
your beak-and-pockings won’t open
more living room. You’re so enamored
of mates you don’t know your mirrored
yew from yew. So bloody your reflection.

This city you live in, terrified, is now empty.
Friends fly in and out—for love,
 
sometimes for nothing. And this evening,
a mist so fine your lips are slick
 
as you walk from his apartment to his
and then back, into yourself.
 
There is a place everyone leaves for.
 
Someone you slept with once said that to you
while he ran his hands over your face.
 
And there is a place for those still here,
watching the last ships circle around the receding island.

     I.
 
The three schoolgirls wait in the snow
for their bus,
or the mother’s yellow beachwagon.
 
      II.
 
I, too, am a child, actually an X-ray
of a small child’s chest.
During the winter, my best friend contracted polio.
Her father burned all her linen
in a red barrel under the elm trees.
 
      III.
 
A not at all anxious Israelite
with a jeweled breastplate
is carrying a clay tablet
through the rooms of our house.
When he passes my bed I see
sparrows flying
from a nearly sunken freighter.
 
      IV.
 
I asked the Israelite
what is that thing he’s carrying?
He says don’t be alarmed
it’s just a wall switch—
on/off, off/on…
I wake crying.
 
      V.
 
In an old bezel of wisdom
please understand the coincidence
of a large mirror resting flat
on darkly polished floorboards.
The frame of the mirror and the wood
of the floor are indistinguishable
one from the other.
A pearly wet light everywhere!
 
      VI.
 
When
on the wall, the mirror is closed.
 
      VII.
 
The simple first plane of spirit
is not extensive, it is
switchback after switchback.
The mountain
 
is collapsed as with the mirror
but, yes, with zippers like a human skull.
 
      VIII.
 
A chosen one’s large head
touches his sister’s feet
while they travel
down the birth canal
into a bath of midnight light
from a sooty lamp.
This is Tibet. There’s a plague
and conifers.
 
      IX.
 
It is deliberate like the fish
slapping the floor
of the black reed-boat.
 
      X.
 
One bone of this fish,
called the Elias bone,
is stuck in the throat.
 
      XI.
 
Washing your face in cow urine.
A turnstile
of light. A table set
with bread and wine:
 
one bone of this fish,
called the Elias bone,
is stuck in the throat
of the fish
 
      XII.
 
like a compliment
of mirrorglass or a simple
switch of birch
across your hands and face
being washed in cow urine
as a disinfectant…
 
beside the seven lakes.

So Mandelstam would grow oranges
in a glacier. I can hear
his cough beyond the drifting snow.
 
Candles, three,
in a row guttering like spam.
You heard his coughing
beyond
the sudden rattling of the petrol cans.
 
Bad teeth are a kind of sermon…
 
The prisoner-trains coughing
across the Turkish hills.
 
An Egyptian postage stamp
on his forehead, he shoots
at flying red squirrels, laughs
and misses again…
some nasty tobacco and gin
from the old woman polishing spoons.
 
Osip asleep in an electric arc
like the open boat
with a black canister of Saltines
and currant jelly.
 
What does the one have to do
with the other— a marginal cash
note to the widow
details nothing.
 
Nothing and its red mustache. Coughing?

Leaving Dickinson, ND on 94W with the sun 
rising at our backs, a tractor trailer in front 
and from the height of my vision, from nowhere, 
from heaven a wine-soaked handkerchief, trailing 
its edges, falls as quiet as a bruise into the next 
lane over—a barn swallow caught in the truck’s wash.
They once lived in caves, but now make their nests
in man-made shelters, under bridges and barn eaves—
barns where might be kept a horse’s harness,
the parts of which you recited to me once—crupper,
martingale, throatlatch—rolling your r’s, lashing those
words lavishly for all they’re worth. I’ve since been told
one should always keep the throatlatch nice and loose. 

Yesterday I was, one place to begin 
and Today I saw, another, but I 
know I doesn’t matter to you. You 
don’t know I or me for that matter. 
But you are appropriate—
appropriately unfit like the not it 
we sang out in our childhood games. 
You’re like a confessional or, maybe, 
the restaurant suggestion box; 
you don’t care if I’m penitent 
or cynical. I could tell you about 
the side of paradise I hiked 
today with its flora and fauna—
the birds!—or the Sidle Parade, 
a subtle spectacle I saw yesterday, 
and it matters not. I could tell 
you how I really feel about my 
father or my shoe size, and they’d 
both have the same weight like 
the Weighing of the Heart—the soul 
needs to balance the feather to gain 
entry into heaven. Tomorrow 
I intend to go to the Dead Man’s 
Button Museum. They’re also 
called dead man’s throttles—installed 
in trains in case an engineer keels 
over. Without pressure, the brakes engage. 

Today it stormed. The clouds were flame-base blue
and smoldered close to the treetops. Lightning
double blinked. Ten years have passed, and not
like that. By dusk the rain had ceased, the birds, 
giddy with worm-lust, sang to the softened earth.    
I tried to sleep but thought of the bridge at camp:
three ropes above a rushing creek, my turn
to cross, you on the bank wringing your hands. 
I walked, heel toe, heel toe—a fish the gleam
on a rock below, its wound a swirl of red. 
The world forgave you your attempts, but I
held out. And when my ankle slipped, the whole
sky gasped. You raised your arms as if to heaven. 
The birds start up again. It’s been forever. 

When there’s a song in my head
where God should be,
I yearn for the ballet 
master, for winters
 
at the studio, where I 
was one of four cygnets. 
Rehearsals ran late. 
Night swayed on its green stem
 
and I couldn’t comprehend
we’d ever be clipped from it.
Even seeing us together
in our white tutus—
 
like roses standing naked
on a coffin—I was soothed
by the sound of rain
hissing through the leaves. 

The trees wrote their last scarlet notes. 
Silence grew inside me. All winter
my voice felt like a bowl 
of very still water;
 
for hours at a time nothing moved it. 
Here is the house: a table 
beneath a golden light, 
Mother’s closed bedroom door, 
 
a window. Here is the garden.
She wanted to move away 
from us, I knew, 
and I’d have let her. Go,
 
I whispered, but alone, 
while watching a sparrow
splash in a basin of
emerald water, spindly leaves, feathers.

Let the cerement of light, the silent snow
covering the bells frozen in the towers, speak
a country of tired bays, where rain hesitates
to break the seamless yellow of toil; let this
coffin-shaped light balance on the negative
compass, the shock and stun, the heart’s
sudden brace for a jealous thunder, childhood’s
hands clapping in the assembly of absence,
rejoicing in the clarity of hunger and fired clay.
Let the hands be wings to lift out of water
a rippled name—jangle of bells—left untended
like a wheat field, swath of light, violet
stains, the night someone wiped their hands
on. Let the stray goat be recalled, and the 
mango tree violated for its bastard fruit, recall
the army of cane flags that marched through 
dreams, saluted by silver-edge cutlasses
at morning. O envy of sea, binding and separating 
islands, husk envy at every accent’s core, 
their fiber glint after rum flasks break their seals 
and rivers let down their hair between shallow gullies.
Let not the blank of winter forget the buried glass; 
let it pull blood out of any pilgrim who goes there 
and marks a way back by the body’s scent 
and light, distended by a melting brook. 

Morning drapes over our eyes like little hands—
surprise, look—& this where the story 
 
wakes. You are a lit-up house. 
The light through the window is gauze 
 
dressing a wound. I know 
I am unhinged, like a door fallen down. 
 
The seconds splinter. I shake like sea foam,
the bees in my sea-cave wish to escape.
 
This is the story that funnels into itself,
its beginning crushed by the weight of its end.
 
                                      ~                                                                 
 
This is the story of water. This is the story with its eyes 
closed, a burnt map. I let any pain take me 
 
the way the sea takes a body, hide in the place 
where every voice is water, illegible 
 
& unheard. When you call me 
I do not swim up far enough to hear you.
 
When you touch me, it is as if underwater, 
the way seaweed tangles in the undercurrents. 
 
This is the story with a drowned body.
This is the story with an unsent letter.
 
                                   ~
 
I dream I am alone on a ship. 
It is night and I can see the magnetic field
 
radiating through each object like water through leaves. 
Each star above pulls on the body. 
 
 
The body is a magnet for the dark. 
The bones of each thing underwater turn 
 
diaphanous with concaved light, 
a dense black substance stretched between them.
 
Each body is a radiograph. The sky 
is a radiograph. Then I think 
 
to touch the bones of my face. They feel like water. 
From my vessel, through my telescope, 
 
I can see your body standing 
incurvate on a far continent, 
 
& between us stretches the most terrifying 
darkness, as if to reach you I must die.
 
                                   ~
 
This is the story with a shipwrecked body.
This is the story with a gangrenous throat.
 
This is the story that refuses to end
because we are the hollow 
 
only longing can fill with more of itself.
This story pulls the entrails
 
of stars from each retina, reverses 
the clock in the mouth 
 
until it sings backwards.
This story is the moonlight 
 
brightening the bedroom 
through the slit 
 
in the ventricular curtain. 
It will not let us sleep.

Body my horse           my crossing          my cauldron
body my season of visions    
my crossing through the dark oil 
in the water            body my harpoon           my hook 
in the mouth of the world              body the frost 
from your mouth like a dream   
body the fallen light           the sunken sound 
of a voice in the water              body the well
carrying skulls of the dead                body the open gate
letting the horse outside          the sound 
of bones running into the night            the clouds
like a dream lowering into the mouth
of the world                   I am crossing the season of water
I am trying to unhook my hand from the dream
I am trying to find the breach in your surface
but there is no end to your opening   
your sea inside                    body where is the latch
the shore                 where is the place you touch another?

  for two voices
I would catch that goldfish in my hand                      
                      I remember the water                                                           
 
trapped against the bowl’s clear plastic.                     
                              falling to the level of my waist 
 
                  It would fit inside my thumb if                
 from a line above my skull.                                             
 
the base tapered like the tip does.                                         
                                The sky paled at the edges      
 
Lifting, the slick scales red-orange against the palm   
                                    like the dark water fissioning 
 
into white particles against the sand.                   
the heaving of its gills like the heart’s chambers  
 
rent open with each contraction.                                 
                       The body, an ocean, produces                                                                            
 
Its struggle, net of bone and muscle                     
its own salt.                                                                                                           
 
flexing wildly, an erratic sine wave.                                                                  
                                                          As a child, I     
 
A child, cruelly curious, 
              would lick my upturned hands to taste 
                                                                       
            I would take the fish in hand            
the salt lying in the grooves of skin,                                        
 
again and again                                                        
        and suck each finger hard               
 
                 to feel its thrashing coolness against my palm                                                   
like bones for marrow.                                                                                  
 
What a marvel it was.
What a marvel the body was.

Each night, the same dream: I’m an odd Victorian mansion
in a field of wheat. And I’m either waiting for the field
to catch fire or the hearse of love to pull up to the manse.
Don’t wake me up, please. In daylight, my mother talks of brideliness
as a measure of time: in a kind of flower, a narrative of ascension.
I intimate some sort of border is being discussed,
but I can’t concentrate for the sake of all the beautiful things
claiming my attentions in the tawny fields. 
There, a blankness without meanness, such as one finds
in a naked sea with all its fundamental majesty.

In 1973, I found myself engaged in a sort of assemblage 
of odd pieces of organic material, connected in a series.
I asked the questions, what is a subject? How does it shine?
What are the isolations around what something is?
The shapes and dimensions of my figures, its volumes
of air and light and dew, had an ambiguous and transient quality.
I used string and wire, the scent of snow and winter dawn,
fanaticism. I hated less than the wholeness of a situation.
Hunger is a conventional metaphor for desire, and here
I use it simply—it is just what the hand does, where the 
eye leads. The absent senses of a word on a starless night,
implied and precluded, mediate the tone of a condition.
Not instances of a geometry or some other larger order;
more or less thinkable, it is paid for by existence.

I was naïve of foreign affairs in the Four
Seasons bar when a Swiss knife maker 
assured me of the coming war. I ignored, 
 
the night of invasion, the accidental celebration 
of a bottle of wine opened in spite of everything. 
Four years later my radio wakes to a string 
 
of explosions unreadable as fever or a blush 
to lips pressed to the brow, indistinguishable 
as our ones from one hundreds to the discerning 
 
fingers of the blind. Sleep heavy as a child’s 
has impressed the red shape of my right hand 
on my chest. In my university town, steel I-beams 
 
rise out of the perfected pit of a new foundation, 
a new addition to Physics. From down the street, 
the welder’s torch looks like a fallen star.

He taped the needle to my hand, installed
the mask over my nose and mouth, and said
We’re going to give you medicine to help 
relax you. I had barely had the time 
to think don’t euphemize me when I was 
flat out. I had been reading Frankenstein
so I began to dream about my frame 
made up of severed parts, extinct yet still
with memory of life in them. Still they 
could feel the stitches poking different skins,
and when he sewed the edge of an ear onto 
a scalp, I started hearing. Sounds proceeded 
somewhere far down and dark inside a brain 
both dead and not. I heard him sew and sigh
oh my Elizabeth, Elizabeth. 
 
Some days passed as he worked, arranging limbs
then rearranging them in a better shape
or else he’d leave me alone inside the room 
I couldn’t see but sensed from how it echoed 
and smelled of chemicals. And then I heard 
another voice—rougher than the first, 
but strained the way my body strove apart
while drawing together at the seams. This new 
sound said it wanted to take her, me, away
to the desert, the wasteland of Americas.
 
That moment I began to search for and save 
the words I’d need to refuse him. I was trying 
to move, make sounds I knew. The second noise 
was gone when the first let out a moan, a no,
and I could feel my dozens of parts again, 
unzipping one from the other but couldn’t tell 
what part was what or where they would end up 
in my creator’s fit. Then I felt the blood 
pressure device constrict on my arm and I 
was who I was again, sickened by drugs 
but without pain. The doctor had gone home;
a nurse helped me sip water from a straw.

Sometimes the woods at night are so still
the sound of your own breath
abashes you, to say nothing
of the racket as you walk.
 
Sometimes talking helps, saying
a poem, or even, if you’re going downhill,
singing. Other times there’s nothing
to do but stop and listen, or even sit
 
and close your eyes in the name
of attentiveness. In daylight,
there are birds, and for some reason
the wind too is always awake,
 
delivering weather or dust.
At night, you concentrate
and your listening is enhanced,
and sooner or later you will hear
 
a scale of bark let loose from a tree
or a needle tick from limb to limb
on its enormous journey to the earth.
And sometimes, having resumed
 
your walk, you will stop at the top 
of the ridge above your house.
Its window lights will illumine the ground
around it, and you will listen again
 
and hear the faint hum of it—
the buzz of its light bulbs, the industry
of its clocks. And sometimes
you will approach it as would a thief
 
and peer through the windows,
in order that you might covet,
being part of the world’s greater silence,
everything that is already yours.

When I consider the river I see only myself  
  
                  stretched across the muddy floor, the horizon  
             
a pink curtain I can’t yank. Reeds 
  
                 bristle the bank like wild-haired children 
  
buried to their necks. Dragged, I’ll yield 
  
                secrets: hypodermics, sunken  
  
backseats of cars, black garbage bags  
  
                wound with cord, knives, an iron  
  
stove, mirror glass, annular humps 
  
                of tires. Swollen, I purl under the ribbed 
  
cages linking flank to flank. The sun finds me bound 
  
                for the salt wedge, licks another body’s cycle, a path- 
  
ologist’s debate: what time? cause?  Too late. 

I blame tomorrow, as I blame all the ways a body can die. I stalk  
an empty set in my underwear, scrape my face into masks, play  
to the pills—place-holders for ache, small mimes muttering  
under my tongue. It’s a performance to wow  
  
heaven above, that spoof-eyed shadow. I don’t know anymore  
who I’m covering for, recovering for. My role was never  
clear—the director just wanted to be blown. Audiences prefer persona  
over animus. Enemy animals. Mortal clones. Tonight,  
  
I skinny-dip depths finned with sharks, pretend you’re a star  
far above me, scream. Throat the dark, the deep. No one watches 
as the water slips past my teeth, the frenzied dance.          
No one helps to hold my hair. The shore’s too far away to care.  
  
I blame tomorrow, as I blame all the days a body can lie.  

Their footsteps were an alphabet I  
did not understand as I waited 
  
below where my father told me  
to stay when the Americans came,  
  
to be quiet or they will find me  
and fill my head with voices.  
  
Because I did not want to have 
conversations with myself, 
  
I waited for them to leave, they 
who my mother said have mouths  
  
full of serpents. What did I know about 
the language of a reptile? What words  
  
do they have for witch, orchid, lizard? 
I listened to how the mouth can be  
  
its own animal, expected snakes  
to fall from them and find me hiding  
  
in the dirt so they could strike  
my heel or thigh. I would have taught  
  
these snakes to catch rats instead, how to  
retrieve eggs without swallowing. 
  
The only snakes I knew lived in trees  
where these men must have fallen from. 
  
They must be the same tall men with red eyes 
I’ve caught looking into my room at night. 
  
I have heard them swallowing chickens 
before I sleep. When they came trying  
  
to convince my father I should follow them,  
the heads of roosters were still in their jaws. 
  
What is the sound of a boy  
in the dark? tik-tila-ok. 


Dear Empire,
These are your rebels. Their wills fill the edge of a pit. They are teeth, throats, the sudden sable plume of a feather from a helmet. They meet in old houses whose walls were once doors.
The floors, once a broken field of stones. And now blue ceilings. Now the smell of orange peel sprayed on the bodies in repose.
The artist paints the rebels to music as they cross the bridge to your battlements. A small steamer announces itself in grand orchestrations over a pit soon to be turned to a tomb. In the scene, the artist paints flowers, the slow canal in front of rows of conifers, and not the awkward deaths in the pit. Because of a forced perspective. Because of the way she succumbs to the song.

These are your scholars. In their presence, the story is a bird, shot through. The stone of the sling passes through its chest taking with it the heart in a dazzling array of blood. In their presence, the blood sticks to everyone’s clothes.
Because the story is a sequence of projectiles, someone is liable to be struck. And the profundities of your rule are little gods. Facts rain down like the casing from a fired gun. Hollow jackets clang against pavement and the ring of their emptiness encumbers the ear.
We are ever wary of their direction. We are ever careful of their trajectories.

These are your scribes. The sound of your voice from the reel-to-reel tape travels in spirals, translucent. The synchronic hiss of the acetate is like the clapper of a temple bell—sound of the hard ridges of a dragonfly wing as it slaps against glass.
A scribe’s job of translating internal phenomena into decree is akin to your dancer spilling her form as the music stops. As her feet trace the edge of the floor in silence. During winter, the tables are cold and the cyan of the ink turns a dark and viscous black. The writing feathers out, as the skill of the writers fails. There are waves in their handwriting because of weather. Because of fatigue.
You are dictating in a far off place. Your mouth is adjacent to the microphone. The texture of your voice, as painful as particulates in the air.

i once saw a fawn remove itself 
  
from the ripe olive 
  
of its mother’s womb; 
  
head, one leg  
  
first, griping saccharine flutes 
  
of shocked earth, 
  
hind legs broken 
  
as toothpicks, ensnared 
  
in the sharp mesh of afterbirth. 
  
  
you arrive in New York on a Thursday 
  
eyes bright  
  
as river stones; 
  
our fingers, yoked, like the legs 
  
of so many fawns, the coiled  
  
wire of a first breath,  
  
the grim metal sun  
  
biting the veins  
  
of saplings shut.  

What if the sky were to make the rye 
a blanket of torched, silt-brown suns, 
  
each sheaf its own season of burning chaffs,  
each season waiting on a ruby-loam bed 
  
for the gift of water,  
some pocket to burst in the blue, thankless 
  
and true as two thorns 
of thistle. And we, from our tall dreams, might wake 
  
to see the brown stalks bowing with desire, 
as when the present yawns open 
  
in barren ﬁelds, as when waiting itself 
is its own perfectly blank hemisphere. 
  
Thick as sediment, tired as a body 
of grief, we’d see the ﬁeld’s thirst as suffering’s home–– 
  
narrow, unfastened, eternally broke–– 
and beside this heat-glazed glow we would grow, 
  
ruptured hand in ruptured hand, rustled 
to the windless air, in suffering too, 
  
made to endure this thirst like the rye,  
until burnt and bare. 

No one sees the bluestem blooming like a field of knives.  
If I turn away they grow 
in rows of blue fire, until each bush is a city 
of rust-belt steel,  
and at each city’s heel, a kingdom of black blossoms,  
deep as a moaning mouth.  

         I. 
  
These days, the hurricanes reeve 
through skylines so fast. The roofs collapse 
           over our wet heads. Saguaros 
  
           peck at pterodactyl clouds. 
We are twins. Students of mutiny. We insist 
           on safety, even if we have, 
                        contain nothing. 
  
  
            II. 
  
Let’s build an aegis 
          out of rocks. Let’s knit a coat 
          out of clouds. Let’s planish armor 
out of the house that failed 
          to protect our ugly frames. 
  
  
            III. 
  
Pariah hour. We eat the food  
no one wanted: 
            beachcomber fodder, skeletal meals  
that slowly dissemble, escargot shells 
            and oxtail marrow. The raw pulps  
taste staccato. They stink under teeth,  
            tongue-snipers. 
  
  
            IV. 
  
Dirty with unguents and easy to bait: 
this is how we are portrayed 
on the radio. Once, a man asked if 
  
he could touch my hair. Is it true  
there are magical oils on these strands? 
  
He took me to his house that night.  
He wouldn’t tell me why; claimed he was sick, 
claimed he needed healing. 
  
Wouldn’t let me sleep on his bed.  
A soggy mesh of genitals 
desensitizing the lamplight, quietly.  
  
  
            V. 
  
As if all kind moments were hoaxes: 
            this is how we live.  
  
Blame it on our memories. The husks 
            of sand creatures moving in streams 
where fish survive crystallized. 
  
            Inside tree trunks, we gambled all our rot 
and lost everything. Pity is a cheap emotion,  
  
            and all roads lead to ditches. Hitchhikers 
eat cobwebs in darkness, 
            resuscitating the roadkill. 
  
  
            VI. 
  
Above the singing sand dunes, 
we saw a woman give birth. 
Creature made of needles, 
  
clotted flesh, manic seed, 
who is the baby squirming  
                       in vernix?           
  
                      Our brother. 
The trees in the distance  
appear bridled as brides,  
their yellow trance wounding  
  
the cosmos. Origin of no  
returns: orphaned, 
water crawls back into the womb. 

All perspective is is a dot 
you can plan on any page 
and then draw solid cubes so a house 
  
can hover above crayon spikes of grass.  
I am afraid. I have seen sheep puff 
like dandelions, 
  
some spotting blue as though thumbs 
pushed ink on their backs.  
Farmers spray dye on the rams 
  
so after rutting with ewes, 
the used ones are marked.  
The more a thing is investigated,  
  
the more it burns. Light on paper. 
A museum displays these photographs: 
Paganini’s ghost wearing a devil mask 
  
pushing down on his violin,  
and others, a serious girl,  
hair parting her skull in half.  
  
People show others how no one is  
still there—turning a cold doorknob. 
And how the more a thing is probed, 
  
the more it burns. O it burns. 

Throat rubbed raw from my violin, I pay in quarters
at the track and grip the painted railing
—win!—level with shivering horses
pounding the terra-cotta dirt: running, running, wet
 
stones around the bend, then animals
snorting and gasping, then forms 
 
the churning surf allows almost dry
in the hair, in the water, in the flush of recall. 

Each day you understand a little more 
your place here. Your face: a pious 
landscape. You listen for the bell’s double  
ding-a-ling through the hallways 
like a call to worship.  
Hands fold like napkins. Lips hold  
together with a stitch. Gradually, you learn  
to starch your collar high 
and tight, know the moment before  
the moment a guest turns to go, to swing 
imperceptibly with the door. What  
a long hinge the body makes.  
Day and dark depend on preparation,  
laying the cloth according to the hem 
and fold, the flower basket or family 
coat of arms facing always  
up the table. After dinner, you dig coal  
from your chest with a grapefruit spoon  
and your eyes scour twenty  
dirty plates. The black herd 
of boots return, tracking in the sand 
and snow you sweep out hourly. If you keep 
this up, someday your soul will be  
handsomely arranged as the pantry.  

I’m looking back. God, I always look back—a recycled 
Lot’s wife in soft sfumato. Gazing 
  
at my captors or my father, all manacles 
and forceps and the well-smithed crab claw. 
  
No, scorpion tail! My hair’s a shackle 
of snails, sin-of-torture washed, a blue shawl eternally falling  
  
from restoration-chest. It’s dark behind:  
men are mysteries, in sum. My lips parted. 
  
As. If. Saint me, yes, but don’t draw me this way. 
Pink ribbon virgin when I died— 
  
no matter how many eyes stabbed through me first. 

Silly little nipple squeezer! Woodcut geezer! 
How nonchalant in my torture. 
  
It’s a bondage scene for the ages: 
those tiny footprints leading away 
  
like invisible little girls’. What you don’t see:  
I scared him off, I made a pencil out of him.  
  
Into the fire no less! Look at the whispering men.  
God: hold their tongues with two needles. 
  
Look at the bodies piled behind.  
Look at the nobles desiring me 
  
dead. Look at my arms in the fire.  
The air so clear that day, & cold! 

Give me the scissors, said I. No service but in service to the eternal 
self. No body but. In deepest lounging. These are mine! 
Said I, & no one will slice them. But I will. 
Said I, you won’t have me & after  
I die I will return as soot in your thigh meat, as scabs on your 
scrotum. I will eat you then. 
  
And God said in the voice of the dispossessed, 
Whip your hair into the wind. 
God said, Fuck the earth, you’re its mistress. 
He said to me, Wait! He said, Etna’s my anger descending.  
Box me & you’ll win, he said.  
He said, Your babies will die in the fire. 
So I had no babies. 

It coats the clouds over 
Glendale in steel. Now 
I hear, in memory, Eye 
of the adulterer for dusk– 
  
that verse in a voice that must  
be my mother’s–hushed, earnest 
as the burn of the streetlights as they 
shutter to life outside. 
  
But, my only love, I live 
in the dusk of a model’s body– 
in its glow, pose and transubstantiation 
to the other life of a photograph. 
  
It breaks the eye free 
of city lights, free 
of our fever for each other. 
You who own my sight–in your lens, 
  
in its tension, correct my overcorrections– 
lead me to rose water 
of the darkroom–though I am numb to you. 

Feeling bulletproof, snug 
in my Redwings and Wranglers, 
I sunk the mattock’s iron 
tooth in the ditch wall,  
setting pace for the others.  
My meal’s plug pressed  
under my rib, my mouth thick  
with sweet tea and the cigarette  
shared behind the shed. 
I was just starting to glisten 
with sweat when, crinkling  
like cellophane, a buzzing clung 
to my face. My scream lifted 
a tree full of grackles. I stumbled,  
sucker-punched, stung.  
Then Rick, our captain, old sailor 
with blue-anchored arms, 
was telling me to hold still.  
He pried my hands  
from the sting, and digging  
out his chaw, smeared it across 
my cheek. His eyes bleared 
in their lizard folds. This close,  
he smelled like pine tar.  
He said nicotine would null 
the venom, one poison 
for another. The tobacco’s tang  
made my eyes swim, 
and I hung back the rest  
of the afternoon, afraid  
to wash off the salve, the spit  
and scald of Rick’s love. 

I.
  
Aerophone. Overblow. Grenadilla. Cylindrical bore. 
Sassafras. Contrabass. Orange tiger. Roar. 
  
Harry Carney. Half-hole. Bitches Brew. Resin. 
Cousin Mary. Eric Dolphy. Grapefruit stew. Rosin. 
  
Neither a dry sound, nor the white ricepaper mask, 
But, swallowing the moon, the notes drink like grapes. 
  
The Newark photographer says that when he was a kid,  
There were 12 or 13 movie theaters downtown.  
  
Now, only a tiny porn theatre, a spit’s distance from the Museum,  
Shows octaves of skin. Part of the lip stretches behind the knee,  
  
Smooth as a Mercury reissue, and the precipice, glistening  
Like a roll’s glaze, has been pushed up and down across  
  
Sarah Vaughan’s orgasmic “Uh” noise at 2:35 in “Body and Soul.” 
The Dogon wear purple fringes, and their pearl millet 
  
Sing vessels of donkeys bearing caryatids, like the sandstone 
Bandiagara all rectilinear with masks secured by the teeth. 
  
Four flutes roll off their center; the cake’s filling, plastered 
(Not a sigh, exactly longer) are references to barbecued peaches. 
  
White and red altars catch clouds…is that what Braxton means? 
I shook hands with Elvin Jones, and with Lawrence D. “Butch” Morris. 
  
The cavernous filaments of the downtown room, like a limb 
Soaking in a barrel. An article said: The amount of female granaries  
  
Is an indication for the amount of women living in the guinna. 
Little Richard, with his nougat-like pomade, yelled the girl can’t help it. 
  
Coltrane, likewise, said whatever he’d say about Eric Dolphy 
Would be understatement. Newark’s dry-rot and magnesium  
  
Flares show litter, and the bare branches of a maple. Some looters  
Return with armfuls of candy, Kool-Aid, and water guns. 
  
The late photo of Sarah Vaughan shows black triangles  
Arranged like a batman villainess. Years ago her carefree loafers  
  
And red Parisian mime stripes swung easy. The liner notes reveal  
“That she could have succeeded in the classical field.” 
  
Wayne Shorter would say 'What’s happenin'?' and she’d say 'Newark,'  
And that was enough, ‘cause you know what Newark does to people. 
  
Mel Torme reports that she got kind of huffy when he said “operatic”  
And then she said “Do you mean jazz isn’t legit?” 
  
You might say that powders are being crushed in the mortar, 
Where some of the purple splays like limbs, the embracing limbs. 
  
For a while poetry did not interest me, with its flailing, 
Corruption, boredom, obsequiousness, and general green color. 
  
It was a cloak used for taunting by everyone, assholes all. 
Flaubert thought the same thing about the bourgeoisie.  
  
Nothing is ever the same as they said it was. 
Blue lights of her hair, vertical, the gray pearls of her neck, 
  
Delightful, to the place—better or worse—where eyes penetrate. 
Bare forks, glitter swan glasses, hiding among the bushes.  
  
Sort of feeling your way. Arbus said, the hand is the cutting  
Edge of the mind. Flawed animals. Meat and buns and slaw. 
  
She sort of lifted up her hips so the rims of the bones 
Were elevated, a sort of handsclasp, of “braided chestnut” 
  
Then, a wordless moan, like the pink tent you traverse— 
Rather than nonvocal to the bone, she pulled his shoulders 
  
Forward, hovering. During rehearsal the wordless word was loosely 
Creased, where the lowest part of the hip is hooked to the curve. 
  
Roland Kirk’s “No Tonic Pres” has a double meaning: 
The first note in the scale and the double gin Lester Young 
  
Was drinking without quinine water, circumference of lemon 
Like the brim of the hat, blooming into focus in Gjon Mili’s film. 
  
I gathered dry kindling on the snowy mountain slope,  
White were the branches gathered in my hand. 
  
Wood has dropped its pieces, with trees along the way, 
Where the couple walks the trail inside the creamy sand. 
  
The bassist said the action on the bass was high, 
Vertically so, so that the elastic boom made for instant decay. 
  
Threadgill says tubas can control the decay and attack. 
Tubas blend with everything, whereas the bass doesn’t blend. 
  
Brass will cut through anything. You have to wait on the bass. 
A tuba player, he says, can shut it down, ‘cause it’s wind. 
  
The bass player said during a long jam, he never 
Gets a break. The glass of Pepsi has water already 

Dripping down the side of the glass. From the ice 
Skating in the armful of warm air. A woman bends 
  
To pat a multi-striped cat, liquid grey, who prances 
Between the aisles, listless and revolting with mystery. 
  
She loves the horrendous creature, whose eyes glow 
Yellow like a vial of Pernod. Its tail upright 
  
Plucking an e-minor because the story has become  
More complicated than when we left the house. 
  
Miles played in Tokyo and then Berlin, former 
Scorched sectors alighted in the terror-bots’ scopes. 
  
In Tokyo on March 9, 1945 we (Americans) burned to death 
100,000 people in a single night; men, women, children. 
  
On July 14, 1964, Sam Rivers channeled T-Bone Walker 
Among the velvet echoes at Kohseinenkin Hall. 
  
The Dogon say that we should remember: 
God has no external ears. She cups her hands. 
  
Babies are like water flowers who devour 
The cool leaves from the tubs of their eyes. 
  
Our ways of living differ.  
  
  
II.
  
Think of swagger’s on-off switch. 
Weldon Irvine said: Many of the young rappers  
  
Got disconnected from a tradition of protest  
And decided to rap about mayhem  
  
In order to get paid. You can tell the political 
Orientation of the bus driver by whether 
  
He says “Lenox Avenue” or “Malcolm X 
Boulevard” when he announces the stop. 
  
The large blue and white wheels slap 
The painted curb, covered with slush. 
  
November ’80. I walk to school  
Not knowing how to play with. 
  
I decided, not unlike John Gilmore 
At Birdland 1956, to play contra. 
  
We play against everything, 
In the blaze of a hearth. 
  
We got the concept. We got 
The concept. We got conceptual. 
  
I am on East 80th Street. The whir 
Of pigeons have delicate lavender 
  
Pockets around their eyes. 
They ground themselves and a spring 
  
Of city dust is a pillowy aplomb 
Among the air’s granules. 
  
Of a city, and its puzzle pieces 
Many-tongued, embraceable. 
  
Two men are dancing in a bar.  
It’s 11:30 according to the wall’s  
  
  
Cold Aged “Genesee Beer” clock.  
They are dressed in 1980 styles: velour  
  
And floppy, existential caps. The shadows  
Of the men’s bodies are cast  
  
On the jukebox behind and their joy. 
What do you know about the forgotten ones? 
  
Try to understand the beautiful bodies, 
Peeling paint, and upturned peaches 
  
From a Marxist perspective. Why this city 
Detritus, denotations and detonations? 
  
Why the snail shell, uncomfortable water, 
The caramel tone of Sarah Vaughan 
  
And the air is punctuated by wings? 
Instead of limbs, wings slice through 
  
At 80 degrees, assaulting through 
The sky’s catapult, salted & polychrome. 
  
I would like to be away from 1980 
For a while, and see its chemical pinks 
  
Dripping from the unfeeling dinosaur 
Eye of the iridescent pigeons, 
  
Another time, from above or below. 
I will not take my father’s footsteps. 
  
A miner’s helmet with its bulb  
Peers through the tack and driftwood. 
  
Around a wall, the light bounces 
On a mirror with its white cotton. 
  
You are encased in the city’s 
Steel tub. Washboard, scrap, 
  
Empty grape drink bottle. 
Frail, fall, literal. Burnished. 
  
Do you feel the calm 
Chewing the marrow 
  
From the gains the city has made? 
  
  
III.
 
A halved city moves 
along the mouth of a canal. 
You are living inside its corridors, 
breathing the air shaft’s smell 
of a fishbone. Your limbs reach 
across the threshold, 
down the hallway of metal doors. 
It is that multihued avenue 
that comes at the park’s edge 
after a mollusk’s snowdrift 
away from the window mottled  
jamb’s coded, inconceivable rust, 
the pigeons’ peppery throats 
blush like sorcerers bending the tab 
rings of their cans, and all echoes. 
It is not only pushers and gathering 
places, storefront churches, crates of apples. 
We should not be east of the park, 
but no one knows we’re here, 
if it is the Paradise or the Omni 
swaying along the velvet curtain of the sky. 
Beyond the rooftops, I see 
the families create a father’s 
day picnic out of a card table, boombox, 
a ginger ale, boxes of chicken, 
a dominoes game clamped to a dude’s lecture. 
I would run from the 125th Street station 
down the sustained line of the sidewalk,  
and wait for the elevator that stops 
to raise its pulley and flywheel 
and drop my trapezoid body, 
and race to the apartment 
to caress your hair, 
or to let up or simply hold on. 
It is a familiar curvature. 
The place is a valley, the cathedral’s east. 
The same streets reach out 
in the same places, to open 
the same mirrored lobbies. 
We arrive at the place 
where the wife relaxes 
and folds her legs on the floor 
in conjecture 
at all the sidewalks traversed. 
She has me, a partner who knows 
that her memories are bubbles, 
that we see a farfetched capital lift, 
and break through tenements 
and wish like a creed, 
we would travel along riffs and octaves, 
to hear the doorbells and bird coos 
or feel the extraordinary orange 
of the Florida sun, a woman 
clutching an orange pill bottle, 
and we go along the snakelike namesakes 
and the keratin hooves of the city 
can always relieve us, 
we have people sitting around 
understanding the bubbles’ gloss 
anywhere the fragile, numb inheritances 
answer the launching terrors  
her axes and closet doors she remembers 
we will burst them all along. 

“I shot one of those,” I say to Dennis, pointing  
at the screen. It’s a light anti-tank weapon,  
a LAW, long fiberglass tube, next to weightless.  
I was 17 when I picked it up,  
drill sergeant beside me on the firing line,  
an instructor guiding this gigantic straw onto  
my shoulder. Even the small-size uniform  
looked ridiculous on me. So I have  
the LAW on my shoulder and it feels good.  
Not like the M-60, which was like dancing   
with a barrel of oil. The LAW was nice.  
A little plastic scope pops up, with red lines  
and a circle. Downrange, there’s a huge  
hunk of metal that looks like a tank.  
I take off the front cover, a black plastic cap.  
Take off the back cover, another plastic cap.  
Both swing free. This thing is like a Pixie Stick  
it’s so light. If I’m ever in a war, I am  
definitely carrying one of these, I think.  
It’s pale green, somewhere between moss  
and sand. The instructor loads the thing and now, 
it’s a loaded LAW, still not heavy, but lethal.  
“Pretend it’s someone you hate,” drill sergeant says.  
I’m 17. Firing line clear. Backblast area clear.  
Cheek, chin, against the tube. Line up the scopes.  
The trigger is under a squishy rubber cap,  
not a rifle trigger at all. There’s no one  
in the tank. Though I’m sure there was noise,  
I don’t remember it. Just the joy of being  
on target, some metal crumbling downrange.  
Then it was another girl’s turn.  
“Did you hit any helicopters?” Dennis asks. 
“Don’t be silly,” I say. “They don’t let you  
shoot helicopters.” But of course, they do. 

“And if there’s no way to radio for help,  
use red flares or the SOS signal.  
Three taps of metal on metal. S. O. S.”  
Though he didn’t make the sound,  
we could all hear the taps in our heads,  
hear the exact pitch and call of those taps,  
the ringing, the way metal can amplify sound,  
send it long distances, S–O–S,  
perhaps a shovel against a flagpole,  
a wrench against a pipe or one rifle  
to another, although how desperate  
would you have to be to bang rifles together,  
what would have happened, what foxhole  
would you be in, would there be a body  
next to yours, maybe a little bit alive  
but not caring that you were knocking  
her carefully sighted scope to shit, because  
that sound of metal on metal would be  
her last hope, that desperate noise above  
the night sounds or maybe hidden  
in battle chatter but still you hit  
with metal on metal, ammunition case  
against canteen, canteen to rations kit,  
rations kit to bayonet, one, two, three,  
one, two, three, you only have to count  
to three but each set seems so long,  
so metallic, the helmets now are Kevlar  
or you’d use it one, two, three, what a ring  
a metal helmet would have, how it would tug  
at the ears of someone, a medic nearby,  
a priest, maybe she’s Catholic, she might be  
Catholic, yes, you distinctly remember  
that conversation and how you brought up  
the priest pedophile thing. And wish  
for time to say sorry one, two, three,  
your tiring arms and the longer and longer  
pauses one, two, three, and now  
your signal sounds like metal swinging at air. 

Whether illusion or truth 
before illusion, or truth behind, 
  
there is a door. There must be. 
A door inside usual. In you  
  
as you think of it, when you travel,  
mapping your mind. Go, 
  
become again a threshold. 
You can cross over. 
  
Though it is like nakedness  
in an empty room, to linger 
  
without choosing one, to linger 
because you have to choose. 
  
Waver inside  
that rapid begin. 

A gazelle in the house means tender, breaking 
silence. An approach calibrating hesitation. Something  
held out in the hand. Something bitter, exactly toward 
a gazelle. You will bring things forward that are not 
of your world. You will push things back that seemed  
massive, fundamental—packed away, out of the path  
of a gazelle. Rooms must be cleared for the strands  
of her shadow, a thin frame on white walls. Let a gazelle  
determine it all. Enclosure means trespass. What looks open  
is. No thoughtless clarity. No space she cannot step 
into, butt to the width of her animal  
need. She will stray. Like a clock, her hooves mark  
crooked shifts on your floor. Her ears  
quake like tuned strings. 

Laced through the leaves’ canopy 
long woven, like the bean stalk 
of legend, voluminous vine, 
  
a harboring trellis 
of linked pods, you (a seed) 
are hollow, heart-shaped, grained 
  
dark as mahogany   
and resistant to ruin, until rain  
washes you out of the forest 
  
toward river, then sea 
for the tolerant glide 
inside waves in which, nicked  
  
by fish, turtles, wind, you’ll sail 
nowhere on purpose, will  
be pummeled, and punctuate 
  
battering currents  
like a dash in one tedious sentence, 
bobbing up through tides 
  
until beached, maybe  
Norway, maybe Florida, exotic 
surprise. You can float 
  
for years. You have that buoyancy. 
They call you fava de Colon,  
“Columbus’ bean,” and say 
  
it was you that, strewn  
on Portugal’s shore, a landed echo,  
led him to think there was more. 

As when the boy in the epic 
watched Mommy’s suitors eating  
his pet chickens,  
each pampered bird  
with a history, quirky habits, 
and a pagan name, 
and he must have watched with rage, 
a rage that, given a mouth  
and two words,  
would say fuck off 
(three more: 
no more daddies!), 
so too is your sour,  
inscrutable stare. 
  
But not quite as when the two  
missiles—short-range,  
air-to-air, seeking  
heat—shot down the defenseless airliner,  
embassies were abuzz, no one  
would accept blame, 
and reading his ghostwritten  
national address, our leader  
gazed coldly into cameras. 
  
No, just as when,  
in the restored fresco, he rises from the grave 
and from afar his side wound 
is a cat scratch,  
the nail hole’s a red coral button,  
and he looks solemnly,  
  
angrily as all get-up 
at the beholder— 
you look at me like that 
across the table. 
Not one soul in the world  
is safe. In the background, half the trees  
are bare. 
  
Half green. 
Some even on the verge  
of blossoming. 
You stare at me, stare. 
Miso, udon swim 
  
between us. 
Resentment,  
grilled mackerel.  

   The Enemy’s tranquilized body slung over your shoulder  
                                                                       like a leopard skin, a blazer, you 
                        walk down Main Street in the ticker-tape parade,  
  
                                                            greenish thunderheads growing,  
closing in, I don’t know which one of you I’d rather blow 
                                                                       then worship in my cell’s  
  
             guttering light: you have an M-16, body armor, a beard  
                                                           flecked with boy-blood, gold leaf,  
  
                                                                      ram-blood; he’s naked yet turbaned, 
                                             scruffy, hates our country. Our  
  
              Way of Life. But you love this land 
                                  with all your heart, fought  
  
                      for our freedom, almost made 
                                                           the ultimate sacrifice. 
He’s got more passion, verve, I could be his  
  
                                              thousandth virgin. But— 
                                    you came back, Soldier. 
                                               You came back for me 
  
                       like you promised. Drop him 
                                                            and carry me piggyback  
                       through the crowds. I’m the Chosen One! 
  
                                    I’m the Chosen One! I’d scream  
                                               like a brat,  
                        like a fucking queer. It’s clapping  
  
                                                           thunder now, drizzling. 
                                              Now pouring. Starlings scatter, 
  
                                                                       egrets and cormorants and 
                                              sparrows too, riding the wind, 
                                                                                    chanting or chirping  
  
                                   whatever’s left unsung 
                                                           of lust and love.  
                                                And the wind starts 
                                                                        to gust. Find your  
                                    bunker! Find your bunker!  
  
                                                            you call out  
                                                to the people,  
                                                            the multitudes, the squall  
  
                         would’ve forced me from your back…

1. 
Ghosts do not happen alone. Ghosts are made 
from rooms and glass and cherry trees. They lie down and become 
horizons. You see by them. 
You remember. 
  
2. 
Some ghosts want to undo you, to take you apart. 
They crawl in cupboards and bang against the wood. 
They rearrange furniture and hide 
your good shoe. You cannot fight them, you do 
not know their names. Other ghosts want 
to hold you together, to bake your favorite lemon cookies 
in the middle of the night and climb in bed with you 
and comb your hair with their glassy fingers. 
You hate these ghosts most of all. 
You know their names exactly. 
  
3. 
You know a ghost and you call her Kate. But Kate is not 
her name. You knew 
Kate before she was a ghost. You knew her square white teeth. 
Now, Kate is a red door shutting. 
Now, she is the room you sleep in. Kate sings 
your favorite song until you fall asleep. 
  
4. 
The ghost is a fixed point. Winter’s 
cicatrix. A cup tied to a rope tied to your neck. 
You wear it like an overcoat. You want 
to explain it, but to point your body toward  
the ghost is language enough. 
  
5. 
You wake up and Kate is still there. She enters 
by way of a mirror. She puts out her hands and tells you “take it” 
but her hands are empty. 
  
6. 
You drive out of town, the ghost 
is snow falling and the ghost is a trackless white 
interstate. Kate tries to tell you something, 
to show you where you’ve been. 
Your favorite song plays on the radio. 
You are not yet asleep. 

No more batteries or breakfast. No 
more clean socks. No music. 
Under God’s heavy thumb, I am all animal. 
Unable to crawl away, to kneel upright. 
“This is what happens,” 
God said, and then: nothing. 
My new body is like my old one: a little bored 
and worn out, out 
of prayers and places to rest. 
From this pointillated distance, the city lights look like boats 
floating on top of other boats. 


There Are Lots of Guns Here—
and we cannot trust the refrigerator. 
When I return from the doctor with no   
diagnosis you’re standing in your underwear 
waving a bag of rotting vegetables 
like a monstrance. We cannot trust 
the radishes the color of a sad  
radish’s heart the minute it’s pulled 
from the ground and the rain 
has a voice like a president 
who cannot believe something 
he has just said about security 
or debt. We cannot trust 
the veteran on the first floor 
who stalks the parking lot 
barefoot in the rain then backs 
his truck into six different spots. 
We cannot trust that he hates  
you for being an immigrant, 
or that he has a gun, but maybe 
one day soon we’ll dial 911  
and I do not think I could write  
the transformative elegy, the one  
that turns from grief to consolation  
in memory to an affirmation  
of immortality. Forgive me  
there are so many situations  
to diffuse that one wonders  
why buy fresh produce 
in the first place. Let’s bury  
our faces in the parsley; 
let’s seal up the day 
like a body bag. 

First it was one checkpoint & then it was  
another checkpoint. On the highway between  
D.F. & Puebla two Federales boarded the bus  
  
and ordered the women off. We tend  
to think not me, or just me. One wore  
an assault rifle across his back, another  
  
pointed a video camera at our faces.  
At these moments, we tend to think  
massacre, as in no longer a number,  
  
or biopower, as in Foucault’s botched  
orgy visions. The one with the assault rifle  
said quite los lentes, and I was on my knees 
  
as in prayer, the compliance position, 
pure submission. The Federales  
laughed, and I was just another  
  
silly woman with dusty knees removing  
her expensive sunglasses at a checkpoint  
south of a Volkswagen factory where  
  
Mexicans manufacture German cars,  
as in high performance engines; speed  
management. Not bullets, but the red  
  
record button, the mouth effaced  
by the camera saying rubia, linda,  
ojos verdes. To my left, a covered  
  
well for animals. The assumption  
is that the missing are dead  
or in safe houses. The assumption 
  
as slippage of language. To my right, 
the bus where V watched me watching  
the camera pan in on my face.  
  
Blue curtains, the smell of animals  
and cooking oil. We were, by this time,  
already leaving, as in all of this was  
  
no longer our problem—checkpoints,  
surveillance, narcoterrorism, as in  
the D.E.A. doctrine; species management.  
  
Footage of Rodney King, Katrina,  
Los Angeles, New Orleans, the National Guard.  
We call it a lifestyle decision, these mornings  
  
spent reading El Norte on our iPads,  
studying the photos of headless bodies  
hanging from bridges. Biopower— 
  
a covered well for animals. The squinting  
and trying not to piss oneself. 
The not me of it, which is the final take.  

On the side of this sheet 
(no use looking) 
Or on the back 
(no use) 
Stand motley stick figures 
  
Women 
Those who fell at the fall of Berlin ‘45 
To Russian officers suave if foul 
To Proles victorious drunk roaring 
(no use) 
  
Sisters cousins mothers grandmothers 
Yes and the very young 
Taken (no ) 
Sometimes three or four times  
In the night night after night 
  
Nothing helped of course  
Except to become an officer’s special prize 
(Briseis 
Helen 
You too knew that) 
  
Some faked illness 
Under sheets in a typhus ward 
Or hid in attics like others before them 
Anywhere a closet trunk crawlspace grandfather clock 
Stifling breaths  
  
On the back of this paper 
Or at the ragged margin to the left 
Or at the straight-ruled right 
Holding on 
(no use don’t bother) 
                                                             
Here is plunder  
A slim-limbed Berliner gazing 
She stands at this rickety window 
On the side of war 
Looking in 

Strung skeletal off a peninsula, an archipelago 
pressed too close by the sea. 
  
When a gale brings up the water in gray lurching arcs 
and blows the whitecaps to a stiff spray, that last 
  
rock island is an almost impossible proposition. 
Small, drenched, beaten bare, and unable to sustain 
  
anything but its own brute silence against the weather, 
it remains pitched in the froth, a sudden lee shore 
  
on which our small craft go dashing. 
  
                        * 
  
In a tiny room, the air close and pungent with curry, 
a woman at table peels oranges for her lover. 
  
She frees the fruit from the pith, separates 
the wedges and arranges them on a yellow saucer. 
  
The oranges, the saucer—they seem to float 
away, unguided, toward the center of a white Formica lake. 
  
Had they risen there, as if by some impudent will, 
she couldn’t have found them stranger, 
  
or stopped herself sooner. 

To his mother he was Little Soso;  
to the people in his impoverished village, Dhugashvili,  
  
and even if some linguists claim that his patronymic 
means son of garbage, even if one of his arms  
  
was slightly longer than the other, for one year  
when he worked at the observatory in Tbilisi,  
  
he was handsome, and his mother adored him,  
choler and all. She knew that when he lay at night  
  
beneath the Georgian stars, his pockmarks  
vanished, and his arms seemed the same length.  
  
These nights at the observatory came many years 
before he would forsake his own son rotting  
  
in a German prison, before his wife  
would kill herself from shame and neglect, long before  
  
he allowed millions of Russians to starve. He was still  
Soso, astonished by the dignity of stars, the names of which  
  
owned nothing, claimed nothing, but pointed toward  
a sweet desire: loincloth, solitary ones, little belly, wonderful. 

Picking at the iron flakes, you said what you feared most 
was haze, that orbital heat dragging back and forth in the sky, 
condensing into hot chandeliers stuck bright to the metallic 
atmosphere. This does not make sense, I say. But what do I know 
of aggregates and origins? Or geological time scales whipping 
creatures along into death, into love, into vital 
textures and tribes of phylum? This is not what I know. 
Once, you showed me a radiolarian, a little protozoic net of 
curves (and there are so many curves in Art: Gothic, Nouveau, 
Hogarth, and Serpentine). I said they looked like they suffered 
whiplash underwater, crouching into inky spheres. I said to look at 
balconies and think Rococo. There are many soils and they 
are thickening, even now. But you hate to see mass so covalent, 
preferring burnt and uncertain matter, open roots and elder veins, 
pinning wing pieces like constellations distilling across a blank wall. 

Gray stowaway in the old world’s  
nailed trunk of burnt and dented pans. 
  
Sometimes my mind’s 
an immigrant to my body. 
  
Not unlike when 
the king killed 
  
his son’s little  
blue light of a lover, his  
  
head rolling in the dust, 
making the point. 
  
Mother lifts a wooden spoon. 
She will separate  
  
out English, separate 
grim fabric from guns, 
  
still-born child from  
sibling, sin from 
  
pride, breaking 
the sound barrier of the little boy’s mind. 
  
You would not think 
so now you must feel. 

In the city’s daytime dumpster  
I saw a holy fool, my father,  
feeling out frozen bits of potato.  
  
What is my father doing in Moscow,  
far from the Minnesota woods,  
their clean deer with kingly horns?  
  
In falling snow, two brothers  
with a hand-pulled cart pass,  
both of their noses smashed  
  
in different directions. There is  
too much white here, and where  
are your shoes? Your private faith,  
  
burning, a wooden cross on iced chains  
around your neck— am I to be lost  
for this, for seared paint blistering  
  
from a rotting plank? When  
at last you look my way,  
your shocked hair a tangled wreath:  
  
physicist, baker, wild dove. 

Upon brief examination 
the cathedrals of Gdansk reveal 
an absence of quiet death. 
  
There are at least three choices 
when a wall is blasted away. 
This is an aside. I am reminded 
  
of a crazed friend in New York 
who was daily mesmerized 
by shards of glass trapped 
  
in metal grates surrounding trees. 
Upon closer examination, it became 
clear they once were crack vials. 
  
But the cathedral— 
still tottering as crimson rubble, and 
the view of sun through glass: essential. 
  
Yet, it is simpler to brick up 
a dove-ghosted alcove, 
the wall of windows revealing 
  
rooks flapping their wings against  
sleep. Exhaustion results 
in the most mundane of remedies. 
  
Others, older men mostly, sort 
the saved globes of glass by shape, 
color, the particular Mother’s features. 
  
They die awaiting the reconstruction  
of their minds. Better, perhaps, 
to look gingerly forward, 
  
sketch a guess at the future 
face of the Madonna, knowing 
she finds her reflection abhorrent. 
  
Knowing she kisses glitter 
beneath pigeons and a rusted tin 
overhang. Go ahead. Look closer 
  
into anyone’s face. 

Clarice, the Swiss appraiser, paces our rooms, listing furnishings  
on her yellow legal pad with a Waterman pen, a microcamera. 
Although I’ve asked why we have to do this, I forget the answer. 
  
The answer to why is because, inscrutable, outside of logic,  
helpless, useless because. Wing chairs, a deco lamp, my mother’s  
cherry dining table—nothing we both loved using looks tragic.  
  
Most nights now I sit in the den reading the colorful spines  
of your art books, Fra Angelico to Zurbaran, volume after volume  
of Balthus, Botticelli, Cezanne, Degas, Michelangelo, Monet,  
  
Titian—alphabetized. Friends. An art school’s asked for them— 
after all, they have no “real” value now, except to me….  
Upstairs, Cerise—is that her name?— gasps at the bentwood chaise, 
  
the blonde moderne bedroom “set” my parents bought  
on their 2-day Depression honeymoon in Manhattan.  
I know this has something to do with paying taxes.  
  
Last night, a real icy February zero, I went out to start 
the engine of the car you gave me on my birthday, 
to keep it going, then came in and forgot it till this morning  
  
I woke to the city’s recycling truck grinding my papers  
and plastic bottles and my motor running. And still, I wasn’t out  
of gas. Our neighbor, his head in a red bandana, yelled,  
  
“We didn’t want to bother you at one in the morning!” 
and I thought, How did you know I wasn’t in there, suiciding? 
Cerise means “cherry,” Clarice means “light” or “famous”— 
  
is her name Clarissa? What is she saying? She’s blurring, 
she looks like a Candice, she looks nice enough, but  
I’ll defer judgment until she’s finished this business. 
  
If I let on I felt sad, remember my mother’s advice? 
“Everyone should collect something!” That was her path  
to the purpose-driven life, along rows of a flea market,  
  
then alone in her house jammed with the nicked, the chipped, 
ceramics with dings, the inscribed wedding bands of strangers— 
damaged things that always needed gluing or polishing. 
  
I tried not to teach our children the world’s a dangerous place,  
but there we were, 4 of us, plunked into history, listening to Dylan. 
Then, 2 of us. Our son and daughter out in it, unafraid, purposeful…. 
  
Somehow, our life veered from the script. I should get a new cell  
phone but 18 of your messages are in/on my old one 
and can’t be transferred. How can Verizon say your voice isn’t 
  
really in there at all, calling home to me?—Then where is it?  
Why should it disappear from somewhere it unapparently isn’t? 
Why should my living here be so metaphysical? 
  
Callista enters our bedroom, the room sacrosanct to me,  
off-limits, but no matter. She scans our night tables, our TV,  
our pills and lotions and clippers. Oh, mornings here  
  
you’d perform what you’d call “your ablutions” while  
I read the paper in bed. Pearl slinks from her place on my pillow,  
Bogey’s hunched in the closet on your shearling slippers, 
  
Hosni Mubarak’s been deposed, Benghazi’s a riot of freedom  
until the Khadaffis say it isn’t. The day you died, I knew  
what people meant by saying the earth stopped spinning 
  
on its axis. No choice but to write myself, to keep going.  
Today’s Science Times says we’re not in the Garden of Eden anymore— 
well, that shouldn’t give evolutionary biologists pause. Life,  
  
say the geologists, is a natural consequence of geology. 
Geology? I know there’s got to be more to be written.  
Clarissa, Clarinda, Callista, Career, whatever your name is,  
  
pack up your digital camera, your officious watery pen,  
your scrutineer’s note pad, you’re in the wrong biosphere, 
your data will never add up—Clarity, I think we’re done here. 

A garage we called garaggio,  
ten-by-twenty-two, with a peaked roof.  
You painted the plywood floor sky blue  
with a long-handled roller from Land’s End  
True Value. With the ceiling fan, a mild breeze  
always blew, though when the tide was in,  
the wind would do. For my desks, two flush doors  
you painted white, on wrought-iron stands,  
solid, true. Homasote walls you painted  
white, too, and seven small windows all new  
that opened and closed. I hung bamboo  
shades to block the bay view (distracting  
for me as it was for you—its marine clichés,  
its colorful hullabaloos.) Then I push- 
pinned my old poster of Van Gogh’s room  
at Arles, butter yellow, poppy red, cool  
blues, and a photo of Elvis the Jew— 
not really a Jew but a shabbos goy  
who, Saturdays, as a nice Memphis boy  
lit gas pilots for his frum neighbors,  
and opened their flues (when he died 
the rebbetzin broke down and wept—it’s true!)  
Three flea market lamps; one bookcase from  
Staples, brand new, Assembly Required  
asked too much first of me, then of you.  
When we stood it up, its sides were firm- 
ly askew. Without much to-do I wrote  
three books. If we had regrets, they were 
very few. Now I know we were the paper,  
we were the glue. I’m still at my desks, it’s all  
I can do by our little dream house at dusk  
when the bay turns lavender, without you.  

Driving south to Arches the churches 
change from LDS to Fountain of Faith 
to Fifth Assembly, and the landscape’s littered 
with forgotten handiwork, clay a waste 
of breath. Huge, clumsy bones and arches: 
Delicate Arch, a giant failed rib. Fin 
Canyon, Eye of the Whale. A prototype, first 
try. Garden of Eden, Balanced Rock—here 
He’s just messing around, a Child 
of Architects, leaving out His blocks. 
Nearby, rock faces are scratched with symbols 
drawn by early Us: men, bear claws, scrub 
jays, deer. Circles inside circles, symbols 
we forgot. What they didn’t draw: these 
arches. They took them for granted, 
couldn’t see the things I can’t stop looking at. 
We are happy in the sunlight, want to catch 
this light on these red rocks. So all of us 
hold our shining iPhones up before  
us. We use what we take for granted, beam  
images of what we love up to the sky. 

For their final papers, they had to write 
a thesis and a counterargument. Anything. 
Up to them. Forced narcotics counseling is wrong.  
Getting raped by your stepfather can make you gay.  
A letter to the parole board balancing 
innocence and remorse. One prisoner  
did all his assignments in Spanish, translated them  
at night instead of sleeping. His argument 
was to his son, in a Puerto Rican juvie on a drug charge. 
  
While I was not there for you when you were growing up,  
you should not make the same mistakes I made.   
  
He worked on it for weeks, paragraphs with claim,  
evidence, and analysis to say he was sorry, he thought  
it was easy money, knows his son still thinks  
it is, though no money could be harder: mothers  
dead, fathers separated from sons, imprisoned  
in different countries, unlikely to ever see each other again.  
The last day they all read their papers out loud 
while I stood with my back to the bumpy chalkboard.  
When he finished I was too choked up to talk, 
and they were watching when I wiped my eyes.  
  
Hey, professor, what, we gotta make you cry  
to get an A in here?  You want to cry? 
I could tell stories that’d make you sob.  

     You say I wear a sleepy-eyed mask  
  
   on my back. There were two shots, one clean 
  
       
out the front; one a slow burn in my open  
   throat. We’ve come 
       
      a long way, learned to arrive  
at airports early, the easiest shirt to wear,  
   the quickest story.  
     
      At home, tonight, the blinds  
cut the light, the amber bottle in your hand.  
  
  
  
You’re in the corner of my eye, proof that it’s not  
   enough to live  
  
      thru long odds. A coastline of perfume  
  
   sidewinds its way off your chest  
  
  
and blooms its fist in the air above my head 
  
  
ii 
  
      Once, we pushed up  
to a bar and you said when you blink,  
   you see me  
    
      dead before we met. I watch you blink 
watch the surface of the world  
   close   the surface close 
  
    
over me. You brush past and out the doorway  
   and I catch a moment’s flood  
       
      of hallway light, and pause  
  
   while the pool of skin-sloped scent  
  
      becomes air. It leaves the shape  
of Istria,  
  
  
      my index finger finds Pula  
  
   but it’s already a crescent moon, windplay  
  
  
on a pond, then Thailand, Chile, the S-curve,  
   northbound  
  
      lane, South Shore Drive.  
The scent between us sheds its skin,  
   its song floods the basement  
  
      of my eye. I see it swirl up  
  
   the heel-scuffed steps. You blink and it takes the light 
  
  
iii 
  
      Every glimpse of you is a gift, flesh-flash  
  
   in deathchance that blew itself  
     
  
out. Straight thru me. I’m alive. This scent  
   from your breast 
  
      stalks itself thru the long odds 
of my body. You  
    
  
blink and I die. Blind tip. Your tongue can’t see  
   the hard-domed  
       
  
  
   entry wound high on my shoulder.  
  
      The one below, you say, looks  
like it’s sleep  
   with a half-open eye. One  
  
  
bullet’s still inside me. Dead metal  
   in my voice. You say that   dead metal   
  
       when I say it,  
  
   you hold the metal in your name  
  
  
like the bullet’s in your mouth, too heavy for its size 
  
  
iv 
  
      You blink and draw back  
like you’ve heard a two-by-four crack.  
   You say, for you,   
       
      it’s a red light boy with his hood up      die bitch 
you saw the kick push back his sleeve. 
  
  
  
His gun, jammed, is always there. Deaf click of an open O 
   in your eye. You blink again, slow and long,  
  
      always   and I stay dead  
  
   for ten seconds. Eyes closed,  
  
  
you say the imagination’s infinite, the chance  
  
  
      of meeting there unthinkable.  
I’m wounded in a way that makes me think  
    I can heal  
  
  
around the metal. You say no matter how  
   much heavier than its size  
  
      allows,  
it’s not enough. No  
   matter the metal, it’s no more than the sound 
  
      of sunlight and the taste of tin caught  
  
   in a bright sheet of water thrown across the grass from a pail 
  
  
v 
  
Like the shape of a scent, a voice with a bullet 
   in its chords will never  
  
      cover its shadow like lace  
  
   thrown over the top of a mirror. As far  
  
      as the mirrors go, you’re right.  
You hold one. I  
   hold the other and light blows pieces  
  
      of us thru the room. I watch you kiss  
the mask on my back. You wink a glow in a stainless 
  
  
      eye and scent shadows splay across the wall.  
You’re in your full-length robe  
   of precision 
  
  
and falling glass. I’m gone in blue light 
   thru a broken window  
  
      in your back, my limbs  
break the beam  
   into spectrums of useless motion. The exit route  
  
       
took a piece of my third rib, you  
   find the bone notch  
  
      with a finger and say this wound’s our fifth
nipple. It points away, rises     always 
   to reach where the heat of your voice comes from 
  
  
vi 
  
      The snare rhythm of Method  
and Mary from a passing car,   —foryourbodyandyourskintone   
   the wrong vowel’s a pain net,  
    
      a stress in a word can turn flock of knives.  
  
      I gauze your face with my hands  
  
   and every night we lost   what we lost   
       
  
while you blink pours its wing-footed weight  
   back over us.  
  
      Eyes open, I see you seeing  
me here. You blink. Pigments collapse   
   into a wound  
  
  
and lighten the skin around it. An orbit  
    
  
      of surf against an atoll the weight of your name  
                
   what we   
       
  
lost   in my voice. The sound of that car rounds   
   the corner, loops the block, 
    
      you’re all, I need—lie  
  
   together cry together—they’re police, you say, they love that song 
  
  
vii 
  
      I push you back, away 
from the light into velvet shadows 
   of the vestibule.  
  
  
Clouded liquids  
   from a bowed sky bent like real trust  
  
      move between our mouths.  
  
   There’s always this 
  
  
  
always between us. This metallic click. Our bodies 
   open and pressed against  
       
      the cold steel  
of the front door, the El train’s tremor, blue  
    
  
      flash, suspends us  
  
   over deaths, we wonder how, were not our own. 

I tell you then, your master is never so far from 
      you, you never have to raise your 
voice. It is right that you understand what  
      you are saying, it is good this doing  
something on your horse that isn’t graceful.  
      A wind slides beneath it anyway.  
But imagine a different horse, undifficult,  
      another boy who rides in a  
high desert. The horse is quite black whereas  
      the boy is pale. A sight to behold  
under the sun, this pair. They go galumphing  
      until there is no water and what spare  
fuel is left is nowhere near enough. True story.  
      The sun dies, careening off the piñons–  
there is something left but less than what the  
      day had promised you or I. Here’s  
where we make camp, darkness. And there is  
      suddenly nothing to be done but  
play a harmonica or sing the song about being  
      so alone. No harmonica no song in  
this boy. Best to keep riding it seems and so he  
      does and suddenly, the honest-to- 
goodness-suddenly, the black horse disappears  
      and it looks, for once, like the boy is  
actually alone, carried brightly like a chalice. 

You didn’t want to go to the sea, the base 
      nearby, its simple name, north- 
something or something once exact, crackling 
      lately only as 
lack-of-effort, short-of-funding, post-ascendant— 
      nothing wishes fixity with  
been-there-done-that— 
      you should know. 
You didn’t want to go. But you ate lunch 
      generously with those you took 
not behind the deserted commissary, its 
      sparse flowers, inchoate sun, 
or with your backs up to the barracks but  
      beyond the parade-ground where  
the ocean drives it slag through tidal flats 
      where, you advised 
there’s vantage 
      but where too you asked 
in your voice that did not dare anything 
      if you flew from this place 
if you descended to the water could you get back 
      could you manage 
and then you were the first and it surprised 
      you, that anyone would follow 
for what you had wanted to say did not 
      inhabit others, you 
who would have been there and done this 
      who would be back shortly 
who would go to the dead and love them. 

Both you & he were there. 
I woke up, saw just you, 
Rumpled cloth hat, eyes closed. 
I moved my head, and lost you. 
  
Do I still need to disguise you  
in my dream? 
  
Oh north star, disguise what? 
My friend, 
I can still smell your clothes, 
salt, light, the dog, and you. 

My words to you are the stitches in a scarf 
I don’t want to finish 
maybe it will come to be a blanket 
or a net to hold you here 
  
love not gone anywhere 

I’m going to sleep now 
in case you visit my dream 
  
Full moon       on your left temple 
that nickel-sized circle of whiter skin 
under your straight black hair 
  
I love it specially 
As if it is my secret. 
Known before. 

Of course I’m a liar.  
Of course I’ve traded boys like cars, 
cool-skinned while dancing in dark bars. 
It’s a fucked up life. 
  
Back in Chicago 
the train sparks overhead 
& I watch & smoke 
or lean against bathroom doors at Hollywood 
until I’m tethered to buckles, 
my haunches bucking. 
  
But I keep wanting someone to get on top 
of my blue jeans & glean their teeth at me, 
slide their hand down the slope of my collarbone, 
stick their fingers into my throat 
& pull the wolves out. 

Time-god, since when  
did you make me 
a rabbit: my sclera 
red as infection, 
continually Christmas 
  
between my lids: more scared 
of you than ever 
the Father: your indefatigable 
breath against flesh on the back 
of my neck: deathless 
  
subway creep: the instant 
you seem to stand 
fast is just the white 
flash at a cut 
before blood-gush 

Veritas sequitur esse 
  
Nobody drowned in the flood.  
In the beginning, the sky could not fail.  
The first raindrops took men  
  
By surprise. Everyone died 
Of shock. But when man was born  
Again, he liked words enough  
  
To see if wilted might indeed modify  
Trees, so he drove toward an edge,  
Ran out of gas, turned back  
  
To look at the desert, and like a nation  
Testing its best weapons  
In locations empty, unmarked, 
  
Vast, he shredded himself  
With glass, spilled into and over  
Unnamable stretches of land,  
  
Concrete, water, hands. Then, 
The real killing began. The cacti  
Leaked and lost their needles. A few  
  
Men prayed. And we prayed to win.

But the game includes killing  
Boys in another country.  
At the end of this beer,  
I pay a tax, make sure  
They’re dead. A man asks to change  
The channel, unaware of his own safety.  
Barflies look at him as if he’s spilled  
The final pint of ale. Loneliness  
Is a practice. Like medicine.  
Like law, the law of the land  
Live in twenty-four time zones.  
The last man standing is 
The first one alone. Which of us  
Is too drunk to stagger  
Home? Not me. I can drink  
A few more, see the Patriots  
Or the Cowboys or another  
Very long war right  
Here on this stool, watching  
My money work for me, the heat  
Up and me comfortable enough  
To complain about it.  

Thrust into the platz, wobbly-legged, bleating whatever it is boys bleat 
            When they’re on the bench, sized up and sized down, how strong, 
How much will he eat, can he learn German, what about his momma, 
            Will a beating or two knock her out of him, does he have lice, a disease 
We can catch, will he want a bed and clothes, need to bathe in the house, 
            Will he try to escape, get a message back to Krakow, scare off the other Scouts. 
And what would he be good at—the plow, the tractor, the hoe, the mower, the wagon— 
            Could he be taught to seed, prune, roll hay, harvest vegetables, carve wood, 
And what should we do with him later, how many years of the slave boy 
            In his shack by the barn, grown into a young man, interested in sexual things 
Young men get killed for when it doesn’t belong to them, can’t ever belong to them 
            With their blood subhuman and their brains primitive, by then old enough 
To be trouble for friends wanting to see themselves in the window’s reflection, 
            Not the bedraggled ghost of some kid snatched from a market in Poland, 
Only the dregs left, his life wrung from him like whiskey from a flattened leather flask. 

2. “I can fix it now so nobody won’t think of following me”  
I told him stop but he never could. 
Said he’d learn me good. Show me 
  
ink and catfish, belt and hobnail; 
feed me fishbelly whiskey, cottonmouth 
  
gin. (Widow Douglas: pray for my sins.) 
Pap was dead once. I spoiled it: spilt  
  
the salt, burnt the spider. I heard the owl.    
I listened to the stray dog howl. So Pap  
  
came back riverhair and whippoorwills. 
He came hairball, cowhide, forty-rod. 
  
I asked him dead cats and marbles 
gave him candle stub case knives  
  
whistled up quicksilver loaf batwings. 
But all the snakes were already him. 

4. Huck, again
I forgot to tell the bees he was dead, 
was why. Something that looked like a man  
  
looked sly over my left shoulder from the sky.  
He spoke in beetle clicks, in mothdust.  
  
He said pig slash he said mayfly wings.  
Made air snakeskin, lid-wind, till stars  
  
were things that looked like stars but weren’t  
and the yellow stains of the world all came  
  
through my pores. Where you leave a dead  
snake its mate comes and curls and I forgot,  
  
I’m sorry, I forgot. Pap was a snake. Pap  
was snakes and also their mates.  
  
It came of looking at the moon that way. 
It came of being dead and wanting to stay. 

And now where have they been, the boys? 
Something’s missing from their eyes, 
something trusting, something kind 
cast off like skin or old toys. 
  
The farm that reeks of shit in summer— 
they smell of it, their breath so thick 
we gag. Could they have traveled 
all that way while we were staring, 
  
returning to us feral, with a blank mistrust 
that borders on intent to kill? 
They’ve become the rivals we forgot we had, 
—their nails clotted with muck or rust— 
  
untended, cloven, and aroused. 

My habit was to duchess the clothesline: 
empty sleeves in the wind’s gentle harness.  
  
An only child weighing one form of loneliness 
against another. Walking between buildings 
  
there was sometimes a feeling of floating up— 
piano music from an open window. Given milk 
  
with a little coffee mixed in, given a rosary 
by mistake; I felt closer to God in Canada, 
  
maybe because of the lake. My grandmother 
took me to Zeller’s and bought me a nightgown 
  
with lace. Everyone is so tired. I have never 
understood it. Canoeing to the island I lost 
  
a tooth. You’re a big kid now, the cousins 
scolded, and snag went my tongue on the space. 

Patient in their dark hibernacle 
wait the twinned lobes of the tulip bulb 
hanging like a semicolon 
in the endless sentence of winter; 
not yet the green shaft rips the paper tunic 
in its upward thrust, not yet knifes its tip 
through the topsoil, the stalk aspiring 
up to a swelling of petals, pale 
bud pursed and then loosened, deepening 
to red and unsealing itself sash by sash, 
a leggy dishabille in lipstick. 
  
Somewhere on the other side of town 
some bells begin to raise their brazen; 
everything is about to change— 

Shifting wheat. Cattail seed  
sprung like birdshot. 
  
The tarp horsewhip  
above the half-worked  
  
harvest in sheaves.  
Here again, the air  
  
turned nickel, season 
of drop cloth sky.  
  
What’s another word  
for idle that’s not sloth?  
  
For regret that’s not failure?  
The horse bucked 
  
her birthing colt  
snap neck 
  
against the concrete.  
What’s another word  
  
for salvage that’s not storm? 
The wind turned sinew white.  
  
The corn stalks bristled.  
What’s another word  
  
for jubilee that’s not  
written in mud  
  
and a thousand concussions 
on the coop’s tin roof? 

As kids, we conjured jungle gyms  
            into whaling ships, and depending on the jobs  
  
of our parents, one of us played captain,  
            and one of us played anchor, and sometimes 
  
we stood on our toes in the crow’s nest, 
            gazing at a glint of the sun on the sea  
  
through shoreline mansion windows.  
            This is a place with whole stretches of beach  
  
sealed in a purse with a gold lock and bone key.  
            Salt cardiogrammed the levee, and I could sit  
  
on a dock until someone told me not to. 
            In the dream my sister remembers best,  
  
she’s standing beside a wooden fence  
            that stretches and curves the whole coastline. 
  
She wants to get through, and she’s found a hole  
            the size of a thumbtack. She scatters her clothes, 
  
and raises her hands, peeling each layer of skin, 
            unspooling the fretwork of veins and bone slowly, 
  
until she is one floating mass. My sister then slips  
            through the hole in the fence as whatever 
  
liquid she is—as whatever benediction—and the ocean 
            dismantles the helix that makes her. 


We made the sea a woman
because we needed 
  
someone to blame 
for Foster Williams fluttering 
  
like a coal-mine canary 
into the fat, catch-penny glow 
  
of the dead. As a kid,  
I made the sea 
  
a hundred jagged-backs  
slumping to shore 
  
as a brute militia. 
And it’s true, some nights,  
  
the Atlantic leaves salt 
on the shore-side windows, 
  
but it isn’t a beast  
born of bottled night-sweat. 
  
The beast has always been in me. 
In the midday, there’s a depth 
  
to the Atlantic so deep  
even the light can’t touch it. 

Smoke passes under the kitchen curtains—my body. 
My mood. A ring of tar won’t scrub from this mug. Water, water 
scorched out of bark black as a wick bringing amber and chalk 
light, an orange torch coming for the animal under my house. 
Under my house, no cavern can hold you alive 
forever: and nervous, your creator is humming. I do not believe 
in your concrete heaven, my animal of Los Alamos, my animal 
exhaling threads of toxic floss that needle my lungs. 
Pilots training above me in the desert air earned silver 
bomb rings. Red fins, metallic tip. Tinnitus, piccolo pitch, 
crest of a county-wide siren—my ears are splitting. 
I’m not sick yet. But the pink land covers you 
like an infection. I shovel sand over you, 
in my mind. In my mind, you are dragging my body 
to the fire, bruises printing my arms. I’m in my mind. 
This is my mind. Get me away from the blood center 
of a hibiscus. Get me away from the pure 
charm of a bell. Everything is burning. This isn’t hell. 

It may be that the public is not fully aware 
  
            that in another war, language 
will be available. In another war, battery acid  
and plastic lids will be  
available in large quantities.  
  
It may measure the danger 
  
            of the three speeches exploded 
before the end of the last war, of the three 
advertisements, of the three mornings  
a girl woke up without a face.  
  
The public also may not appreciate 
  
            that in relation to the damage  
inflicted a word already has become the most 
economical form of destruction. 
Accident already has. Milk diluted gray— 
  
a coating coming off in your mouth. 
  
            In another war, poisons will be plentiful.  
Press will be comparatively cheap. Coins 
nearly pulled from circulation will be plentiful,  
and candy, and T-shirts in blue and pink.   
  
Unless there is determination  
  
            not to use roof shingles, 
not to use bored doodles boxed on a form,  
not to use the unlit depths of the sea,  
song war will be hard to avoid. 
  
Unless I recognize that I am 
  
            not stronger in the world because I 
have a lens to zoom you in 
to a polished white floor, to brass gates,  
and a sea-foam fountain with an electric pump 
  
skimming the sinking coins  
  
            as though a hand were breaking the surface  
for a cupped sip, but weaker because of my vulnerability 
to the glue-scent of dye  
in a folded pair of jeans,  
                                    to a pixelated face, 
  
to a knife splitting a Hefty bag,  
   
            I am not likely to conduct myself 
here or in my relations with you  
in a spirit—of trilobite pressed in gneiss   
  
and thumbed into presence— 
  
that furthers my understanding. Mine. 

We were told, Listen to your parents.  
What can a swan need but a swan? 
                                                    Where did you hide?  
We were not abandoned. We were fed. Cleaned. 
But my sister loved with the mildness of a fawn 
who had not yet learned not to approach the hunter. 
I was too young to drive. 












She loved the bougainvilleas with their bracts savage 
against our camouflage. 
                                                    Out of necessity, there are fish who thrive in  
                                                    brackish water, water unfavorable to the rest. 
We did everything we could. 
                                                    When bonobos are forsaken by their mothers, they  
                                                    forge surrogate families. 




  
                                                    



  
                                                    In foundation-myths, siblings are born, exposed, left  
                                                    to die, but saved. By the she-wolf or a shepherd.  
                                                    And natural abilities. 












She used scissors to pare me. She drew no blood.  
                                                    Lever, or “to raise,” involves a rigid object and a pivot.  
                                                    The multiplication of distance, speed, or travels. 
                                                    A crowbar swung like a bat. Or the bat itself.  
                                                    Simple machines. 
Scissors, like the jaws we have. We are human, I say. 
She says, I know that I was not a tender mother. 

When an evergreen turns color: a signal.  
There,  
  
behind the dusty boards, 
injury. 
  
We were playing dead in the attic, owl-less. 
Amputation was clean. 
  
A cobweb released moth wings 
from its face, 
  
elimination of a limbless use. 
  
Enough time elapsed 
for a missing person report— 
  
We were not ready. 
  
We heard her passing spread of wings 
once, felt the silent serration 
and thought, 
  
This is how we’d hear if we went blind. 

I thought I saw my original once, through the slit my hands cupped on a window. To be watched is to be confirmed. Which one of us was behind glass? Who was present at my immaculate conception? The sky was a color never mentioned in children’s books.
———
What is a child grown up if its organs mature and decay at different rates. Do not tell me that only the liver defies the aging process. No one heard me when they lowered me down. When we were younger, they said, This is your gift. After the tongue of my friend was removed, it kept apologizing and lying at will.
———
A bus is not a waste even if it hasn’t been boarded in years. We must maintain a route. The evacuated body maintains a shelter for life. When they took one of my eyes to a stranger, I remember thinking, Light bulbs are not created equally. Who owns my face if I can’t read it.

We took turns breathing.                                                      Like bulbs  
                                     in a fisherman’s net                her body 
  
                                     we bore                ropes in our mouths 
         wiped our footprints                                           from the bruised sand 
          
                            we flew until our plumage                        turned cirrus. 
Mother did not find us—                     
  
                                     only a watermark                                      of sea foam 
                   remarked on what it saw.                          We grazed our cheeks               
  
                            against her wrists          broke apart the hoarfrost. 
The fingers of a girl wrinkle differently. 
  
                                               She woke to salt                     at her ankles 
                   a loom                                    in the room of a field               
  
                            seven swans                  in the absence of brothers. 
We licked her threshed hands each night 
  
                                     loved like lake water inside the mouth of a bear 
  
         a stake in the yard                                                       the nettles against her skin. 
                            When we came for her           she cast nets like shirts— 
  
Each of us was noble born once.               
                                                                 The milk on our tongues tastes of sand. 

We were all given the same words and a pen   
like one bulb to heat a cathedral 
and the same subject  forever  our part of it  
ways to describe the combed clouds 
and their brightening denials  pollinators  
finding by infrared the scentless flower 
Purpose was a sense of self and the world  
at the same time made of leaves and spaces 
all right there in Barbara’s yard  sun fired arms  
of the harpist angel  martins in a pagoda on a pole 
space bent by asparagus and capillaries  
small muscles holding pen to paper like a torch  

There were lies about returning and we imagined the sorrow  
of coming back not as we were but something like a tree   
bark bound  axe haunted  rooted and seeing through florescence  
lovers carving their names in scars 
or come out of tapestry from threads left over from a hunting scene 
a distant figure in Carpaccio hard to pick out from a meadow for brocade 
maybe awakening in a room entirely bouquets one wall see through  
of lace and glass and Nantucket just beyond  a wilderness  
reduced to a last line of bare trees  cars moving among them like deer 
Or how it really happened   no coming back at all   just waiting  
like a voice above a page   not even a face on water 
having expected joy  like a horse seeing the ocean and a beach  
after years of grass in a small fenced acre in Kansas 

We had been following spring rivers 
traveling between little rooms 
with yellow lights and small refrigerators 
I had been assembling rivers of my own  
out of spare parts none of them water  
apples and lacewings  antibodies  
on their way to a limited consciousness 
  
Evenings full of sleepers  each room  
with tics of things settling 
the drifting weight of the others  sighing 
Saying one thing meaning another  Sleep with me 
Despite some uncomfortable reminders 
Exits and Emergency Escapes posted on the walls  
I followed my words like light from crushed rock 
Later I will tell her what I heard of the lost hikers  
found praying to whiteness in the high Cascades 

It’s an anxiety like background radiation, like always hearing 
the siren at the end of the world. 
  
And though every minute carries risk in its 
slim moving hand, this is the risk of exponential 
increase, fallout maps, contaminated wheat fields. 
  
It is the eight-wheeled transport from the power plant  
crawling through town  
and a school bus poking along behind it. 
  
Roentgen labeled X-rays for X, the cipher—most 
accurate of all these names. No, we can’t prove 
  
his leukemia was caused by it. No, we 
don’t know how much is in our garden. No, 
our municipal water plant cannot remove it. 
  
It’s like playing poker, when the other side has four 
wild cards and you get none. 
  
Standing on the top of Yucca mountain, 
our grandchildren’s great-grandchildren will be playing 
with the same set of cards. 

Birds have pushed it under 
with their probing beaks. 
They have buried my city and 
  
now I must be patient, columbines 
nodding their spurs in the wind, 
reaching their roots down 
  
into my city, my noise—the spider 
web of the walnut’s buried arms, 
its feet waving at the stars. 
  
Like me it holds out its body 
toward the city, strains, torn  
between the city’s streets and the stars’ 
  
absent singing. The city cannot 
compete, it is too buried. It is 
half forgotten, it is dangerous, 
  
but even the roses only reach up with 
their cupped colors to cantilever 
over the city’s stopped mouth. 

The last time I cut him, I clipped 
in the kitchen his hair down to stubble. 
  
A buzz. A crew cut because he rowed crew 
out East & wore the bloom of blood 
  
like an earring. 
Little oops & we were through. 
  
So part of me wanted to hold his hurt 
lobe in the curl of my tongue 
  
until the bleeding stopped, 
to work my lips lower 
  
before he grabbed his coat, folded a twenty 
into the pocket of my jeans. Take it, idiot. 
  
I’d been too loose 
with leaning into him & he knew 
  
the movies they based on me: boy 
with laced up bruises on his forearm 
  
as if he’d taken a knife to sharpen it. 
Boy in a pile of hair, half-curved moons. 
  
Boy with hands as wide as oars. So what 
if I’m weak. So what 
  
if I replay the afternoon, 
months ago, we swallowed 
  
in a theatre? When we saw 
the muzzle of a gun, & knew 
  
it’d fire before the end. We spent 
the movie wincing for the shot. 

My Quarry
was ghastly vast, a throat too swollen 
to swallow, as I followed him in— 
he who owned a switchblade 
and told me only 
take it out if you’ll use it. 
He who toed the water naked 
and lit a cigarette before dipping in. 
My quarry, it dragged like a hook 
and hid him in the wreck 
of a dredger for me to find. 
We fell into atrophy 
and used it as excuse 
for what our hands were doing. 
Me, unbelieving, weak from the jeans 
I slipped off and tossed to an evergreen. 
My back bone-white and bruised, 
I wanted to be new for him. He 
who chewed chaw. He who swore 
he’d pull me into a bar fight 
sometime. When he said every year 
a bunch of teens drown in quarries 
I understood and was underwater 
before the beam of the night patrol 
flashed the waves we waited below— 
shaky ghost of a man I didn’t know 
and him a handhold away. 

Half held back I still lost a loose molar though 
he broke a knuckle on the hard corner 
  
of my cheekbone and snapped back holding 
his hand. The rest fell on him and the fight 
  
turned into a dog pile then dispersed. 
I wanted to shoot out the tooth all cool like 
  
because at that point, the girls hadn’t yet 
left, but Steve said spit up into my hand— 
  
a mixture of blood and saliva the color of glue 
with the little thing swimming in it—in case his dad 
  
could fit it back in. Of course, his dad couldn’t so 
I kept the white nub for a while like a trophy bruise 
  
and whistled, sometimes, through the open hole, 
as if no one else would mess with a boy 
  
who could take a punch and keep his feet, 
a boy surrounded by a gang of dogs and Steve 
  
whose dad would clean my teeth for years after 
and ask, each time, about my mother. And I 
  
would dream, some nights, of snapping the neck 
of a beer bottle on the edge of a bar or 
  
wrapping the sleeve of my shirt around my fist 
before burying it in some guy’s stomach. And I 
  
wondered about that fissure of anger, what long crack 
it ran up my body until it bloomed through 
  
my fingers, until it took out my loose tooth 
because I couldn’t turn away. Because it would take 
  
years before I could leave off looking for 
the next someone slightly smaller than me, 
  
the image of Steve holding my tooth like a broken 
eggshell kicked from the nest. How gentle he was. 

I love 
the burble 
  
of the bus 
the vulgar 
  
gurgling  
the brawny 
  
demotic 
paunchy 
  
song 
perfumed 
  
by swirling 
diesel plumes 
  
redolent 
of foreign 
  
journeys 
of turbid 
  
urban 
throngs 
  
of the lover 
left  
  
on the curb 
of his world 
  
as the bus 
lurched off 
  
ushering my  
enraptured 
  
self into  
the furiously 
  
murky  
future 


Spishing
unlike pishing, 
which is Yiddish 
  
for pissing, 
is birding 
  
gibberish 
which 
  
will flush 
a twitchy 
  
bird from perch 
or brush 
  
or a ditch 
allowing us 
  
to watch  
as it flashes 
  
a mustache, 
a nape, 
  
wing-stripes 
or lores 
  
and then rushes 
off, leaving us 
  
itching 
for more. 

Imagine living, the cannonball clean  
through the sternum, a hole the size  
of a coffee can kept for old screws 
and rusted nails. Imagine walking away,  
the fields, the streets, the years, a prodigy  
of forgetting, dangling flaps and shreds  
and nerve-ends slowly pulled back, ribs  
and spine knitting around the mouth of it, 
everything smoothing over. Till even you 
believe it didn’t happen, couldn’t, the physics  
isn’t right, but how else explain the uptick,  
mid-chest, these late October afternoons,  
the colors, the light, all that, and a volume  
of air, cool on the edges, passing through. 

Forgive me if I forget
with the birdsong and the day’s
last glow folding into the hands
of the trees, forgive me the few
syllables of the autumn crickets,
the year’s last firefly winking
like a penny in the shoulder’s weeds,
if I forget the hour, if I forget
the day as the evening star
pours out its whiskey over the gravel
and asphalt I’ve walked
for years alone, if I startle
when you put your hand in mine,
if I wonder how long your light
has taken to reach me here. 

The chair, the bedside tables,
the TV stand come out
 
after she does, and then
the bed, each thing leaving
 
its weight in the rugs,
as if you’d erased these letters
 
carefully, leaving blanks
sharp as words. As if
 
I could erase her voice
from this cassette and listen
 
to her quiet open and close.
Carpet bright below the sills.
 
A memory of breath
heard beneath the door.
 
Maybe ghosts
don’t want to come back.
 
Maybe we keep saying
their silences between our words,
 
the shape of their voices
in ours, in ours
 
the warmth that haunts
their absent lungs. 

After the palm has clasped the hot, white
iron, the pain whispers slow
as the march of torches up the ridge.
Perverse lava, flowing up,
pine-knots flicker their shirts, their hoods,
white as eschar. You hear
the crackle, the whip, later on.
Here, lips part but make no sound.
Words suppurate slowly, halving
then halving their distance to your ears,
moving like bees in a cry of amber.
How old will you be when they arrive,
when you remember the tissue
your mother brought to her tears,
watching the fire climb through the window,
how white it was, when you remember
the sound of what you did not hear?
That’s when you’ll feel the burn,
when you’ll feel the shape of those words,
even the ones she could not say. 

Did your right hand itch when I transcribed your O
don’t you hear me cryin? phrase I’d pay a hundred dollars
to raise my voice into, cause you got money for sure,
not like Son House in the nightclub film, drunk
as a goat glutted with rotten apples and waving a sawbuck
like a flag, but stacking up in a New York office
like a locomotive’s chimney if I keep this going
and then I imagine raining down into the world below
or uncurling on a magnolia only you know
how to find, my hundred plucked, still crisp,
then rolled up in your pocket as you walk again
from White Station and West Point to Grenada,
Ruleville, Rosedale with a guitar on your back,
where you meet Charley Patton again.
You pull out the bankroll and count off a Cadillac
so y’all can cruise to Memphis, St. Louis, Chicago,
unpack at the 708 or Silvio’s and maybe House
is already there at the bar, rediscovered
and thirsty for oblivion, when Sumlin walks in
with Dixon and you’re ready to pitch it again,
and the microphones are humming so you can invent
rock-and-roll or whatever it is Eric Clapton
tries to play in that London session when you take over,
showing him that music is a kind of language,
you just say this, you just call roosters and cats
and airplane pilots into the club, the whole
Wang Dang Doodle of the afterlife catching your notes
like undampered pianos and sounding long after
you’ve gone down the blue highways back to Jackson,
Nashville, Lebanon where your girl stands in the door
of the house you kept together as peaceful and bright
as the day you met, you’re gathering everyone you know
and rolling down to Natchez where the fire
hasn’t ashed the Rhythm Club and the whole town’s
waiting for you to take the stage, maybe costumed
like an engineer or busking like a janitor,
the mic taped to a broom handle, the sheet-metal walls
shaking when you let out your O,
O there is no sound like this in the world above
except the one you engraved in the great disc of the night
that spins above us, through the hole of which
every C-note floats to bud from that one magnolia
somewhere in east Mississippi where this sound was born.
When you walk down the dirt roads each night,
when you pull your hands from your pockets, the lint
turns everything first-Spring green,
and when you open your song you light the underworld
with a throat and a mouth full of gold. 

Does the river, after
it’s come apart,
still hold the drowned
hand’s tremble, still
reach for sky or branch
or oar? Delicate sweat
of a delicate hand,
tease of hair before
the rope makes its fist—
music, time, whiskey
flower and decay.
Night is an open mouth.
Breath minnows the water,
whispers leaves as if
through lace
to some forbidden ear.
Maybe the trees
remember that fruit,
the water its dew-
washed down. Maybe
water could return
that skin’s last itch
to the lips that glisten
behind the ear.
Wish of every silence,
every sigh, breath
that’s passed, that’s
passing—that pleasure
hangs forever.
Memory, is anything
this cruel? 

A great nation
of clouds

lolling above us.

Out of fear, I love
every branch 

of our government.

It’s not faith but doubt
that every day

supports the weighted

sky’s deep blue 
from falling flat

on top of us.      

In the balance the clouds
hang, shifting, teeter-

tottering, precarious.

Glance close, glance quick, 
but don’t stare. 

Our childhoods are annotated,

our marriages, our loves, our failures, 
our solitary, effortless deaths,

by the sky,  

the clouds sifting through. 
Awaiting exceptional moments

of squalor and beauty

beneath,
again and again. 

God, I know
what you are.

I just don’t mind. 

I already gave you a plan. Heliocentric
smoke signals.  Sunwise. Sojourner, I told you
                        you must shut the one swallow
            within your mouth. Shut within vesper, the whole
of the afternoon. You knew
                        without doubt the incomplete animal I’d become. 
                                                                        Small vice, my delusion. You multiplied
 
the consequence of the dead. You whispered it. You blessed fields. Among patterns
in my voice you rose. I followed your irregular direction, the necessary
                         fragment, later knives and trees. You appeared to pass
among those I loved. Quickly you offered blight. Bright hawks
                        as a swift shimmering geometric. Spotted leaves you encouraged
among maples.  What supplication must failure bring me. Your location’s trail
permits a cold grace. My feck of immunity, your air. 

The three principal products of Peru—
Does anyone remember them who’s not
Enrolled in elementary school? Textiles
Is usually a good guess, and oil
Should American troops be deployed in
The particular exotic country under
Discussion.
                    Cities of great importance tend
To be located on rivers and gulfs, where goods are traded,
But mountain ranges, soothing to behold,
Interfere with communication, and
May be the source of stressful isolation.
Topography is various and never
Less than interesting and yet the same
Can be said of staying in a single place
For a lifetime, 
                        In which case changes will be temporal,
Your family and friends growing older,
Weaker, sicker, sadder, broker, dumber,
Although those days you sit on your front porch
You don’t regret not being in Peru.

Lavender sky, enormous pumpkin moon
Leaning low over hackberry, pine, and bamboo
On Old Mountain Road, Danville to Halifax,
Virginia. Deer slip in and out of dusk.
Surely the moon has left its orbit behind
And is about to smash into green earth,                      
Chasing the seas from their confining beds,                
Worldwide tsunamis, people praying in panic,
Presidents and prime ministers herded
By underlings into underground shelters.
But no: before we have arrived back home 
The moon has scaled the sky and shrunk, a small                   
Yellow disk now, but still perfectly round,
Still shadowing the deer on the ground.

At dusk the mountains a tincture
of tomato & coffee. Glinting jets
were slowly magnetized above.
I tell you: I was never so lonely.
Military helicopters shook
the condensation under my micro-
waved quesadillas as the bees
veritably dry-humped the rosemary
bush. To a drunk man on Central
I was a “piece of shit white-trash
lord”—& maybe he was right:
maybe I cried in my roasted swan,
swatted the full chalice of mead
on the coffee table. I screamed
at my only friend in Taco Bell’s
drive-thru. Should you know this?
I see you as the cat, its eyes
heavy with suspicion or sleep,
as I’d jump from sleep, gasping.
If cities are desire, I let a city
define me: City of Respiring
in a Paper Bag. Nonsensical City
of musty beer hangovers & the sun’s
daft brightness, Lonely but Beautiful
City with cross-hatched jet exhaust,
pink & orange in the waning hours
against the sky’s interminable
blue. This is not about the self
but rather its near-erasure: let
self-mutilation mean not hara-kiri
so much as autopsy: peeling back
the dermis (pinned to the table),
sawing then prying the sternum
to view the pulsing innards, finding
there is nothing of intelligence,
no lecture to learn but the city’s
unrelenting mind, links of cars
in nacreous soot on the distant
freeway, each refracting its small
version of the sun—an inertia of living
opposed to the persistent desire
for destruction. The dove beat its wings
as the cat sunk in its jaws, harder.

I think I will do nothing for a long time, 
except listen. Listen and rest 
my head on the noise of familiars. 
Accrue what I hear unto myself 
and let the pitter patter, 
the birdy chatter, the kokoro of the core, 
or the ta Dum, ta Dum ta…
accumulate in me. 
 
How Hopkins does it, 
hold us captive—I cannot tell—.
Or how Pessoa makes us 
forget how to spell…
 
Today I felt like a failure, 
a harangue bird, whose calls jolt 
like a doorbell, or wear 
like a herringbone coat in summer. 
 
My malarkey is no more. 
No mas talky talky por mio. 
For I know failure well. 
I live in her house and make her bed. 
 
Serve her tea and toast 
and sweep up her mess—.
You can say she’s harsh, 
but she’s also a kind master, 
whispering the infinite 
in my ear when I choose to listen.

Not a swimmer in sapphire seas, but only
someone’s dad who went out to get a cigarette
to script his own undoing. Call him 
 
a linguistic ship, which doesn’t need
a skipper, a misplaced marine
in a forest of stiletto & swagger. 
 
Welcome to a wilderness of downed timber.
His tree a lit wedding gown—white
green, yellow, red, then all white again. 
 
In this light, the nurse enters, hair cut short 
makes her look butch. Her hemline hangs 
stiffly over her daikon legs,  
 
she’s a boxer with a pug nose. 
Her provenance is Manileña—
hails from the barrio of Tondo,
 
& packs a knife in her purse. 
She wiped her knife with a tissue 
& clicked blade back into her purse. 
 
The merchant seaman had scoped out the skirt 
So sayeth the knife telling us her version: All he wanted 
was to feel good, all he wanted was to talk shoes…
 
He sidled up to the nurse waiting for the bus
when a knife appeared & told him to go to hell. 
Down he went into a kaleidoscope of broken mirrors,
 
a festive flotilla of colors, blood, & pavement. 
The seaman doubles over, 
then falls flat on the seat of his pants. 
 
On the corner of Haight & Fillmore, 
failure drapes his body like an oversized shirt
flowing like jibs in front of Hank’s 500.

A shivering under my skin 
made me doubt, made me want 
to lie down in the grass with you. 
 
I was a page folded over, late blooming
and slim-shouldered, always getting 
it wrong: couldn’t remember 
 
which hand held the sickle, which 
the trident, left my blessings to rust 
in the rain.  Ruined by nothing 
 
but my thoughts, I wanted to be plain 
and unconditional so I could slip 
unnoticed between this world 
 
and the next— so I could dream 
a body of my own: clever bones, 
a new flutter for the heart. 
 
Instead, I wilt every prayer you put 
in my mouth.  Petal-soft, it crumples 
easily in your hand’s mean curl.

Amongst peacocks and jacaranda
she is humble, calls everything leaf, bird, sky. 
 
The forest left its branches in her chest, 
mobbed her dreams with its noise, its fisted heat. 
 
She is always in the wrong season, wakes 
to a mouth full of pine needles, winter grass,
 
imagines the cold hush of stars, spiked and luminescent,
as halo, as proof. She is wary of fire, backing away 
 
from stove, candle, match. In mirrors, she sees only
a mouth yielding, practices bending to the wind.

Sociability occurs 
to one like the idea of god:
humped camel on the horizon
lurching forth on hindquarters,
all unmet need and malaise.
That’s me in the corner,
jealously guarding my
little chrome tower.
I am swimming in a red
pantsuit, winding up for
shuto uchi, uke waza:
anything to prove
that I am more than 
body, or that that 
body, a machine,
has been raised.

This is the dance of no hard feelings,
deranged sonnet constructed
to resemble a paper Valentine.
All morning the mother animal
refused to nurse the baby animal.
Call it a mongoose, seal, or sea
urchin, birthed on wind-whipped 
horizons stacked with travelers’ 
skulls.  I don a red woolen cap, 
keep going. The arctic elements 
hurl insults before relenting.
The crowd’s collective sullen
face:  dust on a spiral staircase
made of frozen water, or gold.

Omaha, what besides animals 
on loan can you offer?
Eric’s Extreme Body Shaping, 
mobile meth kitchens.
Your suitors 
prefer the fakest names: 
Taniel, Tessica. 
They don oversized yellow hats
like this open pasture 
isn’t a place of business.
But they have another thing coming, Omaha.
Yesterday, I misherded your cows 
and now the whole field 
might as well be the moon.
They cultivate the kind of boredom
only prey could love.
When I visit you,
I expect a little more than tapirs, 
antelope, parrots 
and over fifty varieties of wild cat.   
I put on your worn
folk ballads.
You put on 
your beautiful emptiness, 
and no one notices.
How alike we’ve grown. 
I feel like the lone 
publicly-funded snake pit 
in America. 
Those evenings 
when I slither so sweet, 
that tight coil you feel
around your thorax 
is more than 
mere instinct to touch.
It’s joy.            

Ms. Weiss sticks her fist
inside a dead cow’s heart
and wears, for one brilliant minute, 
 
a red boxing glove. Poor 
heart, dumb on the table, 
to teach us about form: 
 
superior vena cava,
veins, valves, ventricles,
small, empty chambers 
 
where blood once swarmed—
Ms. Weiss’ wedding ring 
slips off inside this once warm 
 
home—Oh!—is it David 
who howls first? The lesson 
shatters. I love that 
 
what is precious can vanish 
in any heart. I know 
nothing of gold or marriage, 
 
just that today, science lost 
to slime, expert to animal, 
term to body, living to dead, so I 
 
join my pack and laugh 
until my sides crack and my heart 
bursts at the sight of Ms. Weiss, 
 
both hands now deep and bloodied, 
leaning over the long gone organ
to save her thing of meaning. 

I’ve been a diver, too, but the one who stayed 
in the open water, content to track colored fish in the warm currents. 
I’ve been the woman at the entrance of the cave 
watching my sister’s flippers kick into black, breathing 
my steady long breath into the respirator. 
	     						   Overhead, the shadow
of a boat covers us, then releases us into the rays 
of watery sun. 
   	       			    I’m circling 
so as not to lose this entry 
among the coral mounds, the undersea castles. 
I’m her monkfish mothering, half-blind in the mask
that shows me only the tiny details of the closest creatures. 
For example, the bitten fin of this hammerhead. Not the faraway figure 
emerging. Nothing but darkness here at the mouth. 
And the wavering flit of two clownfish as they dart, together 
then apart, into a cluster of anemones. 

The first signs: he didn’t sweat,
tired easily, lay on the bed like brackish water 

eddying in pools. 
Then, silence of sand and gulls far off. 

He didn’t rise. A doctor came. Another. 
No one recognized the yellowed eyes, 

that the blood was slowing in his veins—
And he also loved ships, my father, wanting 
 
instead of losing his mind piece by piece 
to be cast in a canoe onto the sea. 

For those weeks he was Odysseus, stooped, 
who had thought his journey over,

but now had to carry the oar across his shoulders 
into the desert until he reached the town 

that had never seen a shore. 
And we were the villagers, 

circling the stranger with the sun-baked skin,
bidding him drink, 

because that seemed the only thing to say.

They think I’m uninhabited,
having settled me
into this zippered coffin,
but I wait, because soon I know
all will be released
out of this darkness
so like the desert night –
the saguaros dumb giants
reaching eager for the sky
with both hands.
The owls perched half inside them
with those eyes like dry wells,
as if all the stars are never enough.
Starving for light.
What did the elders say
they were? Guides?
 
And the yelp
of the coyote morphing
into an infant’s cry, filled
with such longing, I wondered
what country I’d stepped into.
Even this machine in the shape
of a room seems to murmur
lonesome, so made in the image of man,
it too breathes sorrow.
But I, I am already leaving.
Can’t hardly hear it anymore.

In black cassock & white cotta
I brought the flame & held the Word
 
holy & lonely 
like you, Father McCarthy 
your pockmarked cheeks
 
& cheery homilies
the way you’d intone Kevin
as if assuring me you knew
 
my lack & need
to serve your mass
ready your wine & water
 
to kneel beside the bells
& be careless for nothing
on your altar
 
You were early 30s but severe
hair in place & parted
a gold signet on your right hand
 
to clink against the chalice
lifted above our faces all black
except yours
 
then wiped clean with a kerchief
I’d laid out starched
& white
 
After I took a saint’s name
at Confirmation
I was done with Catechism
 
& started the bleak stations
of middle school
those sorrowful stations
 
I stopped serving
came by occasionally
for confession
 
for midnight mass at Christmas
when the older boys carried your train 
as you swung the thurible of frankincense 
 
blessing the old ones 
clutching their beads
& crossing themselves
 
while the young ones like me
fought for relevance 
in the pews
 
I remember the tie-dye chasuble
of your last Easter
its burnt orange & brown silk
 
flooding the aisle as you stepped 
from the altar to tell us the marvel
of resurrection & life of the world to come
 
Two years into Whitney’s voice
the mixtapes of sophomore year
when I grew out my flat top & kissed a senior
 
when you were stabbed five times, Father
through your throat  
some clear down to the spinal bone
 
but you weren’t dead 
so he wrapped it in electrical cord 
& pulled both ends until he was tired
 
& this took two tries & a rest
in between
but you weren’t dead yet
 
& I was probably watching a rerun
of The Cosby Show or sorting out my algebra
just a bus ride away from where
 
he poured salt into your eyes
& into your throat
on his eighth night there
 
that was after the claw hammer 
into your sandy brown hair
the night before he was to leave 
 
but December is a cold month 
even in New Orleans
& Marcus Hamilton was a muscular man, Father
 
Put his hands on me
every time I got near him
he testified
 
neither of you had a chance

Is it the mind that insists on smoothness,
or the eye. The perfect sheen of the clementine
 
is tested only when I pick it up, divots and pores,
a soft spot. The gather-round-y’all hospitality
 
of the American folk song, which came from
somewhere else, like everything here except
 
the land, and the thunderous misery of the lyrics
if you listen. Dead lovers, women gone from
 
us forever, so it’s like they’re dead, even if
they’re not, Susannah, Clementine, all darlings
 
and dears. The water is wide, and the valley
is low, and from down here the mountains look
 
like they’ve been baptized with powdered sugar.
From far away, the river is a ribbon, satin,
 
and if you were shoved down onto that quilt of grass
it would probably feel good, wonderful, even.

It wasn’t the smallpox blankets, but forgetting we gave them. How snakes wrapped our arms like vines & our hands functioned as gavels. That deep sinking feeling: us running over our convictions, the brilliant pallor of lotus leaves.
I’ll tell you a secret. I died in a pothole. The water filled beyond its lip, a hideous love stretched the land. It was a mistake, the way we whinnied in our sex. Worthless pioneers, dark creek of worthless pioneers…
Angels live in our nerve endings, but always, we treat them as Martians. Where is my ray gun? Where is my skull? What knowing doesn’t alleviate, I kick off like seaweed. Life without a skull is a gray cloud of meat.

In the lake, the cottonmouth. In the sea, the shark.
In the soil, the growing seed. In the tree, the lark.

In the dark, the insects’ call. In the light, the trust.
In the child, the weight of years. In the steel, the rust.

In the dust, the memory. In the air, your soul.
In my head, the unsaid words. In the diamond, coal.

In the hole, your polished box. In the earth, the quake.
In my blood, your vessel ran. In these lines, its wake. 

Once, while I was watching a group of cows
take careless steps through a Virginia field,
my sister stood outside and watched the lights
of fire engines spin across the walls
of a neighbor’s house as it burned for hours
three hundred miles away from my sadness.

It was another sign of her madness
growing worse. I was unaware. Some crows
perched on fence posts near where I stood, and ours
was a different sort of vigil. Cows filed
past our lines of vision, heeding the calls
of the distant farmer beyond our sights.

Up on that mountain, the dark summer nights
seemed wholly starless, nurtured my sadness.
And I spent most days there looking at walls,
searching for words and, in the evening, cows.
I’d lean on a fencepost and scan the field.
Everything, nothing on my mind for hours.

Some say that all families are broken. Ours
broke so slowly it was like seeing lights
fade in the distance as you left. It failed
under the weight of my sister’s madness.
I felt like I belonged there with the crows
on that remote mountain. My mother’s calls

filled my answering machine. Darkness falls
quickly in those mountains, overcomes hours
of daylight in seconds. Slow-moving cows
disappear in front of your eyes. Those nights
I could close my eyes and escape sadness
if I tried hard, escape into a field

of absence, like a sheep outside the fold.
I’ve spent most of my life evading walls
and the rest of it avoiding madness.
Now I love a woman who loves me. Ours
is a full joy that very rarely lights
on any life. I left behind the crows

and the cows and my family. Have I fooled
myself, or really shed endless nights, walls,
and those hours, whole days, devoured by sadness?

He’s been brought down from the cross again,
        as in the Gospels, for restoration:
        limestone Christ, entombment scene, 
                soon cleaned of mold and grime, 
the divine enfleshed in dust, the flesh of time.
        If I were a finer believer, I wouldn’t see 
        His body in immodest repose,
                the Classical physique, as I see you 
undressed by moonlight and want to rest against the stone. 
        But unlike Him you keep me warm. Look,
        He’s been brought down before—ancient graffiti—
                and had love carved into Him once more.

Rest after restlessness and your body
like moonlight on the river, wavering.
Outside, bells and tugboat horns
keep me up. Night’s brackish river-
scent as your body; fragments of a foreign 
tongue looping into song:
                                                Where are we...
how do we...how much...may I touch?
Earlier, in a little chapel, among effigies 
of kings and bishops, you touched the 
broken chest of king’s favorite, Moorish, 
a singer of Provençal. They were lovers
or they weren’t.
                                One man letting another 
in as if out of the cold raised suspicions. 
When the king died, a small mob’s hammers
pelted the stone face and crossed arms
like rain. They burned the royal pepper trees. 
Like a troubadour song, the scent lingered 
after the hammers and flames hushed.

Angelo Angelucci, by the Fountain of Serpents, hollowed
   seven-month-old lambs, submersed  
       for seven days in alkaline

their intestines, combed them, braided, coiled, stretched
   them across rafters, them drying blonde 
       like her shook-down hair:—

                                                   he favored it put-up, but with a puttanesca spoor pinned
                                                      into her bun:—wool-thick, a tuft to clutch
                                                          and sniff.  Of the cut, he 

                                                   said eviscerare, pfft coltello, meaning guthook, crooked  
                                                      his finger in her neck’s notch.  Butcher,
                                                          he drew netherways.

In the maple outside
paired crows 

squawk through

rain-wracked sky a bit frayed
at the edges then

batten down the hatches 
and keep going.

In our apartment, the cat 
staggers loose circles 

on the living

room rug. Head off-
kilter, eyes shaking like marbles. 

Body pitched over as if on deck.

Then crouched
underchaired

in the corner. We watch
shaken from sleep

by the crash of the falling.
We’ve called for help.

Minutes pass and then some.

Was it the blue-tailed lizard?
The chips of paint?

The meeting of skull with floorboards?

The phone says disorder
says wait. 

This is ataxia. This is nystagmus.

The sky’s clouds 
are God’s fingers. Like gray logs. 

The light flank of morning
showing through.

I can’t tell the difference between desire and design.

The lake distinct and glass-faced.

Did the rain intend
this blind beating of leaves?

Skin-shivered
morning, wind-headed sky riddling 

the screen. Off in the distance, zoobirds
mumble and disperse.

You whisper There is
a change.

What’s done is done. The cat slinking 
along the back fence, mouth 

feathered. My body failing by degrees.
Don’t worry about tomorrow.

Each day has enough. Trouble, that is.
I name this the day of no regrets.

How is it that each sparrow still looks
to the feeder, months empty?

Animals know what’s coming to them.
Or don’t. Running heedless

across streets. Two bodies I found.
One, the gray cat curled next to the signpost.

Two, the squirrel splayed belly up.
A mother, clearly. Let us live like this matters.

Arteries narrowing to a whim.
Blood thrumming through its acres.

Downpour.  Under the colonnade,
a man from China teaches me about opera, 
and Italian vowels, and how Italian words 
ping inside the muscles of the face like ball-
peen hammers tuning the skull’s hollows.
He tells me how he trained for twenty years 
to mimic the sounds that all Italian babies 
learn at “ciao.” Sun breaks through the clouds. 
The plaza fills with sun and rain.  As for Orfeo,
I believe in genius, and I know if I could hear 
the voice Ovid himself shied from describing, 
I’d understand the poverty in how I praise.  But it 
moves me more to imagine the man beside me 
singing scales—and to think how he could hear  
when he didn’t reach the notes, like a painter 
who mixes grays and golds but fails to match 
the sky. I hold out my hand and he closes 
his fingers on my wrist, taking my pulse. 
He claims it tells him a lot about me, 
until I believe that somehow, in the blood-beat, 
he can read my fate’s trajectory, as though 
he hears my footsteps on the slope I keep 
ascending in the dark. Will I be one whose song 
shatters the mountains, or just a fool 
who fiddles in the scree?  What does it mean that I 
want him to know, and never tell me?

Beatrice wrings her sleeve on the threshold.  
Beatrice squints at the ceiling as she kneels,
imagines she’s a bird in the rafters,
shifts her mind to the bird’s eye-view—
all the bald men, small as baby dolls.
She digs her thumbnail into the pew, 
leaving graves for the eyelashes of saints.  
When she sings the litany, 
she can feel them looking.  

Outside, rain runs the streets to the Arno, 
shores dirt from construction at the walls of the Duomo, 
stains a cobblestone someone will carve 
to look like Dante, looking. 

The sun breaks through—dries the bricks 
that builders pried off one façade to make another.  
In July, in any bit of shade, 
a dozen people hide.  
 
Beatrice has taken ill.  
Somebody skimped on her chapel—  
anywhere you stand you can be seen.

Scheherazade must stop the light from entering. Her face: not blood but cut ruby. Her smile: a string of pearls. Tonight she resembles my mother. So like a girl’s apartment is her royal chamber, the king like a stranger breaking in. Tell me a story, he says, Tell me why I shouldn’t kill you. Shadows of chairs become foreshadowing and the door a frame to frame the tale.  Narrative is her neck encircled by his hands. Of proverbs, she has none. Of flowers:  the bruised rose, the crushed anemone.  Of the king with his fingers on her collarbone, she has this to say: that silk may be used for strangling, that a girl may stab to the silver hilt.

Sometimes I think I’m Kathleen Turner, not all

Broadway-ed up, bitch and whiskey,
        but more
    stiletto-ed, a vapor

liqueur with tiny tits who can mind-
        fuck
    William Hurt until

his groin is wrecked and he murders.

That kind of power. That kind
        of lure.
    How else to gloss the afternoon

between trains—Chicago—
        the Art Museum.
    I remember:  it was crowded.

There was a butterfly in my palm.

I was still a blonde then, hair down
        to my
    shoulders, in torn jeans

and buckskin, lingering before
        Lautrec’s
    At the Moulin Rouge.  

I thought I was a man, but then

I was all panther, Body Heat,
        a green
    face tipped against another man’s

longing, his whispering:  how
        Lautrec
    had to extend the canvas 

(you can see the cut line)

                            *

to give more body to the work.
        By which
    he meant his place, my mouth,

his...  hand fluttering
        in my hand.
    By which he meant

Chagall, that blue world...

his ace gear angel, fabulous
        175,
    closeted cake boy,

limp-armed, a little lame
        in
    the pants, flaming, fruit,

                            *

faggot....

I had a woman then (this
        is
    wrong) and was a dog for it. 

Was a hound so when she asked me
        to do X
    in a dark room,
    
I did, and together,

we burned a law.
        As for Chicago,
    nothing happened.

I morphed back to being
        a man,
    if that’s what I was in the first place,

made the train,

held jobs, had boring sex, raised
        a daughter.
    But still that blue light, skewed

light, was everywhere...
        in the side-long
    glances from other men,

from neighbors

who thought I was gay, in what
        my wife read,
    pressed so far down

into the grain of a pew
        it would take her
    nearly half

her life—

                            *

and her mother’s death—before
        she took
    my hand and put it down. Our

daughter was in the other room—
        we were
    whispering—our words

were knives. We made

the cut lines—the canvas tore.
        She was sad,
    apologetic. She had never killed

a man before, or fashioned such
        a perfect
    death. And then a little nervous—

                            *

she had yet to taste a woman,

my malfior, madivinaise,
        my she who drinks
    from the cup.

It was missionary work after that.
        Pity
    sex. What to do

with the child, though

the child had long floated,
        gone Chagall
    one Christmas

with scissors and crayons. 
        I remember: the school room
    wall was crowded.

We were scrunched in tiny desks,
        
two skewed parents, elbows
        on
    kneecaps, beholding a litter

of angels, 29  in all,
        stapled 
    in a wedge, identically robed,

pre-fab, wheeling

from a blood feather hub: what
        my
    daughter saw in that nulling

heaven: herself as Adonis,
        shirtless,
    sculpted, blue, glittery with

anti-gravity, trumpeting her mute refusal.

There I am all head beside a window, sunlight
turning bright yellow 

walls to mud-shades,
darkening greens.  Nothing moves.  I am 

dreaming or constructing a death.
My left arm hangs.  My right 

balances on the flat wood of the sill.
It is not far to the ground.  It 

is never not far to the ground.
I dream:  my parents stroll arm in arm. 

Or my father waits among columns for the train.
There is sequence:  all those bodies

escaping the station until there is nothing 
but tubes of air,

weeping concrete. 
A bird’s body moving headless,

then flaring
in a crucifixion of flight...

Dreamed, veiled reflection, untitled.
Slow swirl at the edge of a

sea. 
The grand panels of summer

bleeding in cloud shapes
to autumn dusk.  There is this sense now

of oil filling the ear—
oil warmed in tap water—

cotton stuffed in the hollows,
so I am deaf again and on my back,

the vaporizer churning.
And beside it all—one shade—drawn—

flexing like a drumhead,
saturated with bands of orange 

where the paper is thin, but then rendered
opaque, thrilling,

then shot again with unburied light.  
This, the skin of the world, 

nineteen-something-nothing.  My 
ears packed with oil, eyes

pinched to cracks. The shade purpling,            
then flashing to magenta,

settling blue.  It, too, alive, wildly breathing.
Untitled (Portrait), 1939












Untitled, 1939

Underground Fantasy
[Subway], c. 1940





Hierarchical Birds, 1940





1944


Untitled, 1948














White, Orange and Yellow, 1953








Untitled [Purple, White and Red], 1953



No 27 [Light Band]
[White Band], 1954


Lilacs hedge the yard
where my brother 
and boys in ball caps play 
capture-the-flag. They curse
when they capture, 
when they get caught. 
Inside, my mother 
bakes a cake: folds oil 
and eggs into batter, 
350 degrees for forty minutes 
or till the toothpick 
comes out clean. 
This is how her son 
will let her love him. This 
is how, when she lifts 
the pan from the oven 
with the same tenderness 
she may have lifted him, once, 
from his crib, and calls 
out the kitchen window, 
the ranks dissolve: 
prisoners and captors, 
shirts and skins, enter, 
clods of grass falling 
from their cleats. But 
neither the fragrance 
of lilacs nor the air dense 
with chocolate can mask 
the odor of almost-men 
who have learned, as if 
overnight, to lift each 
forkful in silence, leave bare 
plates, and return 
to the yard to finish 
what they’ve begun.

Fifth grade, two kids would hold each other’s hands
        and the stronger would twist the weaker’s wrist 
until he cried Mercy, and even though 

I was bigger than the boys whose voices 
       hadn’t yet cracked, even though I could’ve taken 
Vince Biagetti’s skinny arm and twisted 

it until he shrieked, I was learning to get hurt 
       was holy; to cry Mercy was to be 
like Christ, who Mrs. McKinley said died 

so we could live, and during Lent we knelt 
       and prayed, Because by your holy cross you 
have redeemed the world. In truth, I wanted to be 

not like Christ so much as like Mrs. McKinley, 
       with her kind eyes and soft voice 
and beautiful cheekbones; who kept a photograph 

from the wedding on her desk: him, looking down 
       at her and smiling; her, leaning 
into his arms, her lips parted in laughter,

and that photograph was a small window
       into a life that I could only begin to glimpse,
that seemed more sacred for my not knowing.

And so the week Mrs. McKinley was out sick, 
       I did not know what she was doing
when I saw her in the supermarket, standing 

in front of the glass doors with chrome handles 
       that opened to shelves of milk, doors like portals 
that reflected the store’s fluorescent lights 

and waxed linoleum, or why she was wearing 
       sunglasses, but when I tapped her arm, 
and she turned, a deep violet ringed in yellow 

spread past the edges of her glasses, eye to temple. 
       When I asked my mother 
what I had done to make her leave like that,

what illness made an eye bruise so badly, 
       she shook her head and patted 
my shoulder and asked what I wanted for dinner. 

Mercy, I said, but Vince Biagetti did not let go; 
       Mercy, I said, but he only tightened
his grip until the pain shot through my wrist

and I screamed, Mercy, and the world went 
       white with agony, and I heard a voice 
from somewhere far off scream, Stop!—

and then he stopped, and released my hand, 
       and stepped back, his face blank 
with shock, and I realized then that the voice 

had been my own voice, and Vince Biagetti 
       held his hands suspended in the air, 
as though he had just realized they were his, 

as though he didn’t believe himself capable 
       of doing what he’d already done.

I’d weave myself of wool the color of sun. I’d spread my body over yours 
and lay my head against your heart.

You’d open your eyes. I’d see myself: a tiny dot inside.

*

I call again. Night after night, a hollow ring. Where are you 
in your threadbare hoodie, eyes burnt-out moons 
against your winter skin? 

Floating down the river. Soot-caked under a train. 
Fighting rats for garbage scraps. 

*

When we were kids, my sister rescued birds. 
Her long-fingered hands would tuck 
& fix their feathers, wings. 

Now fly away.

*

Who will save me if I can’t save you? 

*

The window shows me moving closer to myself. 
Rain twins lamplight on the street. 

*

Outside, each puddle is an eye 
I will to find you. But my blues 

cover the view.

And the thin one, the beautiful
finch of them, fears what’s next

rolling his eyes back into a mislaid
valley—a moth, worm without dirt.

He thinks he can save himself
by cutting the air of conversation

but the question is accustomed
to corners, lying as it does inside

a man’s gut, growing on its own meal
of particular logic. Watch it become

a grapefruit—a miraculous child—
ruby fruit of thistle. Flowering doubt.


The Town Dreams the Tornado Apologizes
And then we woke up. And our uncles
were still missing, our azaleas yanked

and gone, our dogs dashed against oaks.
But before we woke, we heard you say

in a voice that hummed without words
that you’d gone too far and would hold 

that rushing hole at your center for the rest 
of your life. Hearing that made us feel a little

like church. We are people who forgive, but 
who can forgive something with no eyes, 

no ribs, no head to bow in shame? 
In the dream, though, we sat and spoke 

somber. In the dream, we reached out 
and took what must have been your hand, 

smoky and vanishing and damp. You let us.
And when your whir-voice said, full 

of torn-off roof shingles and children’s 
coin collections, that you were sorry, 

we wanted, with all our blood and breath, 
to believe you. So, for the span of a sleep, we did.

After police found parts 
Of him in his car beside the falls, 

I made a mask of Cyrus. 
I am more or less alert to changing 

Conditions. For months 
I could tell that Cyrus 

Was doing his best. Deer is also 
A kind of fern prone to frost.

Friendships based on material 
Strength have nothing on the establishment. 
Sorry, youth, the numbers 
Are out of service. Huge holes 
Where the seasons were, back when we ignored 
Winter bells breaking down 
Housing towers, among other soft 
Eruptions from the State. Or was it prevention 
We were after, factors within our control? 
Whatever, youth, it’s all yours now, 
Yours to be alone with, and with each other’s 
Reaffirming states of being.

Seven tubes of blood in a neat line. A needle longer 
than a finger slides into the muscle between ribs.
A spaghetti strand of organ suspended in clear solution.
 
Some days my doctor says you have to napalm 
the napalm, but this morning he says undetectable, 
and it’s Thursday the 29th of September, 1988 again— 

on the news, Discovery is inching closer and closer 
to the moment of truth. I’m outside with my class, squinting 
at a trail of cloud as Discovery’s pinprick spark disappears. 

For every disbelief, an equal and opposite belief. Outside 
the blood draw clinic, I believe I see a passenger plane—
upside down, dragging backwards, it banks to a still speck.

The soul is a white mouse 
burrowed inside the mouth 
of a sleeping child until he yawns. 

Easier to leave the soulless boy 
asleep than catch the mouse 
by its tail.

We listened to the broadcast for days 
until the wave came 
and smeared the city like rough paste across the land 

Only the smallest creatures came crawling from the wreckage 
and the smell of broken 
fish hung in the air 

Basements filled with sand and sodden kelp and inside
the dense mass 
two pink and folded children lay still as rags

º

When they uncover them some hundred years from now 
they will try to make sense 
of how we interred our young

They will chisel them loose 
and thunk the fossilized knots into numbered bins 
to be housed in archival storage

The dense and ossified coils 
will defy anything equating song
alongside the artifacts of less predictable people

Why this pile of parts, the resin-soaked heads 
tightening? From her hands 

on air, the suggestion of body. I wander
in this room of spines, but leave 

them alone. Such guts: the presence of versus 
and peril. Against self-sacrifice she gestured, 

contoured. Against the silver in her head.
The rope, the line, absurd: a penis, then pink 

relief. I move around to find what’s left:
smoothings and soft orbs. Her careless 

hasty hand. It’s done. I am unanchored. 
Nineteen repetitions, wan,

translucent. Nothing less is meaningless. 
Lapped with wax or liquid latex, cheesecloth, 

rubber. From her hands, the gathered 
moods. Her resin, tube-like, glowing. And now, 

the sun pierces a small window because 
sometimes we need defenses. I let it parse 

and wait a little longer. All the surfaces keep 
kneeling, standing. Holy, hollow,

dossing down. When I close my eyes, 
the pieces reconnoiter, occupy the grieving

room. Her forms are shaded 
in their seam and volume. Each time, 

she climbed to what is meaningless
and gave it flexion. Is it refusal to accuse 

the eye of what it’s doing, adding 
life to puckers, to the flaying folds? 

Each time, she must have laughed,
then dripped discharge and aberration.

The stars blew across the sky
as if with a great gust

the crystal dome and diamond 
dust. We sat up drinking soju

my back leaning 
against your leg. 

Only the stars against a sky so black. 

I can't make meaning of this
of what drew you toward me. 

You say you don't know.

Good son, magnetic pole. 
Aria of fire and wood smoke. 

Coarse desert sand. 

The way your hand cradled 
the back of my head. 

We returned to the desert 
with the trees gnarled and ash green.

I left before I could write an aubade. 

I dreamt my belly full of pregnancy. 
A clock tower tolling down the hours. 

When you coughed, 
did my stomach deflate?

Did the mirage of the future 
appear fucked and penitentiary? 

Who are you to me? 

Cloud formation in an aura of blue. 
Mole at the center of a lip.

Tonight the rock formations 
will rise while I sleep. 

This one a conqueror.
This one a monument 

to the hope of forgetting.

Out in the field, the wheat stalks
called your name. 

Your hand cupped listening 
to a rustling like the sea.

You ran toward the sound.
Hands were pulling at you, like waves.

Swells growing undulant and fat. 

We cursed the morning 
after seed scatter,

wondered what living thing 
could possibly grow here. 

July, late afternoon. I sit alone
And look at only water; the still river,
On which the homely bridge’s arches cast
Three perfect oval mirrors less than a stone
May break and break the stillness, soon will shiver
With life, be lost, imperfect as the past.

What of imperfect love? Which wears perfection
A day an hour a moment—a moment’s wonder
That fails as morning’s dew, as mornings do.
This small river’s a good place for reflection:
Its little hour, before the sun goes under,
Begins to change. Then what of me? of you?

We talked that other hour of love, but not 
Of mine, of yours for someone else. Now all
This afternoon I’ve thought of love and you,
Who are not here. The wide world makes a knot 
Of spirit bones flesh blood dark love loss gall.
And yet the grass, come night, is laced with dew.

This river, quick with carp as thick as mud,
Is a cool place where idlers like to pass
An hour or two and fish or contemplate
The fire-swept wings of the blackbirds, the flood
Of feelings that their shadows on the grass
Give rise to, as the day flames down, turns slate.

And O how fleeting the seasons are, how on
And on they stream! Do you not feel with me
How cold the grass is? Will you never fear
This chilling, failing light? The sun is gone.
The river’s glassy now. Do you not see 
How still it is again? You are not here.

No matter. All this will soon be done.
And I shall leave for good this riverbank—
Sleek carp the redwings this close-knotted earth
The bridge its mirrors the hours will be as one.
Before the air darkens and goes blank,
Where will the world have brought me? What was it worth?

When all these that were shimmer, shadow, or gloss
Are far from here, shall I remember then 
The river as a world wide as wonder
That flows, entwines continuous change with loss?
Having once been, shall I be once again
Aware of earth’s both excellence and plunder? 

1. The Summer in Early Spring
	to the memory of Martin Luther King, Jr.


				The King is dead.
	The summer came in early spring this year.
				The King is dead.
		    How timeless do we have to be
	to be able to tell one another the time of day?
				The King is dead.
	The morning glories, which have not yet arrived,
				are bursting with life, 
				but the King is dead.
				Who would have dreamed
		on an April day bursting with life 
	of the dream exploding in his dreaming head?
				The King is dead.
				The morning glories,
which have not yet arrived bursting with life and dying,
        are as blue as the sky has to be to be heaven,
				but the King is dead.
			The whole world wept last night.
				The King was dead.
			The whole world is blue today.
				The King is dead.
				How can we tell,
			on this summer day bursting
			and in early spring,
				the time of year
				when the King is dead?
		How can there be, in such a time, on such a day,
			the thought of spring or summer?
				The King is dead.
		Heaven today is to be able to tell one another,
			not the time of year, but the time of day.
				For the King is dead.
May the seeds of the heavenly blue morning glories survive.
		Will the King and his dream of a heavenly day,
			in the summer that never was,
						arrive?

			Is the King alive?

		What is the color of sorrow?


2. The Summer that Only is 
	near Macon, Missouri


			This is Still-Hildreth,
		a private hospital going to seed.
				When I arrived
			in August, in the dark,
		after four months of dead-white nights,
				I saw few patients;
	the rest were gone or too far gone to go.
				What greeted me
				was Still-Hildreth,
		a hospital gone or going to seed.
				I greeted it
		as one who may or may not stay.

	The summer that is is worse than uninspired.
				I sit alone
	in a cell-sized room, wondering what I desired,
			desire; or walk around
			unsure and more than tired
				of no firm ground—
			the future as the present blown
				apart—not least of all
					the small
	and inward peace that has almost expired.

				Still-Hildreth,
		whose grounds are pleasant for strolling,
			being large and serene,
		has a short, straight driveway
	that circles in front of the entrance doors
			and meanders in back
			around an untidy pond;
	there, wildflowers, especially the wild carrot,
				are everywhere.
	Today I saw from the mute concert room
	the useless tennis courts, the lawn around
			well groomed and green.
Beyond are picnic tables, benches, and folding chairs,
				deserted now,
			and one small table
	where I come to write, to find some peace.

	The summer has never been like this before,
				or not for me,
			so personal, impersonal a war.
			Who can escape, turned outside in,
	the hawk within and the unknown predator? 
				whose discipline
			is death, whose love must be
		  	  a love of hatred, crud,
					greed, blood,
	and the maimed lives and loves that cry: No more.

			Still-Hildreth, a block of bricks
					that looks 
		like nothing that could ever go to seed,
		  once an academy for the glory of war
			with a still splendid staircase
made curious with iron tendrils and stone trefoil forms
		  like clover leaves without the luck 
and rich with rails of brass and flowerlike brass motifs
					is dying
				from end to end
			of unused massive space.

	The summer that only was has gone to seed,
				whether or not
	Still-Hildreth goes, whether it meets my need,
			which is to know what I
		should do and how then to proceed.
				I wonder why
	   	  when something has been shot
			to hell, it is my hell
					as well.
	Though clearly it cannot be, it is indeed.


3.The Indian Pipe
	to the memory of Robert F. Kennedy


	St. Francis, all the little flowers are dead.
				Autumn has come.
	The summer that never was has somehow fled.
			The tiny temple bells,
	their rich, greathearted leaves, blood-red,
			  the heartfelt knells
		that told our fears are dumb;
		spring beauties, red and gold,
				are cold,
	and every tender stalk has lost its head.

		Where are June’s copious beds?
	Can the full season, just rose, be denied?
			stripped of their flowers,
				their due rose hours,
					war-torn,
		dead-white where something died?
			What is this horn
		of death-filled autumn reds?

		June’s gentle first increase,
			our budding peace,
	whose thorny presence left only his own seed,
		burst with his shattered head
				   bright red,
		while the hell-blooms of war,
	flesh roses that explode and bleed,
			are as before.

	Speak of untimely dead, Francis, untoward
			silence, all the abhorred
			unnatural voids, the blank
		pages, missed connections, the horde
				of things gone rank
	too soon, the seeds that never thrived
					deprived
	by chance—of how much cannot be restored.

			Speak of our festered ghettos;
				our lily-white
		suburbs; luxurious estates,
				their filigree,
			but iron bars on windows,
		their high rails, spikes on posts and gates,
	—all barricades—a disguised incivility.
				Speak of the abyss
			and why we have come to this:
					the bloom
				of our white mushroom,
	like an enormous, spreading saprophyte,
our ghostly Indian pipe, feeding on death, not light.

Before it begins, the dogs next door
(two labs, one small hound) 
know what’s coming, so warm their voices
with short runs, quick licks of howl 
that overlap the voice whose boredom carries
out to the frayed edges of town
a warning for the testing of
the Emergency Warning System. 
Each week, same hour, we’re asked 
to listen
and to disregard.

But when the siren’s long blue leash unrolls, 
it tightens the throat’s longing and
makes things dream-slow. 
It finds the yard 
like a shaft of sun – a complicated unity
the dogs rush in to meet
in unison, their howls 
more in tune with this ordinary noon
than the wolfish moon of their forefathers.

All week I hear them cough away their song. 
One could think commotion made them happiest. 
(It’s possible.)

But Saturdays I know them 
by their hymn—that opening 
in the atmosphere
I step more slowly through. 
No emergency. Just sinking in
to softer, muddier ground 
as though I’ve rejoined myself
on the long walk I forgot I’m on
where it’s always almost dark, never quite, 
and home is off its leash 
but down the hill somewhere – 
should hear me if I call.

A coffin is an envelope
for sending off the body.
We do not have a body.

We have the skeleton of a balloon.
We have our breath, white on the window.
We cannot see through it.

In Japan, five- and fifty-yen coins
are hewn with holes in the center.
We can see through them.

These are the coins considered
lucky. Imagine that—a thing
missing its center is what’s lucky. 

I dreamed of a coffin filled
with five-yen coins, 
so heavy we couldn’t lift it.

When I woke, I took two five-yen coins
and sealed them in an envelope. 
Absent of center, granting passage-

way to light, lucky—if that is 
luck—these are the coins I would 
place over his eyes, if we had a body.

It leaves, rearranged to devolve or fade:
white flag's molten face, sunside. Not lost but losing.
Clouds funeral in gray and gray. How a nude
reclines, half painted. 

What can stop; what can't begin?—
processions boxed out, closeted. The way you fold
and tuck your words away. Citizen to windows,
glass comparison—dixie-hammered, looking down.

Then again—one pocket: scarred, slain, sleight, singed.
Less like welcome and more like salute—small anthems
sung out of obligation—it's all relative.
And what you can't quite say correct is moot, just loss—

is a rusted nail allowed to stay, is a shadow
engraved, is a card from cuff, is anything unnamed:
apotheosis, immaterial—to say a lowered flag, 
scattered cloud—how she's at last asleep.

These churning hues, what we leave out from the world.


There were Turtles
                        turtles everywhere,
                                                for months
they followed (or perhaps I them) 
                                    the last the lamp 

            in Iowa
                        the pale glow from its shell ghosting 
the granite counter top
                                    the Jamaican ginger 

ale as I fled 
            the stone in my chest headed back 
east to the mosaic at Houston
                                    and Varick 

            the station 
                        wall a window into a submerged 
Manhattan the tunnels an aquarium 
                                                            cast 

in blue and green 
                        tiles. And the week before that 
a one man hand-propelled eight foot 
                                                long replica 

            a Revolutionary
                                    War submersible 
known as The Turtle found 
                                    off the East River. Go 

further back, back 
                        to the turtles two men received 
as a wedding 
            gift in May and later that same 

            month the four Turtle 
                        Towers in Ocho Rios 
the shells in the water 
            trough outside the tower 

office and our joke a tower for each 
                                                Teenage
Mutant Ninja who weeks 
                        before danced in Times Square. 

            It was April when it began 
                                                when I took you 

through the brambles 
                        through the ramble to the castle 

to climb its narrow 
                        stairs sit upon its ramparts. 
There were turtles in the pond 
                                    below on the rocks 

on the logs we watched 
            them surface murk risen plates 
that broke into humped shapes 
                        and so for months I've kept 

a turtle watch new totem in this shift 
                                                and give 

but the one I think on 
                        often was from the day 

the woman sucked her teeth 
                        as we passed caught a snatch 
of batty- as we wandered 
                        through the crafts in search 

            of an exit the steel 
                                    haloed father who leapt 
from a stool his mahogany 
                                    turtle's red glass 

eye on fire its shell caramel 
                                    molasses 
carapace. That was the day 
                        I laughed at the box 

the cartoon turtle and his bubble 
                                                “take it slow” 

wrapped the used 
            Durex in toilet paper to mask 

it in the trash in case any 
                        knew remembered
two men rented
                        the room and I think of that wood 

            turtle what would 
                        have happened had I bought it brought 
it back to this northern 
                        island. Would I still see 

turtles in all the places
                                    I never look. Would 
it stop the sightings. 
                        Would I see them and not care 

fertile in this language of hurt or dare.

If I were a bull, I’d have to decide between focusing on a target
and charging everything that moves. Either way, I’d get hooked 

behind the shoulder and brought to my knees in front of everyone. 
Spain is never the Spain you imagine. In the arena, picadors do prep work 

and we get bored. But here comes the Butcher of Small Complaints;
spectacles always seem to draw assassins. We peer at the scuffle 

through opera glasses and ogle it with our phones. Let’s face it: 
we stare down the lens of whatever at whatever’s on display. 

Above all, we’re drawn to the gore of the present. We want the estocada, 
the death blow and difficult exit. Banderilleros toss darts into the bull’s back;

flowers for the matador, while the body’s dragged from the ring. 
You wear a muleta as a little retro jacket; we pour one out for the bull.

Sometimes a dolphin in captivity will take
one last look around, close its eyes, and sink
to the bottom of the tank.
At the beach, we just wanted to know
why the seaweed was heaping
itself onto the shore in thick slick silks.

When we started out, to protect myself
I said, marriage is a set of limitations,
but something about all the wires
cutting into the visual realm
suggested new forms:
clouds rose dense and vertical,
the horizon drew breath,
had mass—aren’t we two small bodies in wild space,
one organ in love with the earth?

We sat in the sun and felt its steady
stroke a sweetness beneath our skin.
Soon, we would go inside, kiss each other’s eyes—
make, as is said, love.
But first I wanted to read you
the story of the bees, which is also a story of bulls.
The story is told twice, once
as a series of imperatives and again
so that the real ending is always beginning:

Everywhere in the bellies of the victims
Bees buzzing in fermenting viscera
And bursting forth from the ruptured sides in swarms
That drift along like enormous clouds in the sky
And come together in the top of the tree
And hang in clusters from the swaying branches.

There were no trees on that island
but the salt-spray burned white,
an image in negative against the blueness of sky.
We looked out from the porch
as if from some great vantage point
as the wind rushed in on invisible pinions.
The water, if we were willing
to swim out far enough, seemed clear.
But the wind made talking unpredictable:
we didn’t know what we were hearing.

Don’t doubt it when the core samples prove
how pleasing it could be to be woken by a baster’s
rain at dawn, cool grass wet with the benign.
Your tormentors are yet to be born, or fell asleep
a millennium ago. Your beauty is the beauty
that does not dispense with struggles—it wears
loafers the color of gun-metal, a face full of
second thoughts, eyes you’d like to believe
are supernatural. Agreed: aspiring to eyes of a color
not found in nature is very lace-curtain Irish,
and you do resemble one of Yeats’ twilight boys,
the walk cold from counting house to pub, 
the Easter Rising over—but the purpose of your days
isn’t simply to meet cute, it’s to be changed.
We inherit a marshalling yard full of dark freight,
but the track switches work. How much of whomever
you are after all is who you were when you
were the stony theologian of Westport Harbor?
Maybe in a quiet moment in the backyard today
you’ll look at a spray of tea roses leafing out
and hear the rain inside them whenever a breeze
blows. Don’t let possibility go away in pain.

The rag that swiped the skate blades clean
            of slush, drying now

                        in the trash barrel, a 50-gallon fire
                                    burning up the teahouse trash

and samurai armor, those dragon scales 
            humbler than the pants that boys put on 
            between 5th grade & 6th 

                        behind a levee, rain on the river

“rain; empty river; a voyage”

like carrier pigeons flying home, footsteps
            on a run of wooden stairs

                        near the wildwood,
                                    where a swallow dies of hunger,
                                    winter’s end

in costume, & all by itself,
            the sunset

                        a red bowling shirt with black piping
                                    on the collar

going forth with vehemence
            into darkness, the rebee’s daughter, hot as ever

for Benya Krik, the wish to be something forbidden
            or flavorful as always

                        on the skinny legs of the pert, a taste

            brined in boatyard puddles, the reflections of a yacht
                        that drips seawater in November

when hoisted up, glorious & miserable,
            a wall calendar that had fallen

long ago, the child having been
            born at last, sloppy & lawless—

            Here we go, I thought, face down 
                        in autumn’s indispensable blue pillow book,
                        here we go again, full speed ahead.

Everywhere in Boston by late February/early March
a tidewrack of road sand & corrosive salt
gorging street gutters, bunions hardening
on brain cells, & needle-nosed greyhounds, formerly
sprinters at dead-end racetracks, hooded now
in walking blankets of polyester fleece & leashed
to the owners who adopted them, narcissus-pale
women with Medicare woes. All creatures
in heavy clothing look connected & friendly tho
from the warm side of a south-facing window—
bossa nova singers with smiles everywhere,
everywhere gym rats, & the occasional mail slot
of a dark chador or burqa moving past, a pair of
blue-green eyes behind it watching. You like them
at a distance tho, don’t you?—& you love loneliness
even more—loneliness, which has ways of flowing
over barriers, hidden from sight because vast.

I ran myself ragged at the backboard 
to hear the pop of the ball
between my racquet and the wall,
the flat, the faded, the waterlogged, 
pounding shots the board gave back. 
On the courts I hammered serves,
forehands sailed, and when
I landed one, it went unanswered.
So if sometimes I bat my words 
against the half-silver of a two-way-mirror,
Love, see through your side to the boy
at the backboard rehearsing in the void 
that he fought against, then came to prefer.

 (Climb 
                                    in, climb out of the little black square) 

            The village rises into form amidst the pines. Cows and goats stand unstunned in
the forest. The Muslim and Christian quarters are made of flimsy wood and storage 
containers. Assemble, disassemble. There is a military technology fair in Orlando where 
you can purchase a village in a box. Then populate it: live inside it for a time. 

            At the beginning of the exercise, the soldier students are told half-truths. They 
must stabilize who and why. 

            While playing market, Nafeesa and Ralia cry out leblabi leblabi, to the soldiers. 
It is that roasted chickpea soup they sell in paper cones in the Middle East. “Win a-
leblabi, u ashgid?” (Where is the leblabi and how much?), I ask. They are so shocked that 
they give me a Coke. 

            Nomi (Numi) means a particular lime from Southern Iraq, particularly Basra, and 
its delicate flavor pervades so much of that cooking. I introduce myself as Nomi Basra, 
and they take me in. 

            POLICE STATION/                       WAILING ROOM 
            JAIL 

            BROKEN-IN                                    MOSQUE/SCHOOL 
            INTERNET CAFÉ 

            One of the Iraqi role-players (Omar) tells me the soldiers don’t know it yet, but all 
the Iraqis in this village are in cahoots with the militia. The game says figure out which 
bodies’ interiors have turned the bright chill of gold. In the classroom behind the imam’s 
chair, a blackboard with drawings—planes sizzling into the building. 

            Omar shows me the knife, scimitar-curved, that hangs on the wall at the police 
station. Descending that knife, he cradles it like a guitar, and plays a song.

(Come here first (they all say): it is the best theater.)

	Omar with the rumbly laugh, Omar who air-guitared the knife, waits at his desk.

Cue the soldiers.  The soldier approaches Omar: Sir, we 
want to set up a tip-line.  The people will be our 
eyes.  	How dare

you interrupt me says Omar. In the play you have to play hard
to get.  

Ali, thin as a wasp, role-playing O.’s guard, has the gun raised, barrel 
to eye.  Please

lay it away, says the soldier. Who made you
king? asks O. Clicks the room, disengages 
the lever.  Cue 

the lights.  The lights are the signal for Ralia, beautiful and peached-faced, the bored half-
laughing R. in the prison, to crack 

a scream; inqaathni rescue 
me.  The wasp makes the scream
stop.  

The soldiers do not know what to do with the not-
tamed  air, the R-
mute air.  O. is playing 

hard to get.  He says: It is normal. It is natural.  You 
can beat her with me.

	A soldier shocks out of his chair, while we’re talking please can you not
engage in physical activity
Another soldier shocks up 	We want to see 
the person back there we want to see her condition	O. turns up 
the juice you can’t let them in
your pants 	No one made you
king here 	the wasp clicks 	the room clicks 	send them through
	the door send them back

in the door re-
load. 	 	They smile at O. with bright 
cautious eyes	It is sure hot 
today they say.  Sure, it is hot says O.  Its nothing like where we
came from in Ohio.

A giant basket of fruit has poured open		plastic grapes
squeak to the floor

Yesterday the soldiers trashed the room and took the proprietor’s  
computer 

Before the role-play, Laith speaks quietly.  He tells me he translated for the Americans
during the war.  						


When the play begins, his face 
                                                                         darkens, is sent to sea

To start the story again, press play.
They reread the booklet labeled the Crying
Room to get inside what in a plot undoes
a room.  The tank accidentally
did it, but in order to succeed in the scenario,
the soldiers must also acquire information.

Wailing is a noise between them and information
And consolation is impossible when you play
someone who is home and you can’t cry 
for home, except sometimes, when undone
quite accidentally,
in between laughing. The scenario

needs verisimilitude, and the writers of the scenario
care about affect as much as tactic.  If you cry
for real or accidentally, you get a military coin. Play it
like you lived it. (You lived it). You have information
but between you and information is the undone
room. 

Discover if you can that all the Iraqis in this village are in cahoots with the militia.  In the 
imam’s classroom, there is a blackboard with drawings of planes sizzling into the free 
world.

These are the codes and clues but I can follow nothing.  It is night and outside
the quadrant are the black roads circling 

back into the base, whichever one you take.  I have not eaten in a long time, and one
of the soldiers hands me a Clementine, and the juice dribbles over my notes.  I hear four

rooms at once.  To my left, grapes strewn in the café, his face at sea.  To my right, they 
are undone quite accidentally. Across the hall, the wasp clicks in the R-mute air.   Square

of murmurs square of cries.  Square of falling and rising, falling then rising.  Climb 
in climb out of the little black square no matter what you encountered there.  The soldiers

are trying to befriend the imam and crack the code.  Afterwards, the imam
chides them: you should have shaken my hand.  Their Commander reminds them

to use rapport to get to the main point. The culture stuff is a segue to whatever is the main
point.  Drink tea with them for an hour; at the very end, maybe you will get what you 

need.  I am learning how to be an anthropologist, and the anthropologists are furious and 
want culture back.  Every day, I drink tea, fragrant and black and wait very slowly for 

them to open, and for me to open; it is a green ache and it is nothing if not need.

Below the storm, stood blind 
bodies inside the yellow cloud. But the eyes 
of the bombs saw inside the cloud into
the dark intentions of the bodies.  

Like, if you slit a fish
longitudinally and place its seamed 
belly across a plate, any radioactive
tissue will expose on film: cells forgetting

themselves, blinking 
gold gold gold.  Like the tainted
thistle diving its roots 20 feet down
sucking strontium-90 and cesium;
in it came through the hollow
throat of the plant: in came the soil’s 
dark drink.  How they snipped off its
seeding head.  These are those
people these are those
people.

And how we measured them, how we watched 
the clouds in the morning, watched the soot in our hearths 
for sparks. Wolves more fierce. The air like thorns 
in our eyes. Nails springing from the walls. Our shoes hard 
as bone. How we hoped we were wrong, and knew 
we weren’t. The stones breaking beneath the skin 
of the field. The wild animals trying to get in.

Naïve with sweetness, the bees hive-crowd: sugar
swarm the maraschino factory, siphon redness like a sunset 

until zaftig—honeystomachs lining silk with cordial 
as we triage for backrooms where we can slough off 

wintering: feed our own bodies so full with blood and bees
that we might re-dress ourselves in the welting. Skin-close 

or closing: thrum like a barebulb-light; the sudden tightness 
of teeth next to teeth. Dear red wet match-sting 

in our mouths, taste we’ve been tendering-for. 
How speech is a pheromone 

that incites the alarm. And our throats—: as closed 
as cherries. As undivine. No grief 
		
in the swelling. In the numb bulbs left to be carried 
off from the hive. Such a crushed 

and candied liqueur: husk of bees and us, almost
unrecognizable in the plush housing of dyes—

blushed to a fevering, garmentless.

They rubbed salt on me without my knowledge. Plucked my father 
to a single-strand lariat of hair. 

When the pure gold was dangled over my palm, the pendant swung
in circles. The pendant spun a hive. I tried to tie everything 

in contingency knots or hexagons. Uncrossed my legs. The skeleton 
keys picked up by the thin end giving 

me away, honeycomber that I am: each pin unpricked 
over a wrist. I told the bees a stinger instead. Told them my queen was 

dead: I think I am a stolen. Sick with a colony, with a collapse. 
I do not touch my lips—& the town knows: 

it’s a girl. When she turns opaque the town will take 
her: an anchor, a paperweight, a cake 

of stickying light. There were fits & pennies: a chalk white arrow. I wore 
this when spring turned to summer—the dried lilies packed in 

baby’s breath: a reliquary of practice contractions. Her quickening 
heartbeat a sough. The jig up just before deliverance. 

Hours after disembarking a body might still believe it is 
on the boat: a ferry & its circular windows like a mourning

ring strung on a neck. Or the loop of hair we did not snip 
in your hospital rooms. It felt like a wash cycle when we slept 

on the waves. The boat growing around our glass 
O like a meant-to-say-sorry. A carousel of wooden 

sicknesses buffed to their brights. Though no apology for how 
we carried your cell wreckage & fasteners off as ash 

in the hand, forgot how to allow let alone 
let go on loop. I wished for the heaviest brass 

diving bell my head could carry. To be asked to shore up a cathedral 
from six meters deep. Every morning I discover your head 

on our front lawn being pilfered by birds. Then your hands & feet. 
What do you call the remorse of leaving someone 		

on accident again? To be compulsive enough to tattoo your radiation 
constellation across my chest as if heirloom? 

If I rescue your bed from a sinking 
ICU. Float it to the forest encircled in life 

preservers. Drag it by teeth in a fit. I won’t tell you 
sleeping inside the forest means having your legs

separated from your body as if safe
keeping. The birds in focus in the foreground. Birds as holes

in the wisteria wallpaper. The birds that tear our agency 
off as a tender loophole. 

For there are the winter-killed dead to inventory
and the coyote- and wolf-downed does,
cached under brush.  The extant huckleberries, 
withered bittersweet, must likewise be taken note of.
Unguarded nests of lesser birds, the pale eggs
or hatchlings therein.  Wanderings of the unwinged,
pismire factory sites, bear excavations, grubs revealed
by the disassembly of rotting stumps and logs.
Weather to be foreseen.  Wind to ride, rain
to be bathed by, dust as a salve against mites
and lice.  The barely perceptible breathing
of a man asleep in the woods.  He may be dying.
The billion curiosities of the world—joyful 
toy tatter of cellophane, whatever it was
dislodged that scale of bark ticking down 
the soon-to-topple leaning bull pine, the possibilities
its root wad divot will exhume.  The plume
of smoke from a stone chimney, the warmth
upwafting from its windward brink.  Abundant stinks,
a snail ascending a dew dampened leaf.  Nickel,
nail, bottle cap, knife, every metallic irregularity
among the forest duff, along the miles of trail.
All the while, the brief elaborate declarations,
a lexicon of single-syllable commands, announcements,
warnings, and ruses, verbs and interjections, nouns literal
and abstract, indicating dimension, distance,
succulence, and global positioning, here and there,
and the possibility of God, which is air.

As though only from within the gaps,
the circular enclosures, interstices,
staves, and serifs, twenty-odd letters or so,
also diphthongs, digraphs, and blends blended
in an utterance that seemed entirely 
and only vowels, but for certain minimal ticks,

bi-labials and thin fricatives, the enunciations
of dust from a distance, from up close
the pale and weightless declarations
of fog.  Only now and then a syllable
half-discerned and rarer still a word
heard as a known symbol and signifier,

usually goddam or son-of-a-bitch,
as noun, adjective, adverb, or interjection.
He was telling us, or himself, a story,
a narrative certain inflections of which
suggested one of us ought to nod or respond
with our own interjection, with a wow

or a really, a then what or a what then, 
although eventually, his attention as he spoke
lit upon the back of his left hand,
and it seemed the son-of-a-bitch
in question was that very goddam appendage,
the color of a scab beneath the thin skin

he’d rapped against the wall in a recent fall.
A series of long oos and uhs then,
a diphthong oy, all of which were interlarded 
with vaporous, unboned, mostly horizontal, 
unlipped and toothless whisperthin 
phantoms of consonants, as though what we heard

were the spaces between the cars of a passing train.
Like the one he carried me up to sixty years ago,
in order that I might reach out with him
to touch as lightly as possible
each passing freight car, bound southeast 
from St. Louis, perhaps for a town in Kentucky,
whose name consisted almost entirely of vowels.

I need to explain: 
I once watched 
sea moss flower 
on the skin 

of a drowned sailor 
and within hours 
swell to the size 
of a human finger. 

I pulled his body  
from waves so white 
I could have carved 
them from wax, 

soft as bees. 
He looked like a candle 
without a flame—
he looked like fire 

without ash.
The whites of his eyes
were black with flies— 
Let there be light.

I need to explain: 
Since men first spoke
of gravity, it’s slowly 
pushed our bones 

deeper into the soil. 
Since men first spoke 
of lightning, the sky’s 
become an archer.

There is a faith beyond 
prayer: my enemy 
spoke of a bird asleep
on his throat before 

opening his mouth
to that white rush 
of waves, believing 
he would be turned 

into a tree by his grief. 
Down dropped his roots.
A hundred birds fell
into his branches.  

If I could, I would tell you 
how you made me hate        

the sea, because for days        
it was your grave,                  

the only casket that allows
light inside. 

In the end, it doesn’t 
matter: I've written it down—

nothing has changed:
the water that drowns 

is still more beautiful 
than the lungs it enters.

We don’t play songs here; we touch
them. Like animals mulling
over the dead, music is a handling.
Listen to the sounds 
of a touched thing: a body, the pan pipe,
the waste garnishing the roads
that lead out of Cusco. Tocar is creation.
On the bus, two young boys sing
Ojos Azules like a couple of tanagers
that trill and stir the passengers.
I felt something once. A broken reed
licked my foot on the slick banks.

Ojos azules no llores. Take and cut
my soft frame into parts, arrange
by size, bind by catgut. No llores
ni te enamores. I never sing
as a thrush in a natural spasm, 
but as a ghost of that fit. 
As a long sigh that brushes 
the bones. A whisper rolled 
through the stalks. Llorarás 
cuando me vaya.  To be touched, 
        ultimately, by a sickle—
        cuando remedio ya no haya—
        and feel only the wind.

Dilemmas I faced years ago
                        déjà vu–a sparrow in my bedroom
hits the ceiling fan.  
            I whistle at the bird–its bright eye gleams.
                                    Not again.

When I open the door, it flies a straight line
to winter.
                       Years ago, I broomed it out.
If the weather turns, I recall beloved faces 
                                                no longer here
                                –a late tide of the lost.
            Are those only false memories?

Let’s talk about how good you look today.
            Amnesia whirls to the mouth of a river 
                        washed in silver oolong light.

Even the miniature dachshunds were stoned
when they sank their teeth into our ankles,
and we were stoned, too, just riding 
the two floors up from our illegal loft

to Juan’s, where he was growing corn 
and raising bees for his museum show. 
His bees flew from Broadway to Gramercy Park 
for pollen—or that was the plan. Roaches

loved the rice and beans Juan’s table offered,
so he mail-ordered mantis eggs—he’d read
the mantids were formidable predators. 
But when their cases opened and the babies

hatched, the incorrigible roaches ate them
before they’d had a chance to prey. The bees: 
they were driven in glass vitrines to Buffalo 
for Juan’s retrospective and installed, the gallery

for the opening gala at the Albright-Knox brightly
lit. Too bright, too hot—next day, the curator 
switched the spotlights on, and every bee had fried.
—Oh, and John and Yoko visited one night.

Your great-aunt Sydney went to Europe twice—once
to Paris where the food was lousy and the Louvre
depressing; and London where they wouldn’t let her, 
or Abe, touch the Elgin Marbles which were, you know,
carved by a British Lord. Later, they’d try Rome—
You know what you can do with their spaghetti!—
and Florence. At I Tatti, Bernard Berenson 
didn’t bother to come out to meet them. 
She didn’t think much of BB anyway: Big deal—
a dirty old man in a dirty old house,
who got buried by the Pope! she said.
When you graduated from art school, she pulled me
aside and pinched my arm hard, demanding 
How the hell will he make a living?

Here it is winter again
The great heavy coat
The brown woolen coat
With the frayed lining
Over me. I wear it
Into the comfortless
Morning weight of
The coming year
Mother coat

Mementos, knickknacks, treasured junk, set pieces. 
Some call them soulless, yet I heard Robert Lowell admonish 
his child, a toddler stomping a book, “Oh no, dear, you mustn’t—
books are immortal souls.” Things we might say we “love,” 
flea market tables are piled with them—hand-painted trays,
chipped deco pottery; LIFE magazines saved in drawers
for their covers—they’re little museums themselves:
American photography of our troops at Normandy, 
dead soldiers, flotsam, washed ashore; the Dionne Quints
5 little girls in white dresses, caged in Quintland, their Ontario 
yard, for tourists and their cameras; LIFE, declaring without 
shame: THERE IS A CASE FOR INTERPLANETARY SAUCERS 
(Marilyn’s on that cover). Prowling the daytime drive-in’s aisles 
at the flea, in the summer sun, I go into a classic hunter’s crouch, 
walk on the balls of my  feet, my arms outstretched, 
my fingertips metal detectors for Sunday’s hidden coin. 
Dusty broken useless. My closets full of things, my shelves 
overflow with LPs, snapshots, Bakelite boxes that held 
monogrammed playing cards—someone else’s monogram—
or unfiltered cigarettes; my grandmother’s stereopticons, 
scenes of the vast Grand Canyon with tiny human figures 
for perspective; my grandfather’s tefillin in a blue velvet 
drawstring bag. Old piles of books, papers, drafts, 
catalogues, magazines—what’s a bedside floor for?—
notebooks, science articles torn jagged from the Times, 
and also book reviews, passionate or sardonic dicta
about what? by whom? Handle bags from long-closed bookstores, 
mugs with jokes or slogans holding inkless pens, wood rulers, 
random screws and nails. Grandfather’s pencil stub marked 
Aid to the Jewish Blind, his arthritic hand held it to dial the phone, 
its eraser petrified. Mother preached collecting was the only cure 
for depression—she couldn’t think it was a symptom, 
didn’t believe anyway in depression. Earmuffs, bell-bottoms, 
campaign buttons. Matchbooks from vanished restaurants, 
cool restaurants with ashtrays, with smokers. An embossed 
plumber’s card from Pasadena touts Miranda the Plumber—
You Don’t Have to Live with a Drip! A small bamboo rat carved 
so delicately it’s hard to imagine the tool, the carver’s hand;
2 blackened Senufo masks, displaced, implacable on the wall. 
Things, things—Uncle Harold’s tragedy of the Chinese revolution,
No Peace for Asia; the last biography of Harry S. Truman, 
and Harry Blackmun’s; the scathing pleasure of Philip Roth, 
of stirring unsentimental Willa Cather’s America; a battered 
Amphigorey; my childhood copy of Struwwelpeter, Johnny 
Head-in-Air who finally walked right off a pier and drowned., 
the point being it served him right, translated from the German. 
And all this all this poetry, my friends’, the challenging dead, 
unalphabetized life’s blood, positioned to be rediscovered. 
An inventory of them alone would take a thousand pages.
But who on this green earth would type it? And why? And when?
(“So many things in your poems,” one friend said to me, disdainfully,
I thought….) Your steel tool-case with molded grooves to fit 
each mystifying tool.  Drill bits, Philips heads, brushes, tubes
of color, drying… Art—the walls, the closets, the flat files—
humming its demanding song. Or not just demanding, generous. 
Secretly, in the dark companioning me. Things aren’t company, 
I know that, or ideas, or moral currencies, although they feel like
company when I hold them, I look at them, I know they’re here 
except in dreams, except in dreams. Loving them, touching them, 
keeping them, I’d like to think they love me back. Here are your 
shirts, and your hand-sharpened pencils—this blue-gray one 
impressed with a haiku by Basho, With dewdrops dripping/
I somehow wish I could wash/ this perishing world.

You do not see us, but we move among you
with our special lenses and very small
notebooks.  Once in a great while,

a part of us will grow fond 
and rush to cradle the elbow 
that is about to give beneath your sousaphone

just to see you gleam and sound
against the dark of the sky’s decaying teal.
Yes:  even those charged with the rigorous

application of standards grow weak
trying to bear the terrible negotiations of energy
with shapes such energy rushes against.

Some call us angels.  We are
only given to say how far
into the air got the sound 

you asked to move through
such puzzles of brass and wood and flesh
and skin pulled tight—

                                     I remember

moving through an expensive restaurant 
with more of my kind.  Candles desperately licked 
in rows beneath thorny crystals:

the light rivered along the white, white tablecloths
of the empty tables as we swept 
toward the porch in the back 

to eat beyond our means, always beyond 
our means, beneath the questions crickets 
chisel out of quiet 
                                     when the lights go out.

we move through the wind which blows
over us, riffles through the dangling parts, 
our husks let loose and stumbling

past interstates past hiking trails
(endurance) we can be heard from 
though it depends on the proximity 

of neighbors the sound we make when 
struck is glass (breath) wood 
whittled away to nothing: shells or

hollowed metal of assorted diameters
knocking together (relax and unwind)
causing higher pitched vibrations 

(harmonic) the way bluster grazes 
beer-bottle tops the way grass blades 
tangle wind (here) between thighs 

the sprawl the sigh the deferred 
outside is not dangerous we are 
enjoying nature we are up in the 

air which is not the same as 
suspended which is not the same as
hogtied which is not the same as 

lynched, but we’re not writing fiction, fellas, 
get yer ass in here to bone up 
on wishes on come back on why didn’t we

take that self-defense class in college
(you pick two) menu of freshmen girls 
grids of faces lined up as examples 

of what tasteful (buddy system) makeup 
looks like age eyes hair weight last
seen wave hello through the window

and there are so many windows keep going
in the house if you have information
the windows are boarded up please call 

someone so angry it’s possible to sense 
a disturbance in the firmament (we were
taken, we were drunk) a really easy 

weekend project wind chimes don’t
touch unless weather because on our 
backs they prosecuted and nothing 

happened they prosecuted unless 
someone sighed honor code unless
the windows were open until someone

remembered an irrefutable detail
and even then

heartbreak is a fixture of the landscape
like these unbuttoned doors, these streetlamps
over bent pavement, glittering, emitting heat

with covers pushed to the floor there is nothing
lonelier than an air conditioning unit (5,000 BTUs)
or a chain lock and the space between the door

and the frame heartbreak 
is so steep you don’t really race up to it
those men ringing the buzzer (no soliciting)

a motion of crossing the street
(heartbreak) is imminent
against the window against the light

I want you here now with me
to do dangerous things:
salt flats, salt mines, diamonds since

heartbreak is the opposite of acrylic is
dawn over a bridge (rusted, impassable)
Carroll Street Verrazano Kosciuszko 

the river rises to the promenade
after heavy rains,
                         the bright sky

cooing into the night, flying home, roosting
like music in the Anchorage, like music
echoing everywhere we went

whether we stay or go
heartbreak is an option
Verrazano himself was killed and eaten

by natives of Guadeloupe or executed
for piracy in Spain:  heartbreak
is not always a linear progression

Little soul, pulled
down like a drum. Hook-line.

Sinker. You swore there was gold
at the bottom of the lake, that the lake

wanted you to wear its mossy skirt.
Yes, you looked gorgeous

in firefly hues, the moths pitched white
as barrettes in your hair. Little air,

little sediment-coated tongue.
Holy Nothing is a trickster:

oh to be young, yes young, 
and lopsided in faith.

Forgive my country, bread.
Forgive how I, under your nose, live: 

how I, like the horse’s tongue,
speak, how I
in the smudge and fray of ribs
among the tilt and tat of thighs, breathe.

Forgive, life, how
crumpled
doily
your body was.
Forgive my country,
your armory, the bread of war.

Not just an apple a whole limb 
falls in the side yard loaded  
some fruit streaked  
some green party lights  
The problem is interpretation 
It looks like mortality to me
but I am falling behind already
still working to understand
the bird with burned shoulders  
angels in the alcoves turned to stone

I was looking for the numbers we save
to fill in for forgetting
and there was algebra and abacus
even the mention had them 
flooding back and the fives and sevens 
fell neatly into place
recalling the era when people used cathedrals 
or dovecotes as models for memory
dates and places put into a tall Chinese
dresser with Shang bronze drawer pulls
by which banners at Agincourt could be recalled
and horses and riders and blazons on shields

The women in my country, they are going into the yard with pots & spoons to bang at crows. Always, this. Because crows will eat every fruit from the trees, & then? Nothing left for the man, the baby at table. But listen: crow is not afraid of woman. Crow is not afraid of pot & spoon, it will come back tomorrow. Crow will look at woman, like: you bring pot & spoon? I do not care. But tomorrow, maybe you forget the name of this city, your mother. Maybe you take just one small box or just one case, fly to another house, put your box on the floor & ask: this box, who is it? Who is living in my house? You are forgetting, maybe. But in my country, we take the young asparagus in March when it walks on the hills. Asparagus is like the persons we have loved, standing there, in the house of our parents. But you? Must write the name of your city on the T-shirts. Every name more huge & lying across the chest, like a creature. Always, you weep in your small clothes. Near fountains, on the high balconies. Also, on bridges I have seen. You weep when the rain is not stopping, but also: no rain. And this weeping you do? Is just the ghost of the house you leave for another house. As for me, I am living in this place now many years. I do not forget my house, my mother in the yard. My sister with her spoon. I do not weep in your way of ghosts. That’s all.

I fill my plate with rain. I fill my belly.
I fill a T-shirt with shells & count them on the floor of my cabin.
At night, I drink juice from a moon-colored mug.
I feed the lamp & wrap my hair in a scarf.

What good am I doing? The ocean whines from bed.
I take my pills. I bury watermelon seeds.
The pills & the seeds move past each other in the dark.
Who blesses them?

My regrets slither up from the porch. 
They swell like shreds of orange pulp in my mouth. 
It’s true that I love & that I do not love.
I fill myself with my regrets & begin to speak.


You are describing how the transparent oval of my face seems to hang before you in the seconds before sleep. I peel off my gloves to eat from your paper cone of burning chestnuts even though they taste like bugs to me. You buy the chestnuts because you want me to enjoy this trip but then never to come back, not to your bedroom where I left my footprint in lotion on the hardwood, not to sit with you before your mother’s scant bowls of pastina in brodo. We pass the newsstand next to the bakery next to the bus stop by the restaurant that used to be an orphanage. You’re still talking about my phantom face, about the white light which you say surges into a beautiful tree-shape on top of my head. The clarity of this light magnetized your soul, or perhaps your soul already contained the exact spinning glob of sweetness that matched my own. It would be wrong to say precisely, it would be wrong to remember in any particular fashion. Our futures float by in their clear bulbs of breath, & I tell you the story again. 


Now this landscape, this old layering 
technique.  A mountain range of cut paper, 

rustling in my swift, sharp hands. An ounce is
a measurement or a snow leopard, depending.   

Slinking in the redder weather, soft pelt withheld.  
Why lie, I adored you.  See the way I hold my wrists. 

Rain falls in milligrams, where I tell you secrets
I can’t tell myself. I get sick of just about everyone.
    
My body wants for the first love, administered 
only in increments I am capable of, or I can conjure.

Everything I could keep safe, 
I did. But fear does not end 
with the storm. It grows limbs, 
traces its stone index finger
from my lip to the back 
of my throat, drags me, quarry, 
for a gem, or a keyhole
to unlock the mountain.  Logic 
abandons the valley.
Dandelions evacuate my heart.  
I don’t want to be a child 
anymore. I don’t want to nurse 
these hysterical roots.
After the storm, the live oak 
never fell, but wore a scar 
which corkscrewed 
the entire length of its trunk. 
Peeled and orange and 
slick, alight in 
the overwhelming darkness.

Flounder’s eyes lie 
one side of its head. 
Tarantula can shatter
falling centimeters. 
Sweet jabuticaba swells 
from trunk, not limb. 
Like snow in June, this white 
spot on your lung belongs     
to no one, being wrong.

Barn collapsing in wet clay. Ants  
stranded on grass-tips, signaling
like the blind. Sun scraped across winter
in its numb chariot. Fiddlehead, godhead, 
the universe crammed in that green spiral—    
larch-limbs swaying like anemones, tossed—
sweat-streaked stallion hide, unspeakable
grace—  the last few beats in a bird-body, 
crusted in crimson, muffled in down—    
rubber’s calligraphy on asphalt 
and the bright jewels of machinery, of engine
padded in a ditch of white violet and clover—
She fell where she stood in the grocery line
as all the padlocks sprung open, all the gates.

The names we create for the people we build
of sticks and mud and snow. The houses we fashion 
for them to live in. The weather they must survive. All of it 
slipping.  The baby we implant in the dirt-womb 
of a stick woman. The fetus slipping. The huts we build 
on riverbeds, the mud pies we force into babies’ mouths.  
The tongue slipping.  Lullabies in which we swaddle them, 
rocking boughs in the wind and the breaking. Breaking. We must 
build a shelter.  Collect scrap and wood, blankets to save the bodies.  
Imagine trees, cut the limbs, rebuild the bridges.  Trust the sun 
to hold us and not shine too keenly. To keep still as we gather 
buckets of water, the surface rippling with heat.  We will feed it 
to the people. We will wash ourselves in light.

Never mind the robin’s red breast, legs twitching upright in the road,
the sparrow on the curb, his head twisted backwards, or all the blackbirds
falling from the sky at once.  The crows have taken the last 
bit of bread to the puddle: let them call to warn the others.  
We’ll open the windows so the remaining birds can gather 
at the foot of her bed.  Let her rest here until they come.

Look how this slick white island rises from its dewy pink earth all rich with love
decayed and sugaring beneath the tongue, how the mouth speaks contrary to age,

to life: that Widow Quillin was not always Widow’d, only Quillin, only someone else 
still, with very fair teeth sprung up once before. Call her Bess, a good queen

of her linen cupboard, of her small china cup, just one, pale as bone, as delicate as a child 
but less because the cup is still in her hand and her children are buried, even the last,

even the one who she wished had buried her but whose mouth showed no new teeth, no 
newness, nowhere, not at all, who only grew old, as old as a man, like Mister Quillin.  

Look, his name is all but gone from her mouth, both of their names, all of the names, 
spit out one and then the other in brittle ivory fragments painted dark as rum sugar; 

look for the color now in milky tea brewed strong enough to taste, as strong as its burn on 
the lap because everything spills now, poor three-toothed Bess, and she’ll pour 

into her eggshell cup, as blue-veined as her hand, while  something else enlarges 
in the breast’s great soft cavern, bloodying her gums to chatter and bite and brim so full

they, too, overflow.

The brain skips 
the groove the train 
derails the record jumps 

the scratch. Sound is pressed
for memory to serve
the tracks to steer us

to attention.
A microscope
is full with focus

but not so much 
an eye which blinks 
the book the street 

the world a flickering 
designation. Present tense
is picket fence

mind a gap
agaping. Words are just
a gist a record

skips and jumps 
the groove a brain 
derails the track unkept.

Here in my lunar skull a sea
upon which sets a boat, 
some weather-synapse and
a compass for idea.
The hammered dome now fused 
was once all shifting plates and pliable.
Now its hardened craters
are pocked by all the asteroids 
and astronauts that have made 
landings there, nested and hatched
upon the surface. Some sometimes
make it back. Though the seas are vapor 
the boat still sails cold and nectar known, 
though what we know of as the stars 
are gone. The sails still luff
and swell across the eye pits 
and toward the ear canal. 
What is the moon if not a thought
full of cool green light? 
And what’s a thought but 
what pulls as wind the moon 
beyond the cloud.

Your father betrayed me with the composure
            of leaves, accretion of desire in cells.
     Snowy twilight on peaks was nothing 
            to his wastrel beauty. Some things he shattered
     I still recall as though they were whole:
a narrative of well-read romance,
            a bowl my sister made perfect from flaws—

minute spheres of oxygen caught
            and baked in the glaze reappearing, punctured,
     as delicate craters. When he struck
            the back car window with a brick, its faint
     green safety glass became a giant sand, 
an awkward salt cut fine enough to season
            every wound we drove toward and through.


in the museum of the legion of honor
these marble busts of famous men
are starting to look younger

you’re a dancer   struggling
to get centered         are you middle class 

middlebrow   middle-aged
is noon truly the center of the day

doesn’t it all always change     light
to welter to heavyweight 

mean or median    what does it matter
if the center isn’t fixed—alteration

is one way to make things fit

to paint my portrait I’ll translate
myself to water     not a body 

but a medium  a state   a shimmer
—there      I’m in the corner

of your eye   a fleeting   fluid
nameless shape    a glimmer

libertine    a floater—
instance of the universal rain

It went on for years, with no one questioning how I had both a SickDad and a WellFather, with no one treating SickDad more kindly than WellFather.
When WellFather met SickDad, he smiled and extended his hand over the wheelchair’s arm, leaning forward slightly. He pushed SickDad’s wheelchair along cracked sidewalks to welcome him to the house, holding the door open with one hand while pushing the entire wheelchair with the other. He rolled him to the table and piled his plate highest with steaming food, insisting that SickFather take another serving as soon as the mound on his plate began to shrink.
WellFather was always patient, holding the door for SickDad, wheeling his chair carefully over the threshold’s lip, steadying him with a hand under his armpit as he crouched into sitting. Pulling his chair closer to the heaping rice, meat, and vegetables on his plate, urging him to eat more, take more, drink more.
Somehow, our family had grown. When we needed advice about talking to oncologists, nephrologists, or hospice staff, WellDad always shared an encouraging word. At first I was confused to have a SickDad and a WellFather but over time it felt natural, even normal somehow. WellDad was always present, but SickFather grew increasingly adrift.
When I asked WellDad what to do about SickFather he was first pragmatic. Out of earshot, he seized a fruit basket from the table and emptied it. Lifting it energetically, he said, “This is what you carry,” carefully placing four apples inside one by one: mother, father, son, son. He gazed at me knowingly, significantly, brows raised for emphasis. Then he proclaimed, “Don’t try to take on this unnecessarily,” piling an orange and a pear into the mix.  
Eleven months later, I asked WellFather, what should we do about SickDad? He grew more thoughtful, stared into the distance and said, “Things are becoming more challenging. It will be difficult for a while. We’ll do the best that we can. And you, you do what you need to do. You have kids to care for.” He grasped his coffee mug in both hands, eyes on something far outside the window.  
Months became years. I pleaded with WellDad, “What now? Things have spiraled downhill…SickFather in and out of the hospital, his medical issues multiplying. Climbing the front steps is becoming impossible.” WellDad said, “Yes, you do your best to prepare. We’ll figure out the rest when the time comes.” He peeled a banana, sliced it into rounds, and offered me the plate with an encouraging “hm” that meant, “Here, eat.”

Asterisk this, asterisk that.                   My deepest
thoughts slunk through my head, afraid.  Locust
trees shed petals across the street.    They lay
strewn like human teeth     over the raging
                yellow of the tensile yellow line.
I awoke like a lit M80:                    all fear,
bottomless orbits.                  While I slept,
helicopters ferried me through      peerless
darkness, a harness     hugging my pubis,
    a set of smiles for my squinting eyes;
high strangeness     for miles and miles.
They’d call me             snub-nosed bat,
                      they’d bend
my wings,               they’d             touch me
   and strike out                             my mind
with a walnut opener.            Sterling silver,
an antenna calls my brain blood around it,
a cerebral lighthouse, an obelisk,     a sun-
       dial towing an onerous line.

My body needs something to be wrong.    You 

filled me 

like a cup        and then you 

left. I scrub mouse blood

from the baseboards. I scrape frozen bird shit        

from the front door.    

The smell of death lifts 

up the walls:        small animals wanting in. 

An orange cat tosses a rag of a rabbit, whiskers it 
    with claws. 

If you knew how the body can clench     

and hold:        a quickening

of the guts and lungs. 

I once had succulents—the man 
    who broke 

in smashed them from the windowsill, and now I 

eat a little less, a little
    less not because I want 

to be a light bulb but because I need                to be a lantern. Forever

winter, the sky looks cold, pink as a clot                                    in the mouth.

She writes letters 

from morning
to night. She writes

to everyone and everything:
the post-man, her neighbors,

the planet Mercury.

Beside her desk a window
overlooks the sea.

Children laugh

as they play in the waves and she
decides to write to water,

a thank-you note of sorts.
Nothing is more terrible than thirst,

she begins, imagining 
ice, imagining 

throats.

This town is river-hungry, filled
with dried-up moss and torn
blue jeans. It’s hard to find 

any prettiness here, any shade,
much less a place to sit 
and think. The best I’ve 

done is Grandfather’s field.
Nothing will grow but 
there are cow bones still to bury. 

Their flesh dried in the months
after almond farmers 
planted their well. One-thousand-

feet-deep, it sucked us dry. Spiders 
laid eggs in our faucets and 
instead of water, small

brown bodies washed over 
our hands. Outside is
no better. Where flowers

once were are ribs and hips.
Clouds of flies swarm
over them like smoke on a 

humid day and I remember
how beautiful their necks were,
bending to eat grass. Bones

poked up when the spine arced
forward and it was 
a sword rising from a lake,

sharp and still sheathed. 

Four nights now spent crying in the bushes. 
            Four plates crowded on my hands just before, 
placing food on the table.
            My daughter weeps in secret, too. I think
it is about a boy.
            She is fourteen. I     
remember well, loving so openly then. 
            Now I am rain 
inside a jar, I am        
            the arm adored for wiping window panes.
Why don’t you tell him? I ask one day, 
            standing in her door. She looks scared, turns her head.
Why are there leaves in your hair? is all 
            she says.

Walked. Cracked. Blur
of accident, this body 

a dog that won’t stay home,
you a mulberry bush

(round and round we go).
This body a map, longitudes

and lassitudes, this whole body
an unstrung harp, lost notes.

Thus begins the weather
unsettled, the heart as gate

banging on its latch, the heart 
as towel thrown in,

the heart as 3am.
Self-portrait as peeling wallpaper.

Self-portrait as unthreaded eye.
Self-portrait as beehive,

as buzzing, the promise of sweet
unmet, impending sting.

I go for the light, the light, a love
of heights and thaw. Sweets out of season.
Daylong trilling trly and prrit.
A whole flock’s skyward veer and the white
of underwing.

Living in the dark takes will. Irony.
A strong stomach for dearth, dearth, dried fruit.
And no harm, time to time, to sing too much
in the sun, exotic plums, fresh blistered lemon
on the lips.

These flights are just a lark, a lark, a least
creature’s thirst quenched. I do descend, in time. 
Once I’ve soared trilling out of sight,
I’ll fold back wings and fall
like a stone.

I go for the light, the light, a love
of heights and thaw. Sweets out of season.
Daylong trilling trly and prrit.
A whole flock’s skyward veer and the white
of underwing.

Living in the dark takes will. Irony.
A strong stomach for dearth, dearth, dried fruit.
And no harm, time to time, to sing too much
in the sun, exotic plums, fresh blistered lemon
on the lips.

These flights are just a lark, a lark, a least
creature’s thirst quenched. I do descend, in time. 
Once I’ve soared trilling out of sight,
I’ll fold back wings and fall
like a stone.

Some odd solace, this hole in the earth
holds. Hours here I crouch, cleave, curve limbs
among root, worm, mycelium.
Graze my eyelashes in the loam
at the lip.

A hiding place, now. A sanctum. This cusp
that I’ve raced and caught seams to cross
through, that I’ve brushed past, bruised smooth
by my passage – hands, leverage, hems – 
I now haunt.

Eyes level with the lip, vision split
between light and loam, I imagine myself
limbless. Imagine myself severed
of might. Mint, crocus, corn sprouting
from my scalp.

On the oak-plank table, the criminal’s body: hanged 
for armed robbery, squat toes dappled 

with burnt sienna, muscled legs leading 
to a stretch of loincloth—interrupting 

the eye for a second—before the slack mouth 
resting on bare chest. No neck. The tip of his nose, 

marble-grey, a bird’s beak peaking from the rust-
colored crop of his beard. His face partially shaded, 

umbra mortis. The skin of his left arm 
stripped away, revealing muscles, tendons—

the physician uses the forceps to pull the meat back, 
to tug the flexor digitorum superficialis: he holds out 

his left hand, fingers poised in mid-air, a magician, 
look, he seems to say, see how it moves. The observers lean in, 

neatly bearded men in black robes, white lace collars 
stiff and ruffled. They hover like specters, 

fascinated by this theater, eyes probing, the human body 
unshrouded. These men painted in a room 

the color of parchment, of brown smoke, 
stone doorways arched, shadowed, sockets in a skull. 

You spread me like silk, 
like night you want 
to cut the stars from. 
I have nowhere to hide, 
my hide, fresh pink 
and prepped. Once, 
you called me pretty. 
You pounce, prick
of the knife, point 
carefully separating 
skin from sinew.
You, sir, know how 
to gut a girl. You slice 
through everything 
I ever wanted to be,
leave only lungs
wrapped in dark fur, 
soft tissues, tendons. 
You don’t see me, 
you see the schema 
of a body, skin 
to be arranged, 
put on display. 
You only want
things you can
touch, say here
and here and here.

I go to breakfast at the Elks Club on S. Magnolia today
                        and figure I fit in pretty well till I hear an Elkette say, 
"Well, I see not everybody's an Elk here this morning." 

What is an Elk, by which I mean not the large hooved 
                        land mammal common to North America and Eastern 
Asia but the man who belongs to a local chapter of that 

redoubtable fraternal order, just as Elkettes are, according 
                        to the web site, “determined and dedicated women” who 
participate “in the general welfare of their community 

and their Elks Lodge in reaching goals not otherwise 
                        obtainable.” I could be all the things I’ve never been: 
soldier, athlete, skydiver, Jane Austen heroine. 

It would just be a matter of completing boot camp, 
                        discovering a sport I’m good at, having someone shove 
me out of an airplane since there’s no way I’d do it myself, 

and learning to do needlework and play the pianoforte, 
                        which can’t be that hard since I can already sew a button 
on a pair of shorts and strum a guitar. Earlier this week

I was reading John Dewey at McDonald’s and took 
                        a break to talk to a crossing guard who told me that 
little kids want to be good but don’t pay attention (“well, 

half of them don’t”), although he can see them take 
                        the world in bit by bit and process it and change their 
behavior, sometimes in ways he hardly expects. The great 

philosopher had just said the same thing this way: “As with 
                        the advance of an army, all gains from what has been 
already effected are periodically consolidated, and always 

with a view to what is to be done next.” That’s the secret 
                        to reaching goals not otherwise obtainable, isn’t it? 
Gradual degrees. I’m pretty sure I was the only one reading 

John Dewey at that McDonald’s, but, yeah, there are 
                        philosophers everywhere, and I've never met a single one 
who wasn't willing to share his philosophy; all you have

to do is give them a little head toss and say, "What's 
                        your job like?" Not everybody’s an Elk. But you could
 be an Elk if you wanted to be—okay, not the animal.

   Fanny Brawne chides him because he loves her 
for her beauty. “Why may I not speak of your Beauty,” 
            says John Keats, “since without that I could never have 
lov'd you? I cannot conceive any beginning of such love 
                        as I have for you but Beauty.” See, she thinks he means

                        the way she looks, and, sure, most men start with
a handsome bosom or a well-turned ankle, but after that,
            men love women the way women love men, so that “beauty” 
doesn’t mean “looks” but something like “the whole 
                        package.” Did not John Keats describe her to

                        his brother George as "beautiful and elegant, graceful, 
silly, fashionable and strange”? Who would not want 
            to be thought “silly” and “strange” by John Keats!
Of his own looks, John Keats writes, “I am not a thing 
                        to be admired…. I hold that place among Men which 

                        snub-nosed brunettes with meeting eyebrows do among 
women—they are trash to me—unless I should find one 
            among them with a fire in her heart like the one that burns 
in mine.” On the one hand, I think John Keats 
                        is just fishing for compliments, the way we all do when

                        we say, “Oh, this old rag? It’s the only clean thing 
I could find” or “It’s kind of you to say that about 
            my poem/story/screenplay, but it still needs a lot of work.” 
On the other, the fire that burned in John Keats’s heart 
                        is like one of those 8,000-acre wildfires you see on TV,

                        the ones that burn everything in their paths yet leave
the earth ready for fresh growth—woe to the lover 
            who cannot match the heat of that inferno! “In case 
of the worst that can happen, I shall still love you,”
                        says John Keats, “but what hatred shall I have for another!”

                        Oh, don’t say that, John Keats! Jealousy’s the meanest 
emotion. Terror, anger, sorrow, joy: these burn the way 
            that fire in your heart does, blue and pure, whereas jealousy 
smokes and sputters and makes you look noisome and puny.
                        Better to ask Fanny for a letter from her own hand,

                        to say “write the softest words and kiss them that I may 
at least touch my lips where yours have been,” and, then,
            when you get it, “I have kiss’d your Writing
over in the hope you had indulg’d me by leaving a trace 
                        of honey.” Of course: if you’re going to die, why not 

                        do it with Fanny Brawne’s lips on yours? Or John Keats’s. 
His friend Severn says his last words were “lift me up—
            I am dying—I shall die easy; don’t be frightened—be firm, 
and thank God it has come.” Fine, though just two months 
                        earlier, he’s saying this about Fanny to Charles Brown: 

                        “I can bear to die—I cannot bear to leave her. Oh, God! 
God! God! Every thing I have in my trunks that reminds 
            me of her goes through me like a spear.” Oh, God!  
God! God! There’s nothing sweeter than the right word 
                        to the right person at the right time, nothing sadder, nothing 

                        more likely to buoy you up like the scape of a dandelion 
floating toward heaven, to drag you down to a hell
            hotter than the hottest hell you’ve ever imagined. 
Don’t just sit there, reader. Do something! There’s a wildfire
                        headed your way. Throw water on it—no, wait, gasoline.

The problem is the infrastructure of dreaming has fallen
on hard times.  We want nothing so much as

the promise of Yucca Mountain, a sweating red
heart beating deep underground.  For this, we stockpile

dynamite, jackhammers.  We buy new hardhats
for the ribbon cutting.  We show up on the appointed

morning, but there are no photographers and no orange
coolers of ice water; we’ve been sold a scale model,

just a rectangular plot of packed earth.  The sun is a steady
acetylene torch.  It’s clear we each must dig and so

roll the sleeves of our dress shirts in unison past
our elbows.  Though we’re disappointed, it feels good

to swing a pickaxe, harpoon the ground with a shovel.
In the dullness of the work, we can almost imagine

the famed hanging gardens saturated with flowers.

We tasted our Linzer tarts,
he telling me: first the body wants earth.
Then, the body wants earth more.

I should have said, I will leave you in two months.
That the next time you pass Balthus’s young neighbor
lounging on his armchair, you will think: Whatever
people call it, this is love. And she, sleeping Therese, 
arching back like a red spindle working green thread,
will turn her head to you and say:
Don’t you know the landscape is three?
The grass, the audible, the pulling back.

The one who fixates my love
is a moth, pale and lunatic,

come to bask against the glass
that walls me. Her plectrum eyes,

her cautious feet, every night
alighting outside, far-near,

far again, frail with mastery
of me. I shift; she shifts.

She goes;
I whirl, aimless,

wracked by betrayal
and enraged. 

Lush with the barbed thickets,
fluent in dusk’s caress,

why return to me at all? 
To make my want burn brighter?

Speak of anything but touch.
I can imagine. It is enough.

The art of finding isn’t hard to master,
either.  We find so many things, past or

present.  Your way home.  Yourself.  In a pickle,
a jam.  Find something every day: steel bristle

from the street cleaning truck, lucky penny 
on the ground.  Then practice finding many,

finding more:  ten dollars in your winter coat, a stolen
hour, lunch with this woman you love.  The pollen

from stargazers staining her shirt.
In the wine, find stonefruit, ash.  Share the dessert.

Find a volunteer melon in a weed-choked bed,
scrap of paper scrawled with what the doctor said.

Those seeded crackers we ate with lobster salad that time.  
Your lost earring.  Your friend from junior high, online.  

And finding you—a miracle.  What are the odds?
I find myself on my knees.  Weeding, thanking god.

Not high enough for suicide
                              or low for easy landing, save for
                                 the cinematic timing of a feline 

                                            leap onto the back of a passing 
                                                    semi. Not that I’ve considered it—        
                                                            but my eyes have, 

                                                & in this way I’ve sent my energies into 
                                                        the possibilities, 

                                                                                    like dogs after 
                                                                                the Missing

                       into the ravine of time. As a child, I watched 
                                                                     the funnel 
                                                                   cake-fat catfish disappear under the park’s 
                                                                                                     footbridge 

& reappear on the other side, as the twin 
     barracudas of headlights current 
                                                     now into the black 
                                                                                 expressway like nostalgia. I’m ready to say 
                                                                                       that whatever holds 

                                             our attention is a brief
                                             god, that Americans have many, that lovers can be glorified;
                                                                                                 that stopping with my hands 
                                                                                                 in my ratty peacoat pockets 

                                                  here is reverence for my own life, even if 
I measure it against its impact 

                                                   on the pavement. I don’t know 
                                   any songs the wind also doesn’t. I sing them—
                                                                                       I better get 

                                                                             home. I walk buckled 
brick back into the neighborhood, Sunday quiet. Framed in the windows
above the back doors are green bottles collecting dust. Sometimes I glimpse 
a silhouette & know someone’s home. The more we speak of the world, 
the more it becomes 
metaphor. So let me stop here—

at the back gate of the dark yard that surrounds the house filled 
with light & the music of a body’s weight going 
                                                             up the stairs. I could almost believe the world 
                                                  would give me another 

         life by the way a streetlight files 
                                                 the house’s shadow,
                                                                          darkening down

                my boots.

Up the astroturfed 
steps our sight to stars condenses 
       to a vinyl 
portico, green, aglow 
            with cursive 

Park in Rear—
       an offensive to the solid 
order of a city 
              in the dark, but once 
inside we grope 

       through the restaurant, 
booth-humped 
              in shadow, & down 
the hall to a small 
       lounge, crushed

velvet on the walls 
              in blackberry-colored 
chandeliers embossed 
       on bronze, as oil 
lamps flicker between 

              the two-seaters
like pheromones. Sometimes
       I can do anything 
with an excuse. Half 
              permission, half 

pardoning. The night
       I lost, one I’ll never 
lose. I can’t deepen 
              the darkness 
behind my eyes, slow-

       dancing alone 
to Dinah, or hide 
              in one of the busted 
up bathroom stalls. Here 
       I’m made of words 

even if once I was made 
              of matter & am 
now, somewhere 
       else. Do you hear 
that song? That vibrato—

              a gin-burn 
laughed into the nose. 
       I grind
a thumbnail on the side
              of a quarter 

in my pocket as I lean into 
       Gerald’s offered 
light, watching a life at the juke 
              before it goes 
quiet.

The doe skull gleams with rain,
and my father, in his blue flannel shirt, walks
with his brother behind the shed, talking about the coyotes
that come down from the blue hills
and then disappear with the night,
how these rangy dogs are like them: running from home
and never staying together or returning.
The doe’s broken antler and crumbling
eye sockets remind my father of the country of lost men,
where he imagines how his brother died,
alone in his armchair, feet on his bearskin rug, on his ranch,
where his dead wife and son’s horses ran startled within the fences.
How the heart stopping is the form loss takes
in the gut, a small lumberjack chopping away at ribs,
clearing away parts of organs. How my father
has been chopping into trees, moving his wheelbarrow
filled with stones and old roots back and forth, the front
wheel creaking the way the body reminds, reminds
about ordinary pain we grow used to, reminds
him that maybe once in the rain time will tick backward
to the night he sat with his brother in the basement,
his brother’s back covered with belt marks,
the singes of cigarettes, when the beaten little boy
said, either he will kill me, or I will kill him. But then,
he started to cry, my father’s hand still on his slight proud
back, and this little boy said one day he’d never come back,
he’d hide in the hills with the coyotes and bears,
he lay down with horses, who’d flick over his back
with their sorrel tails, he’d open up under an open sky,
he’d find someone wild to love, he’d have his own little boy,
and he’d open this boy’s hands tenderly in a stream,
let him feel silver minnows slip between his fingers,
that quick-finned light they’d hold together so briefly—
my father who then pressed his cheek to this bruised spine,
let his lips taste the light hidden there.

I don’t tell my daughter about these ghosts.
This doesn’t keep her from asking if the dead

stay dead in their caskets, their hands folded
in eternal origami, a broken-necked swan,

a bear shot in the head. She draws their eager
faces on the steamed-up mirror and they’re

happy just to be seen again. They’re looking
in the yellow bathroom warm with splashing

water and sandalwood candles dripping wax onto
my hands. The sound of small hands clapping.

The dead are bright, looking in from a dark
so long they’re miners crawling down my throat

without lanterns, spines lined with stars,
canaries to sing a last song to save the living.

The truth, my grandmother told me, is our bodies
are haunted, whether we invite it or not. By fallen

mirrors or fireflies rising or some other type of spirit
that can’t bear to live outside her skin, the way

her body won’t live outside the earth it’s buried
so tightly in. I want to keep holding my daughter

in my hands like an Easter palm, a fragile, lavender
moth that’s dying or terrified. First my grandmother

died, then this baby slid out into this world too early,
pulling with her my grandmother’s white hair. There’s

something in you that breaks when your body fails
your child, a sky splintering glass on the floor, one

you can’t paint back, so many shards you’re still
stepping on years later. When I sang about sleeping

doves in willow trees, it was to both of them.
When I sang, I imagined that when I die, I cocoon

back into my own mother, dropped into the heart
of her, in a field where what’s plowed is unplowed

overnight. I imagine my mind the color of what
I hate most about myself, that I’m always waiting

for someone to die. My grandmother said the dead
forget their names for a while. They mourn loudly

like Victorians shaking their jet beads. We all bow
our heads like nuns. If you can crush a creature

between your fingers, but don’t, you love it more.
Can you say your name? I asked my buried grandmother

and my baby who couldn’t nurse the same thing.
Parting my lips with her dried-in-fire hands,

my grandmother stepped between my teeth, shaking
her risen bones like she was at a party, hymning, 

I wanted to die at home. And I knelt, holding my baby
as if we were still the same body, and this is why

I mourn: because I go back to when I was a child
watching spirits walk the walls, crying for blossoms

made of water or light to put under my pillow,
to lay my head on something real grown

out of the dirt, so I wouldn’t feel so alone,
when I cried for everyone I would outlive,

headless ghosts squawking in my belly.

There is a park built in this city for people who want to show up with their ladders. 
A park for people who are always thinking, “Maybe that’s my ladder.”
My neighbors are buying ladders wherever they shop. 
They try putting their ladders sideways so they can walk into their neighbor’s bedroom.
        “Hello, neighbor!”
Their ladders have mirrors hung from each rung.
They claim to be in a relationship with the ladder, but it’s unclear what that will lead to.

My city prefers to be called Hope. But who is it that’s actually hopeful? 
People think ladders are hopeful. That’s optimistic. 

People are living and living and living and living. They are a living thing.
They are a simple organism that prefers looking up.
And over. And around. And into everyone’s business.
But not down. We all know it’s scary down there!

My city, all you think about are stars.
You are mountains at night blocking out the view of the stars.
You are an old soul. Your ladders are poorly aged.
And all you can do is imagine what down looks like when you see a ladder going by.
You keep calling yourself Hope.
I am not hopeful for you.
The word denizen is not hopeful. And that’s what you’re full of.
Yes, you were built on the side of a mountain. Every year, you start to fall off the mountain. 
Then, just in time, you catch hold of a ladder. 
Maybe that’s the extent of what you call hope.

I was a son. My house was a son. The city I walked in, the school books, the unexpected 
        enlistment in the United States Navy, my career as a technical writer, my life in the 
        public eye.
They were all sons fathered by other men. And then they were mine.
At least, for a moment.
But I was not to inherit a son.

In the tradition of my family, that starts with a single line drawn the length of a hallway,
there is one direction. And you never find out where it ends.

I inherited a staircase.
I carry it around. I wait at the bus stop on the top of my staircase. I go to the library 
        where only staircases are allowed.
I plan special evenings with my wife where I put the staircase right between us,
so we can hardly see one another. “I’m looking straight at a staircase. Where are you?”

*

When I was a boy, my Father gave up three of his fingers so he could inherit a son.
He told the whole world he would make him a failure.
For there is nothing more cruel than success.

Success is like a sky that was never allowed any staircases. Where do you go, then? 
How long do you stay?
And when you breathe in how do you know the sky going into you is the sky 
that was the meant for you sky, or at least the meant for that one part of you that could 
        fit sky, 
like if it was the sky in your lungs. Most people call that sky wish or determination, 
or maybe they call it that one time in your life something good happened and you knew it 
        was going to be the start of something real.
The future, the sky in your chest was the future. 

I’d breathed it in.
Then I inherited a staircase. I named it Ambition. 
And now I’m just a man who won’t inherit a son.
Think of a home that was built a long time ago in a college town. 
They converted it into apartments a few years ago. And they built a staircase on the 
        outside.
What would the end be like for that home? How often does it feel embarrassed just to be 
        standing?

*

How is it you’re supposed to raise a staircase in this day and age?
When my staircase was young, I built it a nursery. I put a planet inside there.
A planet that was just forming.
Which can be dangerous.
My wife told me I’d need to make the walls thicker. 
Thicker like thick concrete at the base of a tall building.

A staircase can’t breathe. It doesn’t need to breathe. We kept being afraid when it didn’t 
        breathe. We thought at least our staircase would breathe.

We had built a nursery where nothing could breathe.
That’s how you make a staircase feel right at home. 
You’ll grow up a straight line, staircase. You’ll always be a line in this family.

Where is your voice now 
that you have moved, you have migrated? 

            What has the land done to your tongue? 

It is not dirt I hear in your crumbling mouth. 
We did not bury you. When a tongue burns, 

            is it burned always? Does it hurt you? 

I can’t understand you, or you are not 
speaking; there is nothing to say or

            there is no way to say it. I wish you could 

write to me. I miss your script.
Where is your voice? I know more or less 

            where your mouth is scattered, 

where we scattered your mouth, but where 
are your teeth, where is the gold in them?

Sullen color in the cortex suffocates.
My organs are your secret destination.

I can’t establish which part of me is proof.
I measure the curling road visibly.

Seven springs in a row, you would find me 
at numerous parks, the library, in limbo.

I disappeared, came back, but not always
from the grave or a windy dream. 

Both American coasts
have seen my soul sit naked twice.

There’s an accrual of identity, something
rearranges schemes that make me nervous:

my envy, my need for too much comfort
in dark heat. 

I was made out of two conventional masses 
making temporary space. I recreated deceit.

The sticks we drew were cousins, birds & stars. 
Simple & essential.

What burns is a dialogue with stiff voices
& bones. I am losing my being,

a lost sock like a leaf, I was known.
I am correcting myself for tomorrow’s collision. 

I am closing my eyes with the lights on 
& it feels wrong. 

I have something to tell you. I sleep.
I slept on you. I exaggerated sympathy.

The months flicker.
I confiscate black magic & relief.
Some evenings, it’s quicksand
& ideas rough with lashes.
My mood is a mystery, 
a flying white fire of conversation.

These are mouths & necks,
these are just pictures:
casual summer dresses fading  
to night scars in sweaty street clothes,
greedy sex & theft.
The impulse to devour is rift 
& rapture, fear without doubts.
Denial is not closure.

Enter any suggestion—whispered comfort
if the killing heals. Grandmother’s road, a gold field. 
Every piece of agreement desires corruption,
satisfaction pockets its own cost.

I maintain a tiny dwelling 
made from sun-bone strings & art. 
I think I know what’s downtown. 
A new century?
I don’t want to rewrite the city.

Why is it that when I look at the dictators of South America
I see my grandfather, “El Turco” as they called him,
brown paper-bag skin, teeth and mouth ready to smile.
I see these generals of Chile or Argentina or Cuba, and in Fidel
I see my father, an old world Jew, black bearded, thin-faced,
ready for prayers, for oaths, for Sunday lunch with wine.
These are pictures of men I know. On CNN they tell me
about their dirty wars, their missions of disappearing
thousands, using electricity and hoods and dark vans
in the middle of the night, the tentacles of power covering
a whole nation in the darkness of what happens after a coup.
I have read about mangled bodies, blood and vomit on metal
slabs, priests giving benedictions for death squads, for infants
wrestled out of mothers’ bodies, stolen and given to señoras
with manicured lawns, pressed pastel suits, and rose gardens.
But I look at these pictures of the generals of South America
and see men I know and love and miss in death. And I wonder
about the daughters, the ones who sit in courtrooms now, and
listen to their fathers’ lives of torture and midnight shootings
and electricity in the soft blue places of the body, and I wonder
if they see their fathers still in those faces.

Cadavers with half-eaten legs,
a bloody hand, eyeballs oozing
out from cracking sockets. Bones,
they are bones, crab muscles,
rotting, languid tendons
half shredded through the middle
parts. There is a heart, somewhere
on the floor. They are still
alive, moving around, spiders
without eight legs. They have
taken over most of the room.
I have stopped trying to be
Frankenstein. I gave up
on a new species. The undead
are what I have left to work with.

She said it as if it were
a casual thing. Split the ashes,
one for the velatorio here, one for
the family mausoleum. Be sure
the bones are dust enough
to fit in a tin can so they do not
give you a hard time at security. 
This is the great divide, mitad
y mitad. Entiendes? Me repartes. 
This is how you bury your dead. 
There will always be two places. 
Siempre hay dos. The immigrant
always carries twin shadows. Siempre
esta la sombra. You cannot choose
North, South, English, Spanish.
You can only split the sorrow.
No hay medio, entiendes. The body
has life, but the dead, they have
little weight but sadness. Asi es,
mija, asi es. You have to travel to live. 
You have to travel to die.
Me tienes que dejar dos veces.
You have to leave me twice. 
El alma dividida en dos. One soul,
two eternities. She stops.
Then she asks about the dog.  

Why do they call
it that? The land
gets strip-searched, 
and the man coming
up from deep shafts.
Nothing his pickaxe
finds is his: not coal, not
diamonds, not salt.
All he owns
is the darkness
on his back.

I ran out of blue
paint, then gray.

The lady at the paint
store gave me tubes

of orange, free of charge,
so both my cavalries,

my two bugle boys,
my generals and all my

enlisted men, step
lively, impossibly, together—

in defense of one lustrous sun.

The shadow my mother
makes she makes
by mistake. Take
two, she says, rearranging
us in front of the camera,
in front of the brick
wall that is the sea we
are forbidden to drown
or swim in. All these
years we stare her
down, sullen, sun-
blinded. What was 
the photo meant
to document? Not
that we were there—
or anywhere—but that
someone was looking.

What matters of ocean is that it contains—caverns of ship carcass,
pissing kids, the whole night etched like an atlas on its surface. This
is what I want.
                         I want to keep the past like a pearl on my tongue,
to inherit the salt in my skin. I want to learn how horizon can curve
back into itself so I can say what ocean says of wreckage:
                                                                                             Dive into 
my chest, stay as long as you can breathe, chart this hull of bones.

Today’s the day the axle grease goes dry—
I board the fairground rides, on edge,
And hope like hell the safety harness holds
When The Power Surge flips my cart around.
All that keeps me from 9.81 meters
Per second squared are thirty-year-old parts
And labor, and the riders’ collective will.
What are the odds? I chant with every upwardheaval
Of The Plunger’s half-empty carriage,
Or when The Atomizer clocks its top G force.
Jesus may be my safety bar, but still
I wouldn’t mind some evidence
Of bureaucratic oversight.
I must be at least 4-foot-6 and willing to pit
Superstition versus throwing-caution-
To-the-wind. Contrapuntal back and forth.
The Viking Ship completely vertical.
A sprinkle of loose change. What are the odds.
Is luck the universe singling you out?
I hit all seven ducklings at the Shoot ‘Em Up
And won the stuffed blue dinosaur
That I clutch to my chest as the lift hill
Ratchets us to the inevitable
—The bolt shears, or the wire snaps—
Drop dive of The Comet.

I’d only planned to observe/ get in and out
anthropologic like/ find bones and buried
blood of past violent moons/ rehash
narrowly escaped burials/ anatomy
salvaging politicking and midnight alley fleeing
to create a past moment from a future rendition
of a coward’s embellishment/ like the way
I’m full of shit when I hand to God swear
that night in that yard that bullet almost ruined
this crown/ the way we’re full of shit
when we hand to God swear      
those threats from them boys that summer
didn’t have us shook/ you know

teaching college English only saves you
when you’re teaching college English
but when you’re playing tourist to a ruined colony
you may find yourself negotiating for life/
so when a body devoid of bullets ta-da poofs
glowing silhouette of mystification ghetto strolls
an interruption of nostalgic hyperbole
the fucking exact face you fed cereal to
you like to believe you’ve crossed over/
because you cried a funeral at that funeral
watched him lowered deep/ clinched
an almost perished tulip like the born again end
of an almost buried hand

he’s been on the wagon
for a moment sane we celebrate/
no cheers or toast or mention of being off/
we remember the relapse/ the way
the diseased body does this Parkinson’s thing/
like the time it took a whole song to land
that bottle to his mouth/ he amends
for moments at his bedside/ times we awaited
the call/ funerals I nightmared into
a eulogy speech almost memorized/ we celebrate
this miracle of moment and wagon
until he’s agony flushed in forgiveness
overcome with cure

It’s moon hour
when the governor of California
asks the bathroom mirror what to do, what to do
about the drought,
and the governor of the bathroom mirror
stands inside the oval frame, waiting
to answer for himself.  When they reach
in unison for the faucet,
it’s toothbrush time, it’s floss minutes, one’s right
is the other’s left, water flowing
twice into double drains.
I asked the residents to cut 
water use by 20 percent,
says the governor of California,
mimes with reversed mouth
his backwards twin,
but they refused to listen. 
Then the faucet sputters.  Then the sputtering
turns to coughing, turns
to wheezing, to desert sand
rushing into the sink, the longest
shushing, so the governor of the bathroom mirror
flees, runs until he runs
inside my home, into my tea green bathroom,
and motions toward the showerhead,
its perpetual dripping.  I read
his lips: You’re one to talk.  I am one to talk,
am talking now, expressing concern
and ambivalence.  I must have two sides,
two mouths, two minds,
two lives: one that worries about the future
while the other
sleepwalks through the fire.

Blanketed, couched mid-afternoon,
I shut my eyes.  On the other
side of the house, my sweatshirt zipper
ticked in the dryer, went silent

a few rotations, returned—tap
tap inside the humming appliance.
I liked it.  How it lulled. 
Then James Wright arrived:

I have wasted my life. Then the paused
video in my head, the hostage
kneeling in sand, knife to throat.
I opened my lids, and there between

the living-room curtains, behind that
narrow gap of glass,
a hummingbird floated in cold
October light—vanished.

When a baby bird fell
from a branch hung

over our house
and shuffled into the open

slider door, I cupped
it in my little hands

and set it outside, hoping
it would push its wings

against the sky
the same way a child pushes

the ground to stand up.
I listened for hawks.

I told myself its mother found it
and thought nothing of the human

scent caught in its feathers,
a bird’s fear of humans

an urban myth, a story
I still recite to owls

at night when they ask
me who I am. I tell them

about the boy who cried
wolf. I tell them to listen

to the moon at full howl,
to rain collecting itself

between my clavicles, how
it drowns the little bacteria

living on my neck. When
one sense goes out,

the others heighten. I hear
better at night. I don’t answer

the owls’ question. I am
a self-aggrandizing dance.

What I mean to say is all
the things I don’t see

or choose not to see
may yet find a happy ending.

The baby bird buried
its mother before it died

of natural causes. It is survived
by many children who sing

songs from high branches
and power lines. My mother

always told me to keep a few
secrets. Hide them in the world.

I’ve palmed her pregnant belly
and thought: this is violence

I can appreciate. It kicked me.
It kicked me. I felt it grow so slightly. 

I was born surrounded.

*

Scroll down map. Manna.
My first glimpse of the archipelago.

Directive finger pointed at the dispersal,
god-thundered Here, brown islands
breaking up blue parchment
like a birthmark.

*

My tiny toes tickled by tropical sand,
I faced a roaring power, charging relentlessly
but unable to reach me. Great strength
and its limits. 

Yet, drawn,
I refused to be brave against a great rapture.

*

Pacific Ocean. South China Sea. Babuyan Channel. Strait of Luzon.
Mindoro Strait. Bohol Sea. Sulu Sea. Celebes Sea. Philippine—.

*

We are not separated by water, rather connected by it.

*

My uncles each grabbed a limb—legs and arms—I feared being torn apart. A frog
pinned as an asterisk in science class, ready for the scalpel. Then swung like a
hammock until released into the monstrous mouth of the ocean. What they taught 
the city boy was how to flail.

*

I loved the briny taste of me. Sea salt crusted on my lips, skin. The outrigger canoe 
at sunrise, haul of the nets ornamented like Christmas.

*

Through the screen of urban night I try to envision the sea.

It is there, waves like sonar. Traveling hushed yet vibrating as underwater.

My mother was my original sea. I was divine, then microscopic.

I outgrew, turned into raft, boat, yacht.

How do I remain saline?

*

Before I was born
the world existed. 

(Imagine.)

I was set aside:
one cell,

ocean reconfigured.

The depths roused
my animal life.

Crawled.

Horseshoe crab with its
shell of chitin.

Before consciousness
ships had sailed
across histories.

*

I was then moved to the other end of the Pacific.

*

As I flew over it, on an American plane,
I reminisced of the summers shrimping
in the tributaries, of fishing boats laden 
with lobsters and sun-golden men, 
of the time I bicycled over a toad,
flattened on my hurry to the sea. 

Told us not to slope too far out open
windows or the devil would push us
to our deaths, then drag us to hell.

Scold us for going to bed with wet hair:
nightmare fishes and blindness. Under
towels we hid, rubbing our heads afire.

Warned us against gorging on custard
apples or duhat plums or cotton fruits,
which gave us the runs every time.

Spanked us with their coarse palms,
broom handles and bamboo paddles 
for our forgivable youthful trespasses.

Cursed us, therefore we learned how
to curse, blasphemy piercing through
our faint hearts, blossoming with fears.

First, there was the hole,
so small it seemed nothing
could fit. And yet, there it was,
a bee sharp hum, an invitation.
Alice leaned into it as you would
the wind. She bent
to the size of a caterpillar,
turning. She touched it
like she would a closed mouth,
or the petal of a living flower.
It didn’t even occur to her
to leave it alone.

*

I’ve fallen in dreams
and never died. I’ve fallen,
losing my blue dress to the greedy
air, felt the delightful untethering,
a hungry skin
unsheathed. I’ve fallen
from the ledge of an archway,
like a loadstone dislodging,
dragged the stronghold
to rubble. I’ve fallen
from the arms of queens,
forgotten as the plea
for escape. I’ve been pushed.
I’ve jumped. I’ve slipped
on a slant of light,
my shoe grinding against
the concrete like teeth.

But never had I watched
myself fall as if outside
my own body, calm as a clock,
thinking, Well, there she goes.

*

Skirts akimbo, hair wild
as the sudden flood, Alice was
oddly beautiful in the way
everything broken is
beautiful—the cracks
and shadows of a patched tea cup
like blue veins whispering
in an old woman’s thigh.

*

And with me fell
a drawer full of loose keys clinking,
exactly the sound of my son’s xylophone,

and the red guitar given to me
by a former lover, carefully grained
wood I would never learn to play.

The gray onesie my son wore
home from the hospital
ballooned like an empty sack of flour.

My grandmother’s lamp
my husband had always hated
soared by with its tacky green shade.

I saw the piano that wouldn’t play,
the crib with the splintered slat,
the dryer with its cyclical speech.

Then, things disappeared,
replaced by the careful black angles
of the words I dared not say
           
the name of the child we wouldn’t have,
the address of a house in which we would not die
together.

*

How could Alice know that she would not
scatter like playing cards? How could she
have known that the ground
would not break her
into pieces like so many
oyster shells crushed
into the sand?

She was not what she had
expected.

And yet, she knew
that this had been
done before. She knew girl
after girl, in blue pinafore, lips
flamingo pink, had wandered through
the strange wilderness of her own garden
and fallen, quick as the flash of a rabbit’s tail.

*

Oh Alice, oh world of Alices,
on the cusp of drinking
the unknown,

remember me,
praying for the mushroom-soft earth,
praying for it not to be
a dream, but a parable.

Once My Mother
put the phone in the freezer
while we were talking
and closed the fridge door.

On my end, a white quiet
came through the receiver—
the moment after music stops
though the swan-maidens’ feathers
still lift and fall,

while on her end
the phone had disappeared
but she couldn’t tell me
because the phone had disappeared.

I made the usual twenty-minute drive in twelve,
found her dog-in-a-storm, wide-eyed,
keening, traced the cord
across the kitchenette, said “Sweetheart,
sweetheart, it could happen to anyone”—
heat and weight of the yoke
coming down.

The crabs seethe in the bushel basket.
Their bodies are serrated armor
colored Crayola blue and red, shiny
and brittle as Bakelite cigarette cases.
They are defined most by their claws,
an ironic capitulation to the problem
with hardness. One by one, Grandma
grabs them with tongs and drops them
into the pot filled with cold beer.
But one gets loose. It hits the floor
and all the life comes back to it. It waves its claw
and scuttles. Later, my grandmother
will swear the fright this gave her
stamped the image of a crab
on the belly of my father.
Because our bodies are not enough,
they must be made
to include stories.
But what of the crab?
No one ever says: The end
is forgotten, the story’s purpose
fulfilled. For all we know,
something dangerous is still moving
in the body of the house.

Loss is cruelest to the tongue,
shards of scorch in rancid oil,

lemon gone flat at the back
of the fridge, or the bent tine

of a fork dragged across the lip
to add a bead of one’s own blood,

suckle of rust and salt of the torn flap.
For years I mourned departures

with swiftly dilated views, but this
one burns through every pore. Slash

and sear drain all trace from what
I flail to keep.  How many

seams must I stitch up quick
in the skin of the fading print

to keep the wild hyacinth aglow
around the impress of our steps?

And how many hands do I need
to catch the mossy spritz

from the whelm of icy falls?
Quick, quick, give me something light

and sweet, three dozen kites
lifting surfers from the beach.

Oh give me back those two
white peaches we couldn’t eat.

I was redeemed for a moment
like the martyr with his cocked head,

his shoulder dislocating along
the wood. Not the first time I heard angels

filling the humid places,
the Angel of Relief holding my face

in the garden to comfort me who-was-called,
a child on the cusp of all

that thereafter. Along the marshland,
my feet flickering along the path,

along the salt reek, the putrid fish
half-gorged, the white wading birds rising

up into abstraction before
the monastery, that house of light, my house

of tainted stained light and stolen
relics—a shard of saint bone, I am told—

I found behind ivy the weeping statue,
and found myself again going back

into the confessional a fourth
time that month, into that dark mouth

at the end of childhood,
closing the gate of childhood,

When did you touch yourself?—

his coarsely-shaved chin moving
behind the filigree of that screen—

and how?

Banner of colors, slung like a war flag,
district defined by what’s not there, by whom,

where long before dawn
a man would knock

on each door to ask for a place
to place his faith in for the night—

Brothers, we were men dreaming
of greener, wetter pastures.

But I have come too late. Cast-offs,
kissed by more than salt, I miss

the memory of you, of a haven I never knew
that buttressed these streets.

Friendly fire, parasites &
tropical disease, depleted
uranium lodged
under the skin, exposure
to pesticide, mustard gas,
sarin, combat stress, muscle
twitching, memory loss
& the whole host
of “mysterious symptoms”
experienced by troops
located downwind
from burning oil wells
& chemical weapons
demolition depots—
& although my father evaded
these dangers simply
because he was deployed—
quartermaster & answer man—
with a tactical airlift
refueling wing, as far
as he can figure,
the persistent ear trouble
goes back to his days
in the desert.  Who’d
need an official report
when logic alone suggests
the causes of hearing loss
are as simple as noisy
engine rooms & aircraft
uptake & of course sand
& dust & whatever drifted
into the synthetic cells
of protective plugs & Mickey
Mouse ears & if it’s his
fate to deal with systematic
antifungal treatment for
an itch that’s untreatable, so
it goes, never a bad that
couldn’t be worse. Distant
as the whir of choppers,
the what what what my father
no longer asks, having learned
to turn his one good ear
toward or away as the
conversation suits.  No doubt
you recall the ticker tape
parades, free passes for
amusement parks, cruises,
hotels & other deep discounts
by which we could show
sufficient thanks, seal our
belief in fair compensation.  
Headsong & humsickness
are a few of the names
given to earworms,
those sticky tunes you
can’t get out of your head
the product of some memory-
based cortical itch. With
luck you can locate
a good eraser tune to shift
the stubborn soundtrack.

A dog ran across the street and a girl
hurried after him, calling Roger,
Roger. The mechanic struck a match
on his boot-sole. The butcher
wiped his hands on his apron

stained pink. In the fields
outside town the birds chattered
and then a gun cracked, then silence,
then the birds chattering again.
Faint, but certainly a kind of music—

even the young man heard it
and lifted the rope from his neck,
stepped down carefully off
his chair and opened the window.
Yes, a woman was singing somewhere

and his lips parted too, though
he did not know the words.
It was the first day of May.
A train clattered by. Not far away
the war was starting.

Promethea

Midsummer vibrato. Nightfall of yellow
poplar, spicebush and sassafras. Sex
at altitude will end in the underbrush.
Our next subject: the moon.


Luna

All day you horded your shadow,
but at dusk, the spider web
in the low branches of the birch caught
and held, for an instant, the sun.


Grape Leaffolder

I lie curled in the leaf, antennae to yesteryear.
The joy of not-to-be-seen rivals the joy
of not-to-have-been. I missed you this morning,
light-long and blinding horizon. And wind,
wind infinitesimal at the base of the stalk
where passes through dreaming the noonday
thunder of the marching ants’ hooves.


Three-banded Fairy

Arrest and suspension. Pasture 
and cloud band, one moment frozen
in the sepia light of the 1970s,
a lakeshore, a blanket spread on the grass
and the smell of smoke from a camp fire.
Could you wake now, it would be resurrection. 
A flutter, a stir. Your mother’s hair.
Your father’s voice. A word
whispered out of the dirt.


Virginia Ctenucha

I'll begin within you, your smallest darkness.
Saints are destroyed by their ecstasy, such exuberance
as mine. The cells divide. I squirm in the loam.
The cells divide again! My wings!
A tiny breath unsettles the dust. Then rupture,
metastasis. Metamorphosis in May.


Salt Marsh

Just a scrap of white silk in the clover.
A gentleman will wear a white
bow tie after nightfall for the most formal
occasions—an inauguration perhaps,
or the sinking of an ocean liner. 
Shall we fly or shall we feed?
Think of me fastened at your dead father’s throat.


Darling Underwing

I’m a broken chip of bark, the skeleton of a leaf,
whatever’s left-off and useless, and anyway, Lord,
you’re already glutted on the Autumn smoke of burning
bodies. Turn your face from me. A loving father
won’t spare the rod, but I’m fatherless and past
correction. These colors help me hide.


Yucca

The meanest flower that blows, and day wombed
in its underfolds. The thing I've waited my whole life
to tell you can now go unsaid. Lowly, lovely, love.
Forestall. Wait for me on your side
of the morning. For now, a marvel in the meadow:
the last light twists on a single petal’s edge.


Carolina Sphinx

A dying grub. What’s lowlier than pupating
inside this desiccated shell? I’m an amputated
digit in the dirt, nectarivorous at night.
I hover with remarkable stillness above the flowers
on headstones—drink those
severed currents. All night the dead flutter past
your window on thousands of wings.


American Dagger

So serious, son. A little tact, a little circumspection—
try not to head straight for the flame.
Eventually it’s the slow burn
of aftermath anyway, the occasional return—

the play of light, a step in the dance, a certain silly song.
As you fly home for Christmas, it’s John Denver
and a bag of peanuts, dusk over Colorado,
red snow-streaks on the summits.
You can talk to God and listen to the casual reply. 


Webworm

I’m coiled deep in the skittery
paper-shuffle of communal life.
Sententious, my hair
parted behind. And though dull as you please—
the white hallway, the pleasantries
exchanged in the elevator—
I’ll wait long enough to lap
your blood from a leaf.


Coddling

The bottom-line: you’ll never come first.
The theme is need and I devour. Apple, walnut,
pear—O sad suburbia! O grim internia,
distant dawn! Who’ll be with us in the round
of our need? Who’ll be left to draw the curtains?
Who’ll be left to mow the lawn?


Common Sheep

Who are you that moves among these shades?
Aaron, come off it! Here we are at the swamp’s edge,
and here are the salmonberries. See the cattails?
Pull one from the mud. Wipe the frog-spawn
and strip it to the stalk. The root tastes like cucumber. 


Silver-spotted Ghost

I fly unseen through your interstices
of expectation. And with no love
for the lights of the living.
Glimpse me if at all sidelong and streamside
at dusk. Then meet me again just past
the lines of your own disappearing.


Clouded Crimson

Night again. Catechisms of unasked questions and ungiven answers.
Want death to be the fallacy—and dream? Or the dream
to be the fallacy—and death? Refrain.


Fall Cankerworm 

Refrain. At last the marvel and the terror, the wordless You.
Be still. The new muscles twitch. The wings scrape at the shell.

The farmer traded a wheel of cheese for a skinny rabbit with bloodshot eyes. All winter it huddled in a small hutch in the kitchen. Neither the farmer nor his wife had heard about the epoch of reincarnation. Neither knew that the fox raiding the chicken coop was their son killed in the war, or that the mouse leaving a Cyrillic of shit on the clean sheets was the damned poet Mandelstam. Neither knew that the white rabbit they were fattening up on sweet potatoes and clotted cream was Stalin himself. “The heart of a rabbit is a dark forest,” the farmer read one night in an old almanac, in a chapter on the secrets of haruspicy. He looked up from the book and studied his wife standing over the cage, clutching a stack of yellowed index cards. Lapin a la moutarde. Civet de lapin. Lapin a la cocotte. She cooed each recipe like a lullaby, and the rabbit stared up at her, its pink nose twitching its invectives.

Parable

      We are not strangers to
the double.The chair
is not a chair;its saint
is not a saint.The decoy
in the stagecoachdistracts
the gangfrom
their leader’slong march to the
gallows.What a cowboy
 won’t want to
know:the villain
is a decoy,the gallows
a decoy,the handsome
      ten-gallon hat of the sheriff—
decoy.As close to
what we wantas possible.  Close to
what we think we
worshipwhen we worship.
The location almost fixed.


Affect

The showgirl lifts her skirts.  In her
black satin garter: a knife.  Her aim,

spectacular.  The rope, sliced
through.  The location, almost

fixed.  The villain, almost
saved.  A trusty horse loping

aimlessly in the wings.  Goddamn
the fatal delay.  Everyone is thirsty. 

The sun searches for a crucible. 
The crowd won’t leave the square. 

Only when they collapse into them-
selves can we begin again, correctly.


Vision

Meanwhile, the gang is unaware of new beginnings. 

Meanwhile, the stagecoach shimmers
in the distance. Heat has its way

with light. Everyone waits
in the cliffs above the canyon. Everyone
wishes for water. Horses are spooked

but stupid. A driver is wary but then
dead. No one can trust his

eyes. To go thirsty for a double. 
A stagecoach is not

a crucible. It burns as quickly as the man inside.


Representation

The preacher steps forth.

      Therefore speak I to them
      in parables: because they seeing
      see not; and hearing they hear
      not, neither do they understand.

The crowd rises from the dust.

The villain continues to resemble.

The showgirl could die
of shame. How is it, after all
these takes, that she is the one
cursed to fail? The sun scorches
her skin, dressed as she is
to excite.


Bliss

             The villian       who is not
          a  villain was  captured (in the
       first place) because he remained in
      Bisbee when he could have fled. He
         remained in Bisbee to love or to
            sketch a woman not a decoy
               not a barmaid not a show
                  girl, not the double,
                        no. This one
                           here. No,
                              here.


Affirmation

The villain is nota villain. 
The sheriffis not a saint.  The stagecoach is
nothing buta prison. 
The showgirl
isn’t right for the scene.The gang gives several
marketingexecutives profitable
ideas regardingbank credit
promotional campaigns.The gallows, the crowd, the preacher       
 don’t matter.  And still,
the showgirl stands beneath a high noon sun sharpening her knife.

You haven’t killed yourself because you’d have to
commit to a single exit. What you wouldn’t give
to be your cousin Catherine, who you’d watched twice
in one weekend get strangled nude in a bathtub onstage
by the actor who once filled your pre-teen fevers
with lush-lipped Britishisms. Backstage, he talked to you
without his hairpiece and was unafraid of how your eyes
measured his skull. Law & Order: Criminal Intent put her
severed head in a bucket, pulling the towel back
on her clotted bangs a second before the cut
to Honda’s Year End Clearance Event.
And you swear that was her Cygnus-tattooed calf flailing
on the SyFy Network as the mutated piranhas
swarmed like sexed-up galoshes. Some days,
you’re convinced she’s the blur of the passerby behind
the city comptroller interviewed on the 11 o’clock news,
the last lighted window squinting on the high-rise,
the silhouette the pigeons spatter over
the elevated subway platform in Astoria where the bakery
underneath releases the ache of its scent
which anyone it touches will eventually die from,
the ache of how it can do nothing but ascend.
She’s been nominated for an Emmy for her portrayal of
the concerned line between your doctor’s eyebrows
as he listened to the giant, sodden moth trapped
between your shoulders, the ruin you carry
around with you like a speech you’re always prepared
to give. How you’re prepared to be Woman at Bottom of Ravine,
T.O.D. unknown, Woman Found in Motel Room
and It’s a Goddamned Shame, Understudy to Woman
Overdosing, Woman in the Prop Photo in the Wallet
Catherine takes out of her coat and lays gently on the balustrade
before the black sky pours down its scroll of names.

i.

The apple in fact a sickly yellow freckled bronze where death began
its campaign arrows hitting where it lives on the bough death
successful and from those weapons and their men
a victory cry arises  Fallen there in the grass is it meant now
to fulfil its purpose on earth but what is any thing’s purpose  Does a mother’s
for instance arrive when the first wail arrives her own life
ended and she must as apparition live and die again for her child

ii.

A barefooted girl travels the tenuous miles from her childhood
home to her marriage bed  She begins her service dirt scrubbed loose
by her washing meat pounded under her hand boiling of
potato tearing of lettuce  She cuts herself along with the radish her kin
eating recklessly then hurrying away to other affairs leaving her reflected
in bare wet plates  She continues to eat alone small-shouldered
at the table  I turn around as I didn’t then I see her there

iii.

Between a mother and daughter comes a moment of capitulation
When the girl is thirteen the older hands over her beauty
oils leached from her hair entering the daughter’s making it shine
while decay spots the apple-fair flesh of the ma’am defeated despairing
cleaning the mirror to no use her anger increasing  Would this moment occur
in nature the young would either be left to starve in the wilderness
or be killed teeth at the neck by the mother her competitor

iv.

In a painting when all elements are harmonious and feeling
yields to true utterance causing an arrow of recognition to pierce deeply
a stranger  When the colors and composition work as one to frame
that clarity a mathematical rightness called the Golden Mean is achieved
She was capable of deep feeling without art-making  Deer feeding
in the field moved her turkeys rising like quarter notes across the road
Her voice breaks better than poetry when she tells the anecdote

v.

Too shy to work in the world scraping and knitting sacrifice became
her talent yet she hated her home yet it was her realm  She found
liminal pleasure in the blackberries and raspberries that grew wild
in the wood making jellies the kitchen opaque with steam suffused with hot
sugar  She poured great energy into this and when it ended
one year with no announcement she seemed not to mourn it  Her pride
became her children’s accomplishments a kind of self-hatred

vi.

Killed snakes with an axe then chopped wood she roused no sexual
feeling in her husband thus become her own man which meant she was no
longer a wife in the traditional sense  It was when she departed into
a fog she became happiest  How bitterly she wanted
the peace of an hour but a child-sized organ bleated Beautiful Dreamer
somewhere a stain was seeping in  She came with her rag and her listening
with nowhere to go and her children needful

vii.

Sidesaddle on the river’s lamp-lit banks in the City of Lights a bit
apple in one hand in the other a nearly spent cigarette not knowing if I am
choosing life or death the white fruit or black ash  I was taught
by example not to value my own existence meaning I care as much as I can
but this living seems a pretense when the connection to something lost
and sadder seems truer though the decorations could not be more moving
meaning my will to remain on earth is mysterious

Inside the rust of the dilapidated machines,
where the sun scars the grass into paper,

a sparrow remakes from bone
and iron-shards, the hands of men.

An assembly line is a collage
of well-ordered gestures, perfected

mimicry, a rhythm collapsing
against itself. And the sun

is melting the city—brick by brick.
Its rays a form of blur

on the sparrow's wings, stripping
away the plumage to reveal

the cartilage, like a weight-obsessed
teenager, running through the city's

twisting gulleys at dawn, ignoring
the dangers of the raven-black emptiness

that envelops the sleeping porches. A
group of women in uninterrupted white

in the middle of the street: wailing
in loud chants, tearless. Across the metro-station,

in an unnamed alleyway, another woman
refuses to shut her door. A path ajar

for her son to walk in. Without
having to be stopped by the rituals

of knocking. Knocking and waiting
for someone else to unbolt. Only

he was killed—encountered, four
decades and half ago. His bones

scattered in this estuary indistinguishable
from conch-shells that pebble

our paths to distraction. The sparrow
keeps count of each of its falling

feathers, bends its neck to spot
through the shadows of cigarette smoke,

its limbs morphing into a kind
of terracotta. A meticulous carving,

in whose catacombs
the sparrow will excavate

a neon-light map. A sliver
of glass inside the sparrow's

mouth, a broken light bulb, a furcated
tongue—the sparrow is learning

to render otiose the morning-whistle,
the dust raised by the sound

of the several feet marching
daily towards complicit labor, while

in a city thousands of miles away,
a soldier's pellet gun, shot

in our names, blinds a fourteen-year
old girl. What rages through

this city is the opposite of storm­—a
silence growling louder and louder.

Inside the abandoned factory-yard,
a laid-off worker splits open

the photographer-girl: an
inheritance of an incompetent rage

against anything that makes
suffering beautiful. In a house

in another neighborhood
across the city, a couple

is sitting down to dinner. The
meaningless jokes they will share,

is no compensation
for the certitude with which

they disagree with each other, yet
does not dare to break apart.

Robert Schumann is Mad Again &
mother is dead.
What of the requiem wood,
the requiem grasses?
 
No one explained, the
stomach calls
in empty loon voices
over the pond
as you fall
forever toward the water. Exactly, mother
is dead.
 
At the requiem breakfast
Schumann is mad again.
 
I had expected less…

The long memory, spirals in a night sky—
cold and focused
taking her shit in Plato’s cave—
the newspapers like living rock
have a last question, are forever, or…
scattered; red twine
bundles like stacks of folded trousers

in some future work camp beside a river.
(One of Man Ray’s girlfriends,
the suspicious blonde, scratching
a small shadow of breast—
should have been enough,
she muttering, fuck-that
the simple flirty) sonnet.

The whale briefly strands itself
on land—   opening
its mouth, I hear the laughter of the sea,
of a holy man down
in the fish caverns.

There are nuns in primitive bathing costumes
doing calisthenics in the beach sand—
up in the green castle,
in the dungeon’s hallway
of shadows, the ghost of my father
is warning me against something…

I think
he’s in league with the sweating nuns.
They want me to exercise
beyond the amusing pulleys of superior oblique.
And to drink less wine.
Jumping-jack Sprat says
You can kiss my ass, his fat wife
and I have run off
to Reno with her sick cat.

Euclid was alone at his poor supper. He witnessed
his two eyes wandering
to the point of collision, all of this
a simple reflection in a bowl of soup: the natural
triangle that worries itself
into the brow with strong oarsmen
pulling Euclid down the river that seems all wrong.

The rocking of the boat in the cold water
promises nausea—a white crane flying at night
impossibly low over them—he thinks, shit,
there must be some mistake.
There was vertigo and a fall in a stone tub.
An open pit burial
with a red false flag of fish bladder.He asked for a cake of blue thistle, being alone,
instead they gave him fog and a now burning boat.
I said he was alone and you’re asking but what about
those two oarsmen—well, you know
death is an unreliable narrator at ease
with the last arc minutes
of Mrs. Vesica Piscis, the great mother
who is alive within us all.
Smile. Please, smile. I know.

Water came before thirst,
before sand, the sea,
before the tide, the moon,
and sun before Earth.

Bodies lived before love,
and tender leaves before
a body ate—raw food
before the age of fire.

Death came seconds after
life, but some life won’t die—
a colony of sea grass older
than the marsh that roots it,

a fungus in Oregon larger
than a blue whale. Fish
drown in oil, seeds mutate,
a bird falls from acid skies—

the soul needs a soul-
making vale, the lion a grass-
fed lamb. Dear thirst,
dear life, dear lack—before

desire, the planet was no
gorgeous world, Eden
no poem, the tale no Troy,
Helen a girl herding goats.

Once we walked next to a river full of silver fish
and factory run-off and knew we were there.
 
We didn’t consider backdrop or backlighting.
We walked. We fretted about the carcinogens.
 
We imagined being thirty, moving to Belgium.
Overhead a tree frog made its ridiculous small sound
 
and maybe we laughed, or maybe we welled up
for a second, the futility of that noise
 
against the river’s steady pulse, but we heard it.
Once someone took a picture of us before
 
we were ready, standing by a lake, a dogwood,
a field of sunflowers, and it was two weeks until
 
we got that film developed, and then there we were
off-guard in front of some beautiful thing,
 
sharp-skinny or round with youth, hands
outspread in a strange almost-egret angle,
 
hair hanging to our waist, maybe, or buzzed
close like we did that summer, open-mouthed
 
as if we were saying something, which
we almost certainly were. Now we’re never
 
saying something in the photos.
How powerful we are now. How careful.
 
The construction of a world requires
diligence. Is that tulip tree the best tulip tree?
 
Is that moon the best moon?
Do our crow’s feet show, and if so,
 
is it in the most self-assured way? What about
the sky behind us, is it red enough for revelation,
                                                                                   
are the streaks coming through?
Is that mountain significant enough?
 
We’ve seen others like it. These dandelions
are furred and lovely in the afternoon sun, but
 
our hands look old. Try again. When did
our skin start to gather like that?
 
When did the moon get so flawed? Look
at that photo by the lake, the tree, the field.
 
We were there once, and our hands,
our strange hands, were so perfect. 

For you, I’ll explain
            the dream:

lemons turning away
            from green—

bright cargo and
            heavy; they fall,

they unhinge,
            they sail like

a hundred swift ships
            sack and burn

then say goodbye. 
            For you, I’m through

with need—last, enough,
            no more.   Except

we’re never without
            that song.

A clique of flies
            core to center. 

Sweetness as sweetness
            does in our body

hides under sharp
            white ribs. 

A singing of tongues,
            so many I lose count.

            –––

I count; I remember
            a singing

of tongues. 
             Their hum.  Flies

circling a mason jar. 
            Lamb’s ear heat. 

Voiceless breath—
            open, cover, confess;

this wanting and
            the mouth it carries

across flesh.  Little ship
            of hunger.

I’m rapt as a child
            hiding in leaves,

reading reds and yellows,
             new roof and walls

luxuries of a home
            made of storms,

of rivers, of droughts.  
            He pretends

to be swallowed.
            He is. 


            –––


We’re not
            inside a whale

or cormorant. 
            We don’t live

in tin drums
            of any belly, hull

or hell, where it’s hard
            to tell dark

from dark.
            The problem is light—

a new kind of blind—
            my hands

turn touch to sight
            and like waking see

shape before color
            luck before fate.

And the mind, heartbeat
            slow, awake,

turns a day into           
            might. 


            –––


You might     
            with touch

fill the sailcloth
            of my neck,

keel to nest and
            launch to sea,

to island, to palm, 
            to sand bleached

as bone this body
            of possibility:

our life away   
            from life.

Think shipwreck.
            Think crash

and shore, deck timbers
            we gather

to burn, and, without
            rescue, live.     


            –––


Let’s live
            upstate, spell

ourselves in ice. 
            In a quiet village 

aproned owners salt
            a path to their door.  

Pines send snow below. 
            White breath,

white room.
            If I think of sea,

tremolo and trade
            the sunstroke waves

light as lemons
            I’ll say nothing.  

I’m anchor
            and joy.   


            –––


I fear no anchor
            inked to arm

or neck when I
            undress; no

double barbs of stay
            and stay, flesh

never transparent
            as a house

without walls. 
            Each body lives

a hundred lives
            and is silent 

about where
            it sleeps.


            ­–––


We sleep. 
            We live. 

We go back
            to the root

of desire—
            from the stars—  

as we could lash
            light to skin,

and bear it.
            For you

this dream.


On New Year’s Eve
five thousand blue nudes fell dead
in Beebe, a small Arkansas town.
It was all over the news—
everyone woke New Year’s Day to naked bodies
strewn over cold concrete and yards.

The blue nudes dropped onto mailboxes, dented cars,
their busts posed with spines bent
backward, bare to winter.

One blue nude fell onto a woman walking her dog around midnight.
It both shocked and depressed her.

Experts say
it might have been fireworks
that frightened the nudes,
unable to see in the darkness of a coming year.

Is this the end?

Reporters go away, scientists
explain, artists weep,
poets write poems about miners
and canaries­—they try to create a myth
or metaphor to understand—

the ending contains blue fingers over blue faces,
a feeling that we’ll all go on with life
even as doomsayer rolls
off grainy tongues,

the results are coming in.

The experts collect and count
the bodies, while a mother counts the number
on her lawn. She tells her children not to play
with the poor, dead things.

There are many ways to love a person.
In 1993, he wrote the words “Toni” & “Morrison” in a letter to me.
I was at a residency.
The same prize that ennobled her enabled him to see twelve letters differently.
The word “Nobel,” so noble it kept ringing in his ears.
Years before the prize, before her nobility in the world’s eyes, my father was the person         
            who heard the name “Toni Morrison” & asked, “Who’s he?”
He never read one word Toni Morrison wrote. 
After the prize, he never did either.
But the words “Toni” & “Morrison” entered his lexicon.
He flexed the seventeen muscles in his hand to make twelve letters of the English
            alphabet occur in a particular sequence.
Her name became our cryptonym, a silent hymn we wrote to signal allegiance, a
            code we sent back & forth during a war that was otherwise raging.
I was living alone in the woods of Texas.
Walking the red dirt roads so reminiscent of past wars, people stared at me as if I were
            the enemy.
Most had only seen a face like mine on TV.
One man had seen me, years before, in a jungle.
I was a trigger for the time he pulled a trigger & I died.
There are many ways to kill a person.
At the nearest store, I asked for tortillas.
None of the clerks knew what they were.
Texas is big enough to hold most of Vietnam, Cambodia and a large chunk of Thailand. 
There are many ways to live there.
I went back to the cabin & wrote Toni Morrison a letter.
Imagine the hundreds of young women living in dangerous territories who must have
            done the same.
An army of us writing to her, asking: What are the possibilities for me, behind
            all these trees?
There are many ways to ask a question.
One day, her name in his envelope, written in his ink, came back to me.
There are many ways to answer.

We each carried a groan in our throat. 
We ferried them across every water, 
made ourselves into safe boats. 
Most times they sat silent. 
Only at night did we untether them 
note by note. They pillared above us 
in the dark, some floating into the shape 
of a dog, some of a horse, some of a goat. 
They made a moat with their moaning. 
Beneath oak trees we slept and feared 
no predators. When we woke, 
we re-roped them into our mouths. 

Each groan had a scent of its own. 
Too many smelled sweet. 
Yours smelled of lilac and burning hair. 
And yours smelled of asphalt and wet grass. 
And mine of sour fur. Mine of barren orchards 
and miles of paw-marked soil.

Once after many years I put a blade 
to my throat and begged the groan to stop 
but it only changed key. Coyote whine. 
I mercied and it clattered back down 
my throat like loose plaster. Thereafter 
we lived like beast and master. 
When it ran I ran after it faster. 
When I lay at its feet it called me 
sweet names. 

The forest was long and song-
less. All the animal calls had been cut
down. They lay in stacks along the path:
songbird bindle, parcel of foxes’ throats,
packet of bobcat hollers. We tried
to recall them but they wouldn’t come.
Our own calls were hollow and numb
in our necks, and what would come
to that kind of call?

The forest was very tall and all
the trees hummed with some new hum
we couldn’t name. It pinned us through
the lungs. The air ambered around
our arms as we swung them, walking.
The air slowed and syruped and heavied
our mouths like a tongue.

We did not know how the forest
became a museum, mausoleum,
or when. We were still imagining
the bird would respool itself, the fox
refur and return, panting, to our hands.
We were still imagining a clearing,
a meadow, a door waiting for us
somewhere at the end.

Poor illusion. Poor selves, caught
in our wooden cells. The forest
was a forest so long ago
it may not ever have been real.

They say it doesn't exist
that it's not like
 
     eating a lemon—
 
pain, unlike  sour
cannot be called
upon command. It's
always
 
     a lemon
 
they use, as if all pain
is the same as this
one  citrus  fruit. We
 
grew them
     in our backyard.
The tree
     was full of them.

I am lolling on the banks of an idiot river.
Soon there will be more just like me,
carrying baskets and searching.
When I walk the river’s bank
in the morning, I can see the river softly
staring at me with its wet eyes. What does it know,
having had nothing? Having lost nothing?
I turn to rest, laying my head
on the soles of my shoes
so I can run away in my dreams. When I wake,
the idiot river is standing over me,
its soft face shimmering. It does not speak
so I ask what it wants
and the river motions to the land
behind me, the mountains and desert
to the west, the tall cities to the east.
I say what we all must, eventually, admit
when we are in love. The river remains mute.
It takes nothing. Offers nothing.
I suggest we work toward an even exchange
of our labors. I will speak for us both
if only the river will carry me
on its broad back toward wherever it is
that it is going. Still, the river doesn’t speak.
It begins to offer a low whistle beneath the trees.
I can give you almost everything.

One country may hide another country idling inside it like a locomotive in the mountains, a surveyor peering from a distance above the humming cars, searching for signs of how or when you might return, for the manner of the field turning between the mountains, the country a quilt knitting across itself, the surveyor adjusting his tripod and level, his bright vest signaling that he is, after all, a part of the country he’s looking both from and into. And you are, too. You know this,
though you know neither how he arrived, nor you. You wonder after his home, wonder why he left, why he stopped so near or was sent just past the foothills, which don’t to you seem like warnings of anything; you wonder how he moved into the mountains, the country proud of its countryside and how it brims with life—though life, of course, is a warning of death, and death a warning of life, the trees a warning to the sky that the ground is reaching up like a child holding
a wand it waves at the mobile of planets spinning in the low sky above its head. Inside the child’s head the bones shift slowly as plates inside the earth, which shakes each time the locomotive’s engine prattles absent its forward motion. In the sleeping car you see a man talking to a grandmotherly woman holding her bag in her lap, her white gloves spotless despite the heat. Behind her you can see the boy playing jacks, though they’ve been so long out of fashion you wonder how he came
to find them. By chance, you imagine. And you suppose it’s not by chance that he only has one eye, blue in its socket like a planet, and there must be a story to this. You know it. You want to ask his mother, though she is absent, the boy letting the ball fall off the pullout table he was playing on before sliding it back up upon itself and pushing it out of sight as he pushes slowly onward toward sleep. One dream may hide another dream. One dream may hide another country and its methods,
and from where you sit, the weather picking up over the peaks, pressing its white breath into the ground, deer running past the locomotive as it lays there laboring through such restless sleep, you can only believe in the mountains, the wind, the warm breath of laboring underneath the snow. When it melts, you know, the ground will seem to rise, just as steam rises above the locomotive, the surveyor barely noticing it now as he looks over the landscape, the planet, hidden, as it is, at intervals, by what’s inside it.

A thought enters
your head. It imagines itself
 
growing like an infant.
 
How wonderful it is to be born!
How lovely and unrepentant
 
it is to live.
 
You must remember also
there is the love
 
that grows in the wet soil
 
and must be
tended to thrive
 
against the frost.
 
(I, too,
numb to the apples
 
rotting against the ground.)
 
What’s important now is we
recover
 
our senses.  

Vapor, cell, wish,

          spot on the lung
          roiling. 

Ash cloud, dust cloud,
lilac smoke.

Shape of ache,
granular disappearance.

Small weight of crushed
bone.

Down South, you say the devil is beating his wife.

In Hindi and Singhalese: the fox’s wedding.

Orphan’s tears, in Lithuanian; in Arabic, the rats are getting married.

In the Philippines, a tikbalang’s wedding: the demon horse taking him a mate.

In Finnish, a wedding in hell; in Polish, the witches are making butter.

Sun shining, rain falling: quick, what do you say?

In Zulu, monkey’s wedding; in Afrikkans, jackal is marrying wolf’s wife.

In Rio, snail’s wedding day: all slick and silvery, a slither of rainbow above the favelas.

Ghost rain, in Hawaiian; in Armenian, the wolf is giving birth on the mountain.

Bright sun, hard rain: the devil’s at it again, whaling away on his trouble and strife.

A fun-fair in hell, if you speak Dutch; in Tamil, fox and raven getting hitched.

In Catalan, a little saying: it rains, it shines, the witches comb their hair.

In Cajun Country, you can go further: the devil is beating his wife and marrying his daughter.

Sun-drenched, soaked through, squinting, dripping: speak now or forever bite your tongue.

Naked rain, in Gujarati; on the flood-plains of the Punjab, the one-eyed jackal’s lucky day.

In Galician, an impish variation: the devil is beating the women with knives and spoons.

In Dakar, someone hears a cabbie say: “Rain and sun, hyena’s baby about to die.”

Sunny, rainy, wicked cool, passing strange: a touch of water-witchery, a whiff of sulpher.

Devil’s wedding, in Bengali; in Bulgarian, bear’s kissing his new bride.

In Portuguese, you get to choose: rain and sun, snail’s wedding; sun and rain, widow’s marrying again.

In Kurosawa’s Dreams, a scene called “Sunlight Through the Rain”—a wedding-party of fox-spirits
      in slow drum-beat procession through the woods, spied on by a boy.

Sun’s out, but the wind shifts, and now it’s coming down: you’re hot, you’re wet, you can’t say when
       you last saw the wolves and tigers taking vows.

Dearly bedeviled, we are gobsmacked here today in this pelting sunshine, this blazing downpour—

Do you take this hellrake, this wild child, this monkey’s uncle, this demon lover, this foxy sweet-talker,
      in heatstroke and in cloudburst till inferno or derecho do you part?

Printer’s devil, this one’s for you: somewhere, somehow, sunlit rainfall for a spell, and someone looking
       up and saying what anyone in these parts might say.

   It was Augustus
who exiled Ovid—
clay apartment
with a wheat broom.
                                   “I always knew
you’d have to be in the world
a bit more,” my affair said, long afterward,
on his new coast. His groin was a dark corsage
to be caressed. At times around him I felt I had
died inside my unsureness.
                                    Last night
someone new.
He went in,
and we broke out in a sweat, and I went to taste
the salt of his armpit,
                                    not permanent,
like the Latin sentences
in translation, which in English were
fidelitous, like a ledger tracking ownership,
but also astringent: a sky without clouds.

Here now a sense of burning in the rigging of the air.

What, after so long as agent of the untouchable,

what. He has hauled not brightness. Not on his own

flickered lizard grin. Not one such penchant as this,

slack-gold, sudden, and unanimous. He calls up

the shade of Hafiz here to beggar out some habits.

What else can Hafiz say to be but crushed; what

to do but raise a swarm of bees, thicken the heart

with them, and then eat the honey they have battered.

His fingers dream of fire like ten lit candle wicks.

Each carves in the vapor’s glint its own slow O.

O, they hum. Or else exhale. Some heated ceaseless

reap of breathing. Here he can’t confine the wagging

tulip of his tongue. Gentle, brightness; burn me into singing. 

Small jolts animate the corpse of my body:
I discover my gut, my thigh, light in my throat.
Now I am immortal and made of wrung silk,
moving effortlessly as the haunches of horses.
 
Here, in bar-glow, you’re like a ripple of ink
that turns the night darker where you are,
slicker. I could fit my tongue into your gaze
and drink. I could put my finger in your mouth.
 
We circle each other the way flecks of dirt
together revolve toward a sink’s metal hole. 
Your apartment’s round the corner, I know.
We only have the rest of our lives.

The silken-haired dogs. The twining vines.
Bells at the wrist, our falcons’ eagerness—
What thrills me about us is the metal of our thrust,
Our speed. On horseback, accompanied by trumpets,
Under a bloodless moon, a moon blanched of humanity,
We race as though our hearts were our targets,
Quivering before us in a far-off ravine.
When I grip my bow full of splinters and take aim
I want to be surprised by something
Sudden as Morpho butterflies
Spiraling out into incredible distance
Like a tongue of inaccessible summer,
Then I remember my master, his training, that old grove
Beyond the pond where he first tutored me                             
In the art of venery, till I came to see
How to eat the face of everything we kill
Is almost an act of love.


my father raises his shirt
tattoos cover his chest,
stomach, nipples, some
are older than you.
a bottle & two
glasses of bourbon
between us, a swig left
for me, more for him,
though he doesn’t take
his time –  shoots it
like a man half-
drunk and longing
for reunion. i don’t
know what to say,
save drink another
glass, touch his chest—

I.

Almost midnight, your sister blooms
into a bruised heart, miming
your father’s fists, recalling
how your mother just stood there

smoking. It’s not heartbreak.
Not yet. Only a teenage girl
after school using furniture
polish as deodorant. He called

me a stupid, country girl.
Said they should have left me
in Korea. The car straddles
both lanes, you just want

to get home. Do you understand
why I never called. I didn’t
hate you, but you understand.
Do you understand? Later, you hug

the hurtling bones of your sister,
not because you understand,
but remember the stray cat
on Halloween, and how you

wanted to keep him –
so you put the cat in the bag,
and grandmother made
you throw all the candy,

sticky with fur, away. Your
sister took the blame, took
the beating. And you placed
all those years, and the people

inside them, deep into the earth,
and kissed each gravestone,
and haven’t eaten a mary jane
since.


II.

But it’s not heartbreak
until the next day
having breakfast
with your mother
and her nurse and
there’s nothing
you can say
to get her
to remember
your name
until you show
the photo
of your father
in uniform
her in her white
gown and she calls
his name
so you call him
and put her
on the phone
and she tells him
she misses him
and when is he
going to come
and take her
away? And what
can he say except
I’m on my way
and when she passes
back the phone
it’s back
to soggy pancakes
and stale coffee
and before
he hangs up
your father asks:
your son is
going to write
about us still
right?

Portrait of Depression Addressing the Girl Child
if you can’t control the drag of your lungs snatching breath
like a drowned thing clutched at waters that baptized

devoured left dead, you who are only snot strangled sobs
and long hours dreading the long hours between your mother’s thighs

her lithe fingers making order of nappiness, you big headed girl child
you belly roiling fear of everything: balloons,

firecrackers, demons, dwarf hamsters, you love
starved little shit halving worms beneath sunshine,

you wonderer, you cruelty,
what they could've been without you—loved, far

from here, whole— you back rending yoke, you broken record
track 1 momma’s whyyyy howling on repeat

Daddy’s whisper weaving in and out of focus I’m so sorry  repeat
so sorry Brionne. you daddy’s sorrow

you tiny squirming thing, oh doomed believer
if you can't control the pant

your body makes courting breath, your heart’s desperate merengue
your lungs whistled blues—you fissured cask

how can you hold anything here,
even your body is trying to kill you girl—

let it—let them go. you have no power here.
hush child rest a while, it’s almost as easy as sleep.

29.
Without meaning to we spent the whole day
with a poet I'd heard whispers of last winter,
its mild winds melting quickly into the lakes
and coming back up as light. It was coffee
to see if he wanted to sublet our spare room.
We walked to the apartment—tears at the sight,
quick regret for a quick decision—a beer
to settle the humors, a new book of poems
with a tarot series like the one I am trying to write
but better, as everything is when you find it
in the world having nothing to do with you.

40.
After reading Calamities by Renee Gladman

When, on some day after you begin,
having acclimated to being so close
to something massive, like the ocean,
the scale of which you’ve never
come across before, especially something that moves so,
though you don’t see it, the ocean, going
about your daily business—grabbing coffee;
texting yet another man you don’t know
about what you’d do to each other if you did
know each other—you catch the train
as it comes into the station and it’s as if your whole body
is on the pulse of this massive beast,
this horse surging forward, taking you with it.

Holy Sunday and I’m losing myself to god, singing and shaking
in my first communion dress. At first I don’t hear them fighting in the pews,

only the slight rise and fall of their bodies.
When my father crushes my mother’s right wrist, then the left,
                                                  she twists like a wind chime.
Hand over hand, they push and pull
                                                  as if lifting each other to be blessed.

~

They look small from where I stand on the alter. 

I can see the buttons missing from my mother’s red sweater, how the shoulder pads
                                    are uneven and wing-clipped as she fights from the inside out.

When she shoves herself away from my father, a familiar sound—
her bracelets jangle glints of tiny crosses over the broad archways.

The other children laugh when I release my hands to cover my ears
            because my mother’s voice drops to the polished floor
            as though calling out in sleep, or falling.

Forty faces shift, even the priest turns around. His hand shakes above my head
            and everyone’s watching everyone’s wondering
                        until the usher steps in to escort my mother away.

~

My mother’s grief, germ-like and oblique, spreads through me in one long sparking scar
I trace to remember her sadness is always with me, here in this certainty of belief,
                                                                                                                we will not be saved.

As she is taken away her eyes stay buried beneath a swirl of dark hair.
                                                            She is tired. She is harmless.

My father chases her down the aisle, they don’t think I can see them
            turning and turning, drifting farther from me
                        as though I could cup them in my palms and close them in.    

The pamphlet turned fans, the incense plumes slants
            in the privacy of steepled hands—
                        I see omens everywhere.                   

~

Late spring and juniper berries sprawl
                        along the sidewalks of County Line Road. 

Now early morning snow crowns the ridgelines, claims the flatlands in scratches
and garlands the oaks behind St. Michaels like spliced dovetails.

Here is the beginning of a season holding its breath
                                    for a sacrament that never reaches grace.
Here are all the stains in the glass where the light decays.

The saints’ mouths glow in congregations of solitary flames.
                        My mother’s sobs spin pearls in their shriven ears and we call it holy.
                        Their black eyes ache watching us grow sick, we are sick—

                                                                                                and it’s my fault.

~

When they are cast out to suffer themselves,
I don’t know what to do with my hands.

The procession ends. Bells ring their seizures of mercy.
The marriage ends and I don’t blame them.
Every spring since, the vulnerable parts of me change.

Now the saints have names,
            all we ever did was slip from their sprouting hands.

I lied feathers to the backs of my eyes.
I lied the disaster, every crooked breath
of the tornado, every miracle gulp
of the flood, every nocturnal hurricane.
Some birds blew the wind to here
and there and a forest called tomorrow.
I lied our deaths in a mining accident
in the 1890s. I lied the very strings
of the corset I wore into the tunnel,
the dumb canary whistling its feathers purple.
I lied the nested darkness of time.
I lied the tadpole in the spring puddle
into a bald frog nobody wanted to touch.
The frog perched on a gravestone
that lied the afternoon gray. You were never
very pretty, I lied to my mother.
I’d shown up late in a night-ripped dress.
I was always in that dress, and you, my husband,
you were always lying about the plastic tides.
You lied about bears living in your backyard
when you were a frantic blond boy
flapping your hands at the humid dusk.
You lied the gap in your teeth, the scar
on your chin, the numbness in your
night-feathered fingers. Come down
from the sky. There is a toy house.
There is a little mouse. I lied the sea motif
of this eclipsed room. I lied ten gulls
on the telephone wire in front of the house.
I lied the neighbor peeping in the kitchen window.
 
Then one morning the light turned into a crow
that flew above the house and cawed,
and the caw was a frost that tangoed the grass to sleep,
and I wore a dress sequined like missing clouds,
and none of the tender roses cut my palm.

Ripped page
docks tail, crops
ear into a new
morality, wild

and bewildering
as the first,
lacuna’s lecture

in extremities’
extremis, object’s

altered lesson,

as if less were
best in show,

leaves brittled
and unbound,
ex-codex wrecked

irreversibly, thus
resurrected into
parchment’s
favorite parable.

Adam rendered
hemless hovers
above former feet,
element-defeated,

amputated into
the blank space past
where the image

ends, in which
the now-invisible

animals lay waiting

for the curse or
blessing of a name.

New math
says this torn
pard—real leopard’s

imaginary half—
is now a quarter
creature and freer
for it, says lines

of horse permute
to lines of shore,
a jagged absence.
To those who’d

want to hide in
hide or hold tail’s
tale, I say let go

and look below.
A see-through

sea’s bright side

laps at a world of
virtues and of vices

unmoored bodiless,
no herd or flock to
cower or to crow,

murder excised
and pride elided.
That roar you hear
is just eternity.

I want to start the story 
goes, but then the story
stops. I want to say you

borrowed Chekhov’s gun,
but it was just American,
a dumb Colt bucking in

your hand, neither of you
old enough to know
better, both ready to run.

Speed is ignorant of direction,
says the physics text.
The part I love about

the story that I hate is
when it seems you still
believe in what comes

next, just not for you,
is when, after you
drink a beer and before

you, as they say, do 
yourself in, meaning out
of this world worth

saving, you pause
to place the can
in the recycling bin.

The succulents you plucked
for me from the abundance
of your yard and nested
in a blue butter cookie tin
with shells and stones
for me to take home
across time zones
coast to coast not only
rooted in their indoor
plot of terracotta here
in Baltimore but thrive
so wildly I have to cut
them back and even then
new white pink roots
and fat green baby fingers
pull themselves up and out
to propagate from the now
calloused ends of once
raw leaves and stems

which is to say thank you.
I have tried to let this growth
exist a welcome fact
without forcing it back
at you as figure of
though you thrive riven too.
I have watched you dive
through waves to disappear
and then emerge out past
the breaking with a smile
and your hair in tangles
and even this image
of your actual figure need
not stand as figure either
just exist in fact of memory
as do the grains of sand
and bonfire smoke
still clinging to my clothes
when I unpack.

I have smoothed plaster
onto your pregnant belly
and watched as it set to hold
your shape the week before
your first daughter entered
the world through you.
You know all this already
but a litany of remember when
is the closest that I can approach
to prayer or spell as if words
could conjure your mother
or husband alive again with you.
We say lifelong to mean always
but both shift like shorelines.
I used to believe in believing
and thought that if life hurt
it meant to trust that it was
working like rubbing alcohol
and all strong medicine.

That was before I knew you
or anything. In the past’s present
you are making a mobile
of driftwood. Long after
your daughters look through
its slow turning the shadows
it throws still make sense
of a relationship with light.

Beneath the inky wash of winter dusk
A snow-covered hedge maze

To see even this much
                                    one must extend
The exposure so that highlights amass
On the surface of a dark shallow bas relief

A path is all that remains of the passage

Waves of granite pavement outcrops, river
      of shadows, ghostly in the clearing
between hickory and oak, the path blazed
      with autumn. Underfoot, the mineral facts
of these rocks: quartz, feldspar, and mica.
      A century ago, they planted a burning cross
on the summit before Birth of a Nation.
      This year Mercedes-Benz USA
stunt drove its new luxury SUV to the top.
      In recreation we trust!

As we made our way up, separately
      and singly, black, white, brown, yellow
bodies, pilgrims all, exercisers in neon
      scaling the scarred face of the mountain,
my mother light and limber leading the charge,
      my father with his bad knees falling
behind, and me shuttling in between,
      deserters from some routed army, talking
little, fleeing another lost cause, I heard
      Beyoncé and birdsong call and respond….

That was October. Then November
      happened. Late December, we return
to Stone Mountain (one thing we can agree on).
      Rain from last night’s storm clarifies
the vernal pools. We find our names again
      in strangers’ initials etched like xenolith graffiti,
recognize the stunted, scraggly red cedar
      under whose shade we now rest, weathered
as these gray foldings and faultings,
      in silence, our bedrock.

Smoke from wild fires advances south across states lines.
The flags in town at half mast, though nobody can tell you why.

Afternoon, traffic slows, cars disappearing into drifting clouds,
and my thoughts rush out for the new grass, the new days,

just as, around the perimeter of a blackening square of prairie,
the burn team, in canary yellow, drips light from torches:

a small flame gets on its feet and sprints up the hill—
some forms of love will sing through you this way, this way. 

There’s always a house alone in the wood,
three oaks to mark the place, a hazel hedge.
The roof is a slanted pledge.

I’ve worn the pelt of the forest shade.
I’ve worn my little hood
of red. The path is aching with thaw.

When I find the house alone in the wood,
I’m always a tender young thing.
Grandmother’s dead six years.

There is sorrow.
Birds in winter plume.
Salt for the deer to nose.

There are children
with voices bright as coins.
The tall, bent steps. The wolf

raised the latch and the door swung wide
open years ago now. There may be a fire
with hands for flames. There may be a witch,

an oven stoked. Surely a bed turned down
for me. A rug at the hearth
where the wolf sleeps. The tick-tick-tick of his heart.

I know how to dread him—
dread like a trip-wire, dread like thirst.
I’ve ungloved my hands,

eaten the cakes, drunk the wine.
The huntsman is otherwise occupied.
Here is the only place. I wake

every day in this story, call in the children, open wide
this breakable body, this hard-won room, this house
of luck and bone that made us.

The slow ambush
of August
heat, how the hills blur

with it, how the sky
wavers. And
all the sounds

of the world blunted—
hum of unseen
boats, squabbling gulls.

Even the lake’s unsure
of its shores if you look
far off, past the man

who stands in the water
holding up his arms
to you, waiting,

about to count. Already
you know every lake
is a remnant,

what’s left of glacier’s yield
when the world turned
warmer. You know

what rests
on its sepulchral floor—
silt and stone, claw

and husk, lost hooks
and lines. You
have been there before,

playing with your brothers,
a game you call
Drowning.                                                                  

That benthic roar.
Blue eternally.
This is where you begin—

as breath held
in the moment before.
When the man says,

One two three jump,
everything you do next
is descent.

Even
if he’ll catch you,
you’re falling.

God loves the stench
            of burning flesh, Laquan.
            And I’ve heard bullets
            burn the blackness
            out of bones.
 
IF only your leaving the scene
            was exit-stage-right, and
            your rock step to pirouette
            to splay for Ailey
            rather than dash-cam—
 
IF only this scene was lit
            not by hypostatic strobes
            but laureated iris blue,
            your ballistic moves could
            have been seen as ballet.
 
Laquan, we met you at the altar—
            a cocksure ram,
            un-thicketed
            a bounty to appease
            the incessant I Am.
 
We prayed that your aroma would
            steal up to God’s sooty nostrils
            balm his blistered lips
            pool in his pitted throat
            coat his clysmic need.
 
We blasphemed: if only Cain
            had offered you first, without flaw
            and if the Cyrenian never
            took up the cross, this world
            would not see us as sin.

Hear me good, Son.
Even if I’d named you
God Bless America
Even if we candy-paint
the constitution
on your Cutlass—
Even if you were
Charlie Pride
racing the General Lee
at Talladega
with Billy Graham 
as your crew chief
You better not win.
They. Will. Kill. You.

You think I’m lying?
You think ’cause
they can quote Madea movies
and voted for the Obamas
and ’cause Michael Jordan
owns a team that we’ve
made it somewhere?
Let any one of ’em say Black
and Matter and not be
talking about outer space
and watch the Bull Connor come
out all them white news boys.

I’m serious, Son.
That’s why I keep this .45
on me wherever I go—
work, funerals, fishing—
’Cause I believe ’em when they
say “We want our country back.”
They got to make it over
according to their image.
I know white peoples, Son.
And they got no problems
killing who and what
they worship.
No not one.
Not. A. Damn. One.

See you been living off Momma’s good name.
Been skating on Daddy’s good fortune.
But you never want to breathe a word
about how you squander your healthy portion.

You get paid and run to the Silver Moon
with hopes of hitting it big on black
Then here you come, same tail-tucked tune
 “I promise I’ll pay ya’ll back.”

You want life to be a Sunday walk—
fresh bream without spiny rays.
You want sweet corn without breaking the stalk.
No sweat, but every drop of praise.

You spend too much time comparing your life
and believing  you’ve got it worst.
And all your whining about your wretched lot
got you stalled out in reverse.

Remember back when we were young—
How you begged for a herringbone chain—
Daddy got you one—It got a kink—
And yo’ spoiled ass threw it away!

You want the world to see you Napa Valley
when we’re just pokeweed and muscadine.
And you have to accept, with the quickness,
that it just be like that sometimes.

This is how I led myself out of a place so dark
that when I looked back, I could not see it,
or refused to see it.

These words came as water, my body writ
in water, turning through memory in search
of the lapidary inscription—the answer
and what binds me to my death.
If I will find it; if I will let it drown;

if I will use it to write this instead.
What would it be to match the depths of hell
with my own light, made and mangled as
a beast that bites both what is good and evil?
Fingers groping for a face through the black
and invisible. Wet feet clawing
on the maw of the underworld.

I was a woman, I suffered, I was there.
It is late where you are and where I come from.

I guided these fires
from a body of islands
burning and unable
to reach each other

Every day of needing
bends the waters closer
to the unseen flame who
moves to have anatomy

whose sudden heat will
open snow’s first eyelid
to violet iris
and pupal stone

like the sprig of air
between our cheeks
and the whole pink birds
first writhing for it

Not my phrase, I swear, 
But my grandmother’s 
When someone surprised her 
By holding open the door 
Or by singing that same high C 
Stephanie Mills holds 
Near the end of “I Have Learned 
To Respect the Power of Love” 
Or by gifting her with a turkey 
On the 24thof December 
After a year of not tipping her 
For cleaning what they could afford 
Not to clean. You’ll have to forgive 
My grandmother with her good 
Hair and her good white people 
And her certified good slap across
Your mouth. Crack the beaten door 
To eat or sing, but do not speak 
Evil. Dead bad black woman 
I still love, she didn’t know 
What we know. In America 
Today, anyone can turn on
A TV or look out a window 
To see several kinds of bird 
In the air while each face watching 
Smiles and spits, cusses and sings
A single anthem of blood—  
All is stained.  She was ugly.  
I’m ugly.  You’re ugly too.
No such thing as good white people.

I am writing to you from the other side 
Of my body where I have never been 
Shot and no one's ever cut me.  
I had to go back this far in order 
To present myself as a whole being 
You'd heed and believe in. You can trust me 
When I am young. You can know more 
When you move your hands over a child, 
Swift and without the interruptions
We associate with penetration.  
The young are hard for you
To kill. May be harder still to hear a kid cry 
Without looking for a sweet 
To slip into his mouth. Won’t you hold him? 
Won’t you coo toward the years before my story 
Is all the fault of our imaginations?  
We can make me 
Better if you like: write back.  Or take the trip.  
I’ve dressed my wounds with tar 
And straightened a place for you 
On the cold side of this twin bed. 

I am a they in most of America.
Someone feels lost in the forest 
Of we, so he can’t imagine
A single tree.  He can’t bear it.
A cross. A crucifixion.  Such
A Christian. All that wood
Headed his way in the fact
Of a man or a woman who
Might as well be a secret, so
Serious his need to see inside.
To cut down. To tell. How
Old will I get to be in a nation
That believes we can grow out
Of a grave? Can reach. Climb
High as the First State Bank.
Take a bullet. Break through
Concrete. The sidewalk.
The street someone crosses
When he sees wilderness where
He wanted his city. His cross-
Tie. His telephone pole.
Timber. Timbre. It’s an awful
Sound, and people pay to hear
It. People say bad things about
Me, though they don’t know
My name. I have a name. 
A stake. I settle. Dig. Die. 
Go underground. Tunnel
The ocean floor. Root. Shoot
Up like a thought someone
Planted. Someone planted
An idea of me. A lie. A lawn
Jockey. The myth of a wooded
Hamlet in America, a thicket,
Hell, a patch of sunlit grass
Where any one of us bursts into
One someone as whole as we.

It comes from the earth.
It is green with deceit.
Sometimes what I love 
Shows up at three 
In the morning and 
Rushes in to turn me
Upside down. Some-
Times what I love just
Doesn't show up at all.  
It can hurt me if it 
Means to…because 
That's what in love
Means. What I love 
Understands itself 
As properly scarce.  
It knows I can't need 
What I don't go without.  
Some nights I hold 
My breath. I turn as in
Go bad. When I die 
A man or a woman will
Clean up the mess 
A body makes. They'll
Talk about gas prices
And the current drought 
As they prepare the blue-
Black cadaver that still,
As the dead do, groans:
I wanted what anyone 
With an ear wants— 
To be touched and 
Touched by a presence
That has no hands.

  Where I am my thickest, I grew 
Myself by squat and lunge, and all 
 
The time I sweated, I did not think 
              Of being divided or entered, though 
 
Yes, I knew meat would lure men, 
              And flesh properly placed will lead
 
              One to think that he can—when 
He runs from what sniffs to kill us—
 
Mount my back trusting I may carry 
              Him at a good speed for a long distance, 
 
              And to believe, believe that 
When he hungers, I am able 
 
To leap high, snatch 
              The fruit of the tree 
 
We pause to hide behind and feed, feed him.

“These are objects damaged and repaired
in ancient times,” she says, as we slip in, late.
On the dark screen, a nymph is running away
from a pursuing satyr, but one staple
fixes her billowing hem to the frieze below—

one large, lead staple on the Apulian
red-figure bell krater, where it suffered 
a break to its ancient body. Rivets of bronze 
attach the foot to the bowl of a black kylix.  
These holes once held staples long since missing 

from the Attic Black-Figure Little Master Lip Cup, 
holes in the knee of the dancer—but the dance 
continues, as it has for centuries, 
despite each crooked fragment broken and lost, 
despite these scars or welts over the seams.

“An object’s useful life doesn’t always end 
with this garden,” she says. Or no, end with discarding.
The conservator’s accent (she’s Dutch) is hard to follow 
through a lecture whose “fusses” turn out to be vases.
“Erasing” marks of breakage? Raising them?

“We must recognize, it is crucial to recognize,”
she says, with a tone of care approaching awe,
“it is crucial to recognize the added failure.
The ancient repair adds failure to the vessel.
Failure—” Wanting to share that awe, I listen 

harder, straining to hear, while historians 
and conservators consider failure there 
in the auditorium of the museum 
on museum island in the heart 
of Berlin, great city of added failure—

city of gaps and welts, of broken walls,  
of joins like staples forged from lead or bronze.
Sleepy in the dark, it slowly dawns 
on me that what I hear is not (as I’d thought) 
failure, but value: she means there is value

in repair—each crooked scar a sign,
in fact, of care. For us, the value of keeping 
damage visible, what keeps us returning 
to gaps once filled with filed-down, alien fragments 
from objects that exploded in the kiln—

wasters, they’re called, but failure needn’t be wasted.
And now, when she says, value, I hear feel you—
and do my best to feel what she says—we’re joined
by efforts that matter.  It rings true, this mishearing
of failure, value, fuss, beloved vessel

filling with failure, feeling for us all.

Outside her window, the canal’s slow
waters scum green. Unfathomable, 
          how it never stops. 

Every day a bad day—
her stomach lurches, motion sick.

You need to quiet your nerves, the doctor   
says and prescribes pills, exposure therapy.

My entire life is exposure, she says
and labors to believe 

it is the river that moves, that inches by
and not her not her room that becomes 

passenger coach and she its rider 
and insists instead it is the city 

that stands still and she is the one 
pulling out of the station slowly at first 

          then faster and faster 
until she’s reduced to ghost blur, to oily 
whorl—a finger-smear on glass.

I wake the Christmas duck at midnight. 
Snap back the neck, tie the feet together and let hang
an unborn child come from outside of me, dreaming 
of the days I choked over an egg and slice of bread. 

How my heart rattled, hollow as a fist, 
rotted meat no feast could fatten 
in a checkered gown licking honey from the lips of warm foil. 
How when I hid under a chair, my spine softened. 

Beneath my eyelids, Grandmother hovers with her cold 
peppermint tea. The bird 
waits: I muss the feathers with oil and pluck them, 
one by one, from rubber skin, push down the blade 
to crack the breastplate, and fold back the meat. 

The white pearly nectar of my heart glistens in my chest.
Grandmother says eat.

In Mendoza, girls littered their gardens
with used firework casings. Lavender and orange rinds
they burned as incense, the ashes mounded in fire pits.
Dishes with blue flowers dashed with fish heads—
scalloped edges rusted where the blade broke the necks.

Love was a forest fire burning in the back of a bus,
the promise of cut flowers and bread in the fridge,
a bicycle behind the door.

In the stirrup of a saddle, the strap of my sandal snapped.
Afterwards, we drank pitchers of wine, and thumbs flicking 
walked barefoot the whole way home.

When I stopped believing in God
I was struck dumb, insensate, 
reflecting on the kitchen incident. 
The bathroom incident. The bedroom
incident, incipience of useless desire.
Memory is a bitch, trotting out trifles
while the main thrust of the narrative
continues on its way. It’s Darwinian,
the back story of my bank account, 
this globule of spit I want to eject
from my mouth. When I stopped
believing in God, I was rummaging 
around in the junk drawer, the jewelry 
box, the locked safe, for something
I needed to proceed. —How to speak 
of this precisely? Longing is a chandelier 
made of twine that doesn’t snap, but
merely hangs: misery, temps suspendu.
I gave up on the dream of omnibenevolence
long ago; now someone else is the legal 
guardian of my body, mind, and soul.  
My tongue lolls. My divine portion is 
a liquid lunch, a time-stamped email, 
a paramilitary parade. When I stopped
believing in God, nothing happened.
God would have wanted it that way.

Coke cans and refrigerator doors
are wired with needles. 
Even the clip on the dog’s 
leash has an electrical storm
hidden beneath
its cool exterior.  
 
All week, there’s chemo fire in ice. 
It burns in my mouth—flames 
licking my insides on the way down
to the center of hell.
 
I almost like it—
to reach for a spoon 
and grasp the heat that pulses 
through such a small, 
unassuming thing—
 
or to step outside in winter
and press my fingertips
against the air’s
fierce windows.
 
Some mornings I hold a pitcher of water 
up to the light
just to remind myself
that even what’s most beautiful in this world 
can fall like glass through us all. 

Meat, Meat, Meat, Meat, Meat
it’s what they, like, do. Slaughter. Eat. Sandy
-shored Pylos: horns leafed gold, a stunned calf
collapses. Hemoglobin jets. Royal 
women held her. Keen now. Consider [yowling] 

100s butchered [yowling] time & time 
to temper Athene or Olympus’s  
Big Voice [self-turned to eagle, bull, swan, shepherd, 
that he might have]. Consider the mutton-drunk feast 

of these post-trauma crews, 6 per ship 
toward a hecatomb [when from fog survivors 
lunge them-ward] to the Kikonian dead. Or lotos 

gluttons’ nerve-zap yearning. What we want 
assembles in chewy flesh, ruled [like gods] 
by no-relenting stomach-turn toward the substantial. 


Wide-Eyed, Sure, Fella—But Maybe I Care More
right now about reproaching than some dicey   
     rapprochement. Watch out. My name means Ship 
     -burner. I’ve scanned the humblebrag sheet [a man 
     in the fool future will claim I composed it]: no word 
of keeping your buh-bye promise, worshipping me
     as a goddess, once you’re home. Not that I’ll be 
     un-thought of after arrows pierce windpipes & blood 
     weds blood on that feast hall floor. When you spill to your wife 

[enchantress, sirens, randy nymph], you’ll skip 
     Nausikaa. Proof enough. Yep, let this bogus 
     goddess foretell. Your Ithaka’s pillaged, like
a fat nation after an election stolen—
     only, the stupid long war came first. You bet
     I’ll marry. Not you. Some man not made of words.  

Upshot: the toss up, the tinkle, the toodleloo (what the feet do):
(I had to.) You need something to pass through—a continuous 
pool. The splash bombards our descent with kaleidoscopic patterns 
in opal—the white embalms with the blue—but is it jewel enough 
for you if you can’t hold it? I can do the same as you. I can do 
the same as you. (Smolder underwater.) Held breath is my only 
bravery. I suck it like a candy while—next in kin to our skin (we are 
wet within)—the water makes a rag of itself, wipes upward, wipes 
out, wanton with a suffocating sameness. Ebb and no, ebb and no
disembodied flow, the splash tackles air, tickles, dots, attacks in
a flutter, ambushing like a moth an old book. Then indelibly, 
the blotch is dishabille as the dodo. Overdone, then done. But no 
two tethers are the same. Here we envision the ripple required 
to enter the lake: Several snakes slinking out, sinking into themselves, 
shedding skin in a disintegration—finis, fin—they end and a second 
skin begins, then again. Then again. The serpent recycles as we move 
further out. You push through: odd-turned, timed. You need a catapult
to push through, to get through, to get to the thing. More precisely: 
prescient susurrations in procedural dance moves. Yesteryear went 
swimmingly—only lukewarm deformity—but presently we’re 
doomed. (Read the news.) The routine is monotone yet intoxicated 
with color like a cartoon fine-tuned to be as bombastic and balloonistic 
as possible. We need more warmth. We need more mirrors in our limbs 
that can see and can sing. A buzzer goes off which means to begin. 
A demolition derby starts zenning in our minds while our bodies, 
sunning, ache for grace. Everything’s timed. The trick is to come
together, not conform. If it clicks, we explode on the crystal surface 
like the imperfect devotional grandeur of a doodle of a god.

The redback spider throws himself 
into the hollow fangs of his beloved. 
A little gymnast, he leaps mid-thrust. 
Beforehand, he plucks the silky strings 
of her web. Romances his darling. 
Imagines himself as tremendous as her 
body. 
            The females are wholly themselves. 
Bellies stuffed with the same. Their insides 
spilling with their insides. Fat and happy.
Taking everything their sweethearts have
to give.
                        Domestic hogs sometimes
savage their young. Feed on the babies
while the babies feed on them. Out of
necessity mostly. There isn’t enough
to go around. And there’s the sea squirt:
who stations her back against a rock 
and eats her own mind. The sea squirt
reclaims her parts, salvages a form,
houses both genders, starts to glow
as she becomes who she is.  


Early Morning Walks
In the middle of Commercial Street R complains
that a wispy horse mane cloud 

is marring the perfect blue sky.

That’s what he’s saying when I stop. 
This is him, shaking his head,

Marring, marring—
like an old Chinese poet mourning the loss of a beloved city

We look together, we compare the offending cloud 
to yesterday’s luscious cumulus 

Though R’s memory of yesterday 
isn’t what it used to be

he agrees that was one made you want to reach out 
and hug it.

I hug him he hugs me, yesterday disappearing
easily, its clouds…

*

M stops her old bike to tell me 
about a new form of breathing 
which I hear as a new form of grieving

Why can’t I remember what she’s lost?
What’s happened? 
Who does she mourn?

I can’t imagine what the new form could be—

Oh, what use is what she knows  
that I don’t know?
What more am I willing to learn?

*

On the flats two gymnasts
in mirroring postures, sculptural, 

invulnerable.

The tide out this little moment.
Old wooden houses inherited for generations, 

additions jerry-built over the past century 
from spit and salvage.

The old order: how sturdy they look—
yet fragile—

dilapidated homes with names 

hand-painted, repainted
above the doors by children, grandchildren

Harmony  Sea Barn   Snug Harbor  Wannacum Inn

*

I sat with you this August morning
on an overturned dory

when the tide was out
I didn’t know your name

without language you taught me
how to watch the minnows 

and the foraging birds

we were a hundred miles from the city, 
its rage and fire—

then I walked alone for a while, alone again
as I’ve been so long

I felt as if I’d forgotten how to look at anything—

the black head of a gull
the skittery moves of the sanderlings

a brilliant kite stalled in the sky

and looking was like discovering I could sing, 
not well, even off-key

but sweetly 

and though I never learned your name
today I felt companioned

not so much by you
as by the creatures I was learning to watch….

Past grassy dunes, past Blackfish Creek, the Donut Shack, the boarded-up basket
and beach-toy shops. Past the nurseries, their young shrubs still wrapped in burlap.

Sunday morning, a crisp spring light and hard-edged shadows, here at this nowhere
place along the route from Provincetown back to Boston where I stop to stretch 

my hamstrings: left heel, then right heel, propped on the car’s humming hood. 
Good Will dumpster, painted barrels, an old semi parked askew, empty, 

running its motor, its driver pissing somewhere in the scrub pines. And a battered 
blue van like the one my friend pulled into a rest area somewhere in Connecticut 

last month, and died. Scarred picnic tables, benches attached. Crows. Birch trees. 
Fat green plastic bags stuffed with trash and tossed. One foot, then the other…. 

He’d been elated, he was newly in love and must have felt suddenly drained, 
or felt vast unbearable pain. He was a quiet man, would trouble no one—

and, who could or would have helped him anyway? Is that what he thought—
Who could help me?—when he pulled quickly the green van off the road where 

the state troopers would have found it filled with his silence? Outside, 
the loud whoosh of life, of traffic, the rancorous crows’ cries. Did my friend 

shudder with the awful knowledge before his too-young heart stopped? 
Today, here, I touch my toes, not easily but I do, today I fear what happens 

to the body happens to the spirit too. Spirals of piss on dry leaves, on early poison 
ivy, then the guy zips, lumbers from the wild margin back to the tarmac, 

to his warm truck, and is gone. A gray car, one door a discordant yellow, 
careens to the open Goodwill dumpster, its driver heaves her bags 

of worn-out clothes at its open maw. The crows caw and rant bitterly,
bitter insistence on life. Be not thine own worm, George Herbert says, 

and I tell myself, Summer’s coming, with sweet corn and tomatoes, 
with morning swims and evening walks, then fall’s brief blaze, then icy storms. 

Another year will pass, and then another—Where there are no seasons, 
no commotions, how does anyone know to move through grief?

That night I dreamt of the friendship of women,

we were all at an opening in the 20’s, near 9th,
the atmosphere aspiring to be electric, the gallery 

bristling with women, and men looking past one another 
more than at the art.  Some of the women I seemed 

to have known for many years and others many years ago
but only for a short while. We’d never become friends;

somehow something had always held me back—
some atavistic mistrust of anyone resembling myself….

Yet that night, I found myself drawn to them, that night
just when I thought nothing new could become of me, 

inklings, stirrings of what might be called longing for 
home. Sisters! I cried, and only one of them turned away

(I’d so often failed her, my sister, in undutiful affection.
Why? What was duty’s relationship to affection?)

but several of them came toward me smiling, apparently 
fondly, and together we spoke about what we saw on the walls, 

lyrical assemblages of pushpins, delicate threads, rhapsodic
words in many languages, scrawled in viridian blue,

phthalo green and other lush painters’ colors
I never dreamt existed in nature. And on a table, 

tall bottles of sparkling waters, French wines,
crescent slices of sweet tropical fruits,

and through a tall window, amazingly, train tracks, 
old abandoned tracks flowering now with native plants,

Joe Pye Weed, Indigo, Tree of Heaven, Squill:
the High Line. Yet none of that spoke to me, only she 

who’d turned her back, her muteness I kept hearing,
the unforgiving silence we’d passed back and forth that night

and, mindlessly, all the years of our lives—

the boatsman
the boatsman
we name him 
Shaina
and sleep 
on his picture
he’s winging 
his oars
two bodies 
are dragged
on a rope
down the river
their green faces 
smile at us 
crouched
in the freshets
to wake us
he leans in
and touches 
his hair 
to our mouths
and we’re 
already singing 
the boatsman
the boatsman
and calling him 
Shaina
we pay him 
the picture
from under 
our heads
and lay it 
before him
and give him
our hands

In truth, I don’t know who created me,
still can’t find polite words: not for his
house full of hot air or those oak trees
in their patriarchal postures. Dropped leaves
were a royal mess for the woman to figure out
how to contain. Everything grew like crazy
there: in beds of moss, the toadstools sprouted
profanely, while kudzu was bent on strangling
anything demure. Everyone told me, hold still!
I couldn’t. I backslid, ruined my eyelet dress
in a slick of mud. But even the cows willed
themselves to find a hole in that fence, pressed
their fated fat to the road. Better to make a run
for this. I hit the gas, left my name to rot in the sun.

Once, she opened it as usual, 
                                                with a soft click
of cartilage slipping farther. Each and every jaw
unlocks this way, a complex apparatus
that “translates,” as they say, past the first ahhh

of release. She felt it, 
                                   like in cinematic
slow motion, the articulated snap of saliva
when the tongue took its half-automatic
fall to the floor, and then the still awe

of being all the way agape. 
                                            Who will witness
that moment? Who will think through the moves
she took in laying out her body on the bed?

Who will translate what it meant for this
woman to test the muzzle, if not me, too,
who can buy a gun? 
                                 I will not turn my head.

At times the body hides its evidence, missed synapse,
not sickness but a gap or a lack, what is taken
for granted. No amount, no way of compensation. 
How my grandfather lived decades with shrapnel

from the war in his brain, the brain in its broken
state warring, firing into the void. Still, I don’t trust
the doctor’s robust machinery. How can this beacon 
of my body guiding a body out of the ancient

sea be turned back into sea? No heartbeat under
my heart asking, “Who will you be?”—when the night
wakes us with proof on the sheets, when the husk

of the bathtub catches me as my legs surrender, 
and I lie there in the dark in our sublet apartment
wondering what’s in the rooms closed off to us.

Welcome to our bifid world, split
like a snake’s tongue. One half’s

a garden ungrowing, locked-up, but 
we live this side of the wall. We still

have to work in the dirt. You’ll wear
grit in your knees soon enough, no matter

how much you scrub. You’ll carry it
under your nails, a dead man’s manicure. 

Here you’re welcome to taste what 
you want—any apple or frond—

but that doesn’t mean
what you eat won’t devour you

in turn. Learn to tell quick poison
from slow. We don’t yet know

where the haunted house stops
& the gallery begins. The history 

museum. The hunting preserve. 
We race each day to its end, 

but the day always wins. Welcome
to today’s race. Finish is all you can do: 

pick a sin to believe in & stick to, get 
by on: gluttony, lust, something 

to distract your mouth
from the one food it can’t have, 

can’t tooth, the one truth
it can’t swallow.

Scatter factor: fractured
my skin & bone & sown
across this land. Fingers

grow, & pointing with them,
weeds. My state, my nature
is to want, I am all root

& leaf, all reach. I am
expanding fractal. Rare
plants live in a landscape

of fear, their predators
made prey by greater 
beasts, & disappeared. 

So death undoes so many 
lesser terrors. I am all teeth,
so many seeds, the body’s

hardest part: perennial. 
Dig me up. You’ll find 
a smile: lifted, twisting,

eyeless, toward the light. 

I left him standing there by a decaying log, mouth
agape, no sound, still & shocked by the swarm

of angry wasps propelling themselves out of the nest we’d hit
with our bikes under the spruce on the east end of the property.

It was a sun that slanted long and low at the edge of
the pines; it was a soft breeze lifting the scent of grass

just mowed, drying in the distant field, waiting
to be bound, made into rectangles, stacked. What can I do

but pedal away faster? I don’t look back. Not once. You’ve
gotta make hay when the sun shines, say the old-timers. I make

the hay sway. I make the wasps retreat back to their nest.
Or I make him cry and wail: rock beats scissors / scissors

beats paper / paper beats rock / I let wasps beat up my little
brother because I don’t pull him away, I don’t yell: Pick up

your bike. Run! My lungs load with panic. No release.
Because I don’t take his chubby hands, run with him towards

the house to the stone steps, don’t implore him to save
himself. I see his face: still puffy. Wasps sting again & again.

They’re the ones who won’t die after just one stabbing.
So, they tickle him. They caress his skin. They stroke

him like the breeze lifts leaves, makes shadows on the lemonade
glasses set out for the men coming in from haying in the hot fields.

Each glass glistens, the ice dissolving back into its original form.
Liquid pooling on the glass tabletop. It’s true. The wasps

found their way down his shirt. Later, we have to paint
his back pink to cover up the redness, the blotchy

raised welts. Later, we have to go back to get his bike,
resting where he flung it on its side. Pedals still.

I did not enjoy my parents. More and more, I look for them in my face. Am comforted to glimpse a
crook in a smile, eyes that refract sideways comprehension. Most behavior is understandable, if
repellant. Large cities have favorite products that visitors may come to love. These are discernable in
faces, if sought. Bushes and saplings start around the trunks of mature trees, shielded from harsh
light, but insecure. Books in one house change places with books in another. No one monitors this
process. Some people grow forgetful because their collection of times frightens them, along with
their house and lot, deep ground becoming adamant before melting under its own weight. Some
people study themselves till lost, or perform till used up. I am growing to understand women I have
seen in restroom mirrors around the world, their argument with apparitions.

When my daughter is hatched with one arm bowed
and hollow, is half downy, is cut from me molting
and chirping like tin from one lung while she wails 
with the other, and flutters and flails, I will know how she came
to her body. When my daughter will not bear her swaddle, 
when she swans her growing body toward every clean space, 
when she’s clumsy in gravity, half of her crawling and half 
of her hovering low, I will know that we’re in her, dividing
again and again. When she learns to sling her wild arm, a dead-
weight low along her hip as all her feathers sharpen, darken,
thrush-like, shining and she strains against the strangeness 
of her blue-black seams, I’ll see you wrenching at the space 
where skin gives way to plume. We will have done this to her, 
yes. Halved creatures make halved daughters, or so the splitting goes.

Is the bone in you
the place you didn’t 
grow a wing the lifting 
your body refuses
is God belonging you
here again & again 
to the red ground 
and the done daylight
and the hour when 
it flares back up again
is God won’t leave you
alone you can’t resist
your sinew or your skin
your scapula the shape
it takes it makes you up
and up ahead is God 
is your own hand reaching
out to break your fall
the way you hear it
in your joints is God
is a tiny gun you can’t
outrun your weight
is God the waiting
for the impact or the 
thing that breaks is God
so busy with his muscling 
he cannot save the house
he’s made. 

When we were born I had my arms around his neck
& when he died I had my arms around his neck 
& each time there was a coin of heat
just where our foreheads met & each time
I looked & looked into a second set of my own eyes.
Imagine, for a moment, there is your body
& an arm’s length away there is your body again, 
but it is on horseback, but it is calling
your name, but it is built to leave you.
Imagine that this second you became a better boy
& then a better man, your better echo. 
No, imagine that you were the second voice. 
You learned your own shape as an answer to his call. 
But somehow only you were built to last
& in outlasting him you had to make a choice:
you keep your brother or your body. You go it alone, 
or you unflesh yourself entirely: consent to be bloodless, 
consent to be only an answering light.


O
Stars are not the end, but the 
beginning.

A bird is to its throat as a promise is 
to its sharp edge. 

I wanted to make for you a 
sunshower. Instead I have made for 
you a mortal thing. 

Writing is knowing how to cut.  

There is a space in my body that did 
not exist when I began this book. It 
is a window. When I next speak, 
I will do so through that window. 

Please leave the window unlatched.

When I next speak, it will be with 
changed lips. 

I wonder what their color will be.

Finally, she enlarges the figure to a grand 
scale, and cuts off its head.

i.


October rose 
up  All root
wet limbing 
     	and waiting lines
 	A coastline obstructing
	itself  I
    	lost something
 	in every room they
got in how
 	  how 
	  how
  	  how,  your dreams


ii.


The shoreline has regressed pleasantly  Some hair
fallen since, a dozen egrets, out my shrifting face  

Alms in the stream blood artifice gathered to breast
When was it I knew my house to be falling apart
  
When did I lift, for instance, an arm to eye or bend
backward, corbel like, swung you your back to mine

When was it ever September, tides pouring over
When whales like men moved about the earth

So I walk five miles to see what remains
Of the ice age then another mile to camp
To see what remains of my resolve

I am still
I’m not surprised at all to discover
Small

The first person to tell me happy birthday
In the hostel I chose because a woman owned it
And because it’s my birthday

Was Karen with the old injury
A broken leg that hurt her less at elevation
So she retired to elevation

            Good morning, birthday girl!

She spoke like a woman with children
I was grateful like a daughter

Like any river
                       the Rio Grande
When I finally really swam in it was cold
And sharp and easy to imagine

Washing me meaninglessly away

And maybe because it’s my birthday
I would rather live a long life

But I’d settle for an end without actual violence

Thirst’s impersonal collaboration with time
Lung with river water

Where I am small isn’t the same as I am nothing

High and dry
In the empty lakebeds of this old earth

Where I walk through every corner of its turning air alone

Even with this body

Healthy though I am
Able and grateful

I wear a red whistle I bought for the city
And have never tested

Worried it’ll pierce the ear of some
Nearby honest animal

I save it for the emergency I keep alert to keep from ever meeting
Though in doing so somewhere some other good woman comes to harm

Statistically speaking

Not nearly all of us will walk away without paying
Though we do not owe
Ourselves or the bodies that bear us

That bear our children headfirst
Into terrible odds

To any man

I have no children

Still each time I learn a new way to be more fully in the world without fear
I promise to teach my daughter
It is possible to learn to be more fully in the world

Without fear

And if she’s a boy
To teach him to honor her step
Most when it looks like defiance

A monument of unwashed dishes
has once again risen in the sink
an archaeological record 
of what everyone's eaten this week
so she grabs a scrub pad 
twists on the hot water
and leans into the steam 

wiping condensation from the window 
she can see the ancient widower across the street 
plundering neighbors' recycling bins
recently bereaved, the widower wears
his dead wife's sunhat 
mashed onto his too-large head
he is tall and scarecrow-like  
his clothes look scavenged from trash 
and the wrecked little sunhat 
with cloth flower pinned to its brim 
looks comical on him
he seems a ravaged tree 
badly impersonating a human
while above him a huge eucalyptus 
rustles with squirrels

she clatters spoons into the drying rack 
and wonders why her secrets 
have lately gained the power of myth
like what happened long ago in a tent 
on an island in a lake 
filled with sunfish and water snakes 
the rusty but functional canoe 
overturned on the beach
oars stashed underneath 
her bathing suit had a flounced skirt 
that's how young she was
a fondle and a squirt and it was over

it's almost not worth scrambling eggs
if they're going to stick to the pan so bad
is it too early for a glass of booze? 
she thinks a quick spritz of endorphins 
would hit the spot right now

after the initial vodka sip 
she believes she could live a different kind of life entirely 
perhaps in a tent? could she taste the happiness of saints 
in their dark, unwashed garments
living only for herself, god as her alibi? 
a saint's joy dry and crumbly 
as a handful of stale cake?
                                                                      
children toss a frisbee across a parched lawn 
as streetlights waver on 
and a girl and a dog play under a picnic table
while the mother reads her Sunday paper on the stoop
by porchlight one sister walks outside
holding a spatula and says, "how can anyone 
take you seriously with that frosted blue eyeshadow?"
and they laugh

she wipes coffee grounds off the counter 
with a towel that's had its personality bleached away
the sun plummets in runny pastels
who knew shame was such a large part of growing older
as though through lack of vigilance you'd slid into ruin 
as though drunk in front of everyone you'd fallen 
down a flight of stairs

these endless ill-fitting versions of womanhood...
should she envision herself as something else?
a flower full of fluorescing nectar? 
though aren't those mostly deathtraps for insects?
the green afro of the orange tree 
studded with tiny white blossoms 
might be nice to be 
or maybe a fleet, arboreal creature 
who can smell the age and relative health 
of each leaf before eating it

a feminine epic lives in her under wraps
like a field of sheet-draped statues 
fugitive, incognito, and when some of her ancestors 
that chorus of ghost-women finally take her hand 
and smooth her hair, they smile in sympathy as
the last of her mother's wineglasses cracks 
against the scoured pit of the sink
as the cypress tree sways perilously
when an owl lights on its pinnacle

she takes potatoes from the bin and lights the oven
her guts grumble reminding her
of the sloshing bag of viscera she is

when you love someone is it your duty to tell them?
shouldn't you keep those revelations to yourself?
so far, her strategy has been to construct a hive of silence
to tuck honey away where no one will find it
in residual moments of the day
as the last flaming swipes of orange 
abandon the sky to grey


Unhappy Mother of a Hero
Sisters, sisters, hear the sorrows of my heart. Here are his trophies, his cleats. Here is his closet, land of plaid shirts. Here his framed crayon drawings of superheroes from grade-school. There hang the helmets I bought him for each sport. He was sweet-natured, easy to teach not to bully the weaker ones. Less easy to drag to the pediatrician. I wiped chocolate off his chin, did not complain when he came home with his hair shaved into crazy shapes, or took up brewing beer, which he insisted was medicinal, in the basement. His third girlfriend I adored, each of her finger-nails painted a different color. He was the only person I've known who claimed to crave beef jerky. The pamphlet the priest left behind advises:
cry       pray            write things down if it helps
don't neglect yourself                you must eat even
if only a little at a time                   go for walks
take naps                keep in touch with loved ones
The pamphlet also advises plant a tree. Photos of him accuse and absolve me. In a tiny room with waffle patterned curtains around the bed I first saw him: wet, bloody, face crumpled, held aloft by hands in blue latex gloves.
Sisters, sisters: something in me knew this was coming. I am not afraid to say there are many of us who tried to hold our sons back from battle. We are floating islands now, about which little or nothing is known, torn from shore, drifting unmoored toward foreign horizons.

When they returned, we counted fingers, toes 
as if they had been reborn to us. We 

had given the best of our men, the ones 
who could split the earth with their hands and hoist 

whole trees to their brown shoulders. When we saw
their weeping, the aunts shushed our questions and 

said It’s the war, the warand it was dis-
tinction without difference. So many men 

we gave. So many wars. When I was 8, 
I caught B back in the spare room drinking. 

He stood up, looked me in the eye and closed 
the door between us without a word. While 

playing hide and seek with my cousins, I 
found E in the basement cabinets thrum-

ming hhuhnnn, hhuhnnn— rocking himself back and forth. 
He drew a finger to his lips, sweeping 

a hand to his head as if to gesture 
keep your head down, slid the door against me, 

shut himself back up in it like a box. 
So many men we knew. So many wars. 

I learned this as a child. This is how the 
world is made—we sent our men to her, got 

half the half she was willing to do with-
out. Line ourselves about them like joists and built

whole homes around the missing part.  Because 
the war, the war. So many wars. Because 

we love all the men we gave. Because love 
is our bluntest instrument. Between us 

love is steadfast, black, loaded as a gun.  

You asked me about God
in the time of harvest. You 
asked me if God were a

construct to prove in relief.
This is the delta; this is the stony
back of Him. This is what we were

never given. These fields, the white
of them. We gasped for air in the
landscape. What could you know

of cotton? What could you know
of the blood? I love you. I need you 
to know the blood-soaked earth 

of which I am made. How it feels
to fear the earth itself, for the earth
to be a god itself, and the river

that can give or take it all back again 
for any reason she decides. I told you 
about the flood. I told you how we 

gathered all we had on our backs and 
carried ourselves to the levee, how the 
boats came for us and turned their backs too 

and left us to rot for 78 days, which 
(coincidentally) is the same number
of days I am told I lived and died 

and lived and died and remained here 
on earth by will alone. Will and love. 
Once, I said, I was whole and free 
of grief. You took my hand. You asked

how one can survive this, and I said:
what do I know of survival as I blew
apart into mist and the river rose up

for you: a blessing, a drowning, a baptism.

That morning after running 
the bricked-in campus 
some far-off bright fall day—
a flash to my left as the hawk 
scored a squirrel then swept it 
into an oak where it held it 
with an almost tenderness. 
It was like watching 
a sculpture made of smoke
that would materialize 
a moment, change shape, 
then disappear. A masque 
might be made of it, some 
experimental film. The students 
gawking, everyone watching. 
As if nothing sinister ever 
occurred in broad light. 
Before we married, I suffered 
insomnia. Remember? 
We were living on separate 
continents, which could 
have been planets: 
everything that moved 
moved by inversion—our watches, 
the weather, the whether-or-nots
we’d see each other again. 
Weeks without sleep, I took 
a wrong turn, forgot the way 
home. We’re warned against 
shutting our eyes 
to things we don’t want 
to see coming, as if our lives 
were an overnight shift, not 
a series of risks or random 
events. You spent a good hour, 
maybe more, talking me back 
by phone, treating confusion’s 
fact as simple happenstance. 
When you returned next spring 
so did sleep, delivering 
the hawk as it tore through 
night toward the still-living thing 
locked in the tree’s darkening 
branches. I remember 
the damp sap of that dream—
across the quad, two cardinals 
whistling back and forth 
with such sweetness. 
It would take me a decade 
to vow I’d see us through. 
Trust me, you kept saying, 
until pulling into the drive 
I heard myself answer, I do.

The caterpillar digests 
itself—that, the moth 

remembers. By design 
the former self ceded

to overhaul the heart. 
At rest among fruit 

trees: the brown cloud 
of its wings. And love- 

sick drones are scanning 
the nettle, mites 

unbinding their dead- 
white girdles of silk, 

as though the doomed 
leaves will last—

the readers of 
fate on furlough, the first

hard frost far off.

I found an old poem made of desert
bones, feathers, and thorns, but I couldn’t take it
with me, I haven’t learned yet
to smuggle poems out of the desert,
I know I shouldn’t leave poems behind,
I felt lost as I left this poem
amongst a pile of white stones,
I placed this poem with its dry feathers and thorns
carefully over the stones like rattlesnakes leave
their dry skin behind, I avoided its thorns,
I’ve gotten stung so many times in the desert,
desert poems sting is the worst,
by now,I should have learned to collect
and save poems in the desert,
I should be ready to carry painful poems,
I should have learned to split poems,
so I could take away a piece,
I should never, ever, ever leave poems
on top of rocks, a poem with bones, feathers, 
and thorns will be mistaken with another stone 
sitting amongst a pile of white stones;

the day I become a snake 
I woke up alone bent and twisted 
coiled tight inside an old hammock
 
I’d crawled slowly at night to warm 
my bones but I was left alone, so
 
I crawled down into the earth 
afraid to bend and crumble 
 
I pushed and bent my bones
through the red crusted mud walls 
around Abuela’s house, 
 
I smelled the stench of flowers 
and wet dirt from her garden
 
My split tongue tasted the hot 
morning air and guided me across
her gardenfull of grass and dirt 
 
the day I become a snake 
children stoned another snake 
with green and yellow spots as me 
 
I hid and shook my head 
when the poor snake screeched 
like children scream as their mothers 
yank their teeth out;

1

When we’ve just taken off,
and the distance between us and the earth 

is still understandable—a few cars down there
sliding along a duct of road, 

all the differentiated roofs slipping back
into a flat suburban panel—

that is when I most acutely feel
the plane could crash.


2

I was suddenly lifting—

the surface of my sleep below
was falling rapidly away. The expanse

between my body and whatever always 
lies beneath it kept increasing, 

and I could feel the possibility of plunging 
through that vastness into nothing. 

Then I was in the dark of our room 

with you, love, stirring, 
and I eased back into the headlong 

forward hurtling that’s a kind
of stillness.
 

We watch the ultra-buff, over-bronzed 
men flex their bodies wearing nothing
but tiny, shiny speedos & a smile.

Their quads gnarled & bulging,
their pecs flexed w/elbows pointed 
out in the ultimate teacup pose

w/teeth awash in whitening as they strain
to hold face muscles in place for the judges
& us at home who rented the VHS tape

alongside other films w/a plot & a score
to underline heightened & tense moments
in a script. Maybe a piano played soft

as the view shifts to lovers on the sofa,
mother & stepfather in an embrace now
after days of not touching or talking

when he moved out after the last fight
about drinking or money or nothing.
The music intensifies now w/flashbacks
 
of him screaming at her while taking the TV, 
the couch & everything else his money bought
while little brother & I stand in the corner

waiting for this part to be over or edited
out from memory like a scene deleted
for theatrical release. In the director’s cut,

the act is there as well the kiss & make up part
where we sit on the floor & gaze at sculpted men
sculpting a type of desire in little brother,

a want for a type of body in place of my own
& mother a love stronger than the men
posing & straining to hold it all together.

In theory I don’t
like it but then when I’m there
 
I remember how in so many
other locations
it is not considered permissible
behavior to splay facedown
and speak to no one
 
the beach
 
is one of the few spots left
where you get spared
where you may excuse yourself
from the performance of
these clabbered conversations
 
one person saying the fortune
teller on Highland Avenue
couldn’t make rent and hammered
the storefront shut
 
the other spouting back shouldn’t
she have predicted, being
a fortune teller and all, that was
going to happen
 
sour pattern
 
anyway that’s not what they do
it’s not like they’re in there informing
people which semiconductor
stock is fixing to split or in what
year they’ll get divorced
 
it’s more silhouetted
it’s not like they’re in there
 
cautioning walk
with another person that night
keys will be hardly, the fortune
reader isn’t in there screaming,
weapon enough
 
the beach
 
the terns and the metal detectors
the sensation of combing
through sediment witlessly
 
another person
would not have been knocked
 
into the air and propelled
toward the copious bramble
would not have stayed there all night
would not have required returning
the next day
in hopes of retrieval
 
kneeling
scrutinizing the thistle
 

