1. I didn’t know the new name for it. That sound born of tongue and teeth, of sass and attitude’s sweet fire. That, if you weren’t cautious, could land a hot palm flat across your face. Steups. As a child living in Trinidad, that was the name I knew. A name devoted to the sound. And I was Queen Steups herself, flinging it from my mouth while cussing the lady stealing peppers through the fence of my grandfather’s yard, rolling it along my lips when I struck out during a game of cricket, hurling it beyond my small frame like a winged stone. When my family immigrated to Queens, New York, there was no way I could leave my favorite weapon behind. I kept it close both at home and at school, invoking my inner rude gyal whenever the moment called. But it soon dawned on me that Americans did not call it how I called it. I couldn’t figure out the name and at such a young age, the fear of ridicule prevented me from even asking a question. Without the name, the sound slowly disappeared from my vocabulary. Maybe it wasn’t the absence of the name that did it, maybe it was the slits carved by the blade of winter’s cold, or maybe it was the cruel expanse of concrete and asphalt, paved over indigenous burial grounds. Whatever it was, it chased me far into the hollows of myself, somewhere within the marrow. The new land quieted me. Robbed me of my spark, my slickmouth and audacity. The new land roped my tongue, stuffed sullied rags into my cheeks. 2. She Tries Her Tongue, Her Silence Softly Breaks . I was reading M. NourbeSe Philip’s collection of poems in the whitest, most affluent space I had ever lived. I was at Georgetown University, enthralled by the intellectual rigor of my courses but also thirsting for a lick of my histories and philosophies among the unapologetically, predominantly Eurocentic canon. I was seeking some respite, a quick glimpse of my reflection when I walked into the Caribbean Poetry class. I barely knew the function of a line break. I didn’t know about experimental, or conceptual. Or about the wars between poetic communities. I knew that I hated most poetry, that most poetry felt like a white noise squatting in the cave of my ear. Felt like rules and regulations, like it was holding up a great, unfeeling structure that had built itself both inside and around me. I also knew that when I eventually found a poem that I loved, I was transformed and willing to risk anything to protect the winds from where that poem came. When reading the collection, the first feeling that rose up in me was not exactly love, but intrigue. It was a swirl of voices rushing in from all directions. Words taking up residence on all parts of the page, snaking down the margins, unfolding into a brilliant display. Poems like Discourse on the Logic of Language  and The Question of Language is the Answer to Power flooded into me, murky yet familiar, like water I’d tasted before. She Tries Her Tongue, Her Silence Softly Breaks. The name of the collection is also the name of the poem that dug into me the most. It is a testimony of the disorientation and trauma that accompanies dislocation. Philip writes about the violence that occurred within and trailed out from the Trans-Atlantic slave trade and European colonization, with an emphasis on the brutality of having one’s language hacked away. The poem draws inspiration from various sources, including dictionaries and gardening guides, a technique that pays homage the appropriation and compilation that made survival possible for Africans enslaved in the Americas. These practices safeguarded the future while retaining fragments of the past. “ Hold we to the center of remembrance/that forgets the never that severs/word from source/and never forgets the witness of broken utterances that passed before” No, I did not have a good working knowledge of the mechanics of the poem. I couldn’t yet describe its moving parts but I knew that poem was in dialogue with my experiences, offering a witness and a companion. I knew what it was to be uprooted. I knew what it was to reach down and fist a soil that did not feel like it was mine. I knew how to ache for chenet and pomerac, to make do with the juice of another fruit. I knew the women in my family, how they held to the center of remembrance while working long hours and baking cassava pone and helping with the homework and telling stories of our blood’s great greats, thwarting time and its atrocities, pushing forward centuries of customs, surviving and surviving and surviving. 3. “ It is important, when transplanting plants, that their roots not be exposed to the air longer than necessary. Failure to observe this caution will result in the plant dying eventually, if not immediately. When transplanting, you may notice a gently ripping sound as the roots are torn away from the soil. This is to be expected: for the plant, transplanting is always a painful process.” The ripping doesn’t always sound like ripping. For me, it sounded like locking the door of my room while reading textbooks and magazines aloud with the sole purpose of perfecting my American accent. And after I perfected it, the ripping became not knowing the sound of my true voice. I sounded American at school and Trinidadian at home. This difference was a source of shame, as if I was somehow not being my genuine self in either place. I eventually accepted the fluidity of my tongue to the point where I can sound completely Trinidadian, American or a mix of both, without being aware of when the change occurs. I learned that this fluidity is one of the most beautiful parts of myself. I also learned that Americans call steups,“sucking your teeth.” To me the phrase is not as satisfying. It doesn’t contain the same memories of small, pleasurable rebellions as steups. Still, there is a magic in the act of discovering a name. To know a name is to change how you experience the ground on which the name is called, much like making a map of the tongue. 
When my body had forgotten its
purpose,  when it just hung off my brainstem
like whipped mule.  When my hands only wrote. When my
mouth only ate.  When my ass sat, my eyes read, when
my reflexes  were answers to questions we all
already knew.  Remember how it was then that you
slid your hand  into me, a fork in the electric
toaster of my body. Jesus,  where did all these sparks come from?
Where was all  this heat? Remember what this mouth
did last night?  And still, this morning I answer the
phone like normal,  still I drink an hour’s worth of
strong coffee. And now  I file. And now I send an email. And
remember how  my lungs filled with all that
everything? Remember  how my heart was an animal you
released from its cage?  Remember how we unhinged? Remember
all the names  our bodies called each other?
Remember how afterwards,  the steam rose from us, like a pair
of smiling ghosts? 
I tell my woman
I’m in trouble.  Two dice banking
against the curb  and my foot
leaning into another decade,  where men were
tied to chow calls  & count
times, & if the man tossing  the dice rolls
one more seven  I’m reaching for
my buck knife.  This is where I
am when she says  she doesn’t love
me – I’m stuck in  a craps game
that’ll end in my blood  turning money
into a bad omen.  All this I got
from your streets,  those avenues
circling me with  a dead man’s
redemption. You want  me to believe if
I pray long enough  things will
change, that the homeless  will grow hundred
dollar bills instead  of knotty hair.
But I dig knotty hair,  I dig the way it
feels when a fine woman  tells you no for
the last time. She once  said yes, &
if rumbling with gulag  people call the
nation’s capital is just  holding on to the
memory of yes,  I’ll hold on. I
believe I will.
A windshield doesn’t care about the sun,  but
it will come. And it will smear  across
my rearview mirror when it does,  but
I’m not done. If I’m unluckily  alive
then, I will drive my four-door  suicide
past every pleading traffic  sign,
through every red light, yellow  line
and guardrail clinging to a cliff-side  I
can find until my front seat catches  fire
from the sparks between my shredded  tires
or my engine opens in explosion  I
am tired god if you’re not  good
enough to kill me let me die
But then I think I see the wind  as
an intention, pressing us  with
weather. All the pieces  of
the air you’ve put together  somehow
know just how to hold  the
rain. They somehow know  to
funnel and unfold, to swerve  the
snow, to rake the beaches  and
to slope the arcing seagull’s wings.  As
wind inside a shell: they know  you
in themselves. I’ll find you out;  I
can know you as a hint in things.  I
do. And through the window  I
have known you as an opening. 
It's not always pretty. I have seen the botched surgery of sex, the amputation. I have seen things with spoons which I cannot unsee. But all this mess, all this sweat and daddy and fetish: this is the textbook of the body. The instruction manual. To exchange the gift for cash. To compose the jingle to fucking. This is the dumb cousin of love making, who taught you to forget your table manners. To eat with your fingers. To kiss without touching. 
The Genius Discusses Astrology  and you know what else? She’s all proud to be a Gemini. She tells everyone, as if being crazy was a prize show horse she wants to tie up in the front yard. Why would anyone want to feel things twice? Like yes, I'll take the electric chair and the spear. I'll have the food poisoning and the poison. May I please fall in love with two different people at the same time until love is peeling itself away from me in all directions like I am a fucking banana or a wishbone. Some days, I feel sorry for her. I really do. She doesn't realize it, but she is starving. She's got too many mouths to feed in that head of hers. She's got too many heads on that vase of a neck. Must be like making love to a puppet show. 
Her bra flies -
and this - is how I want to love - God  however you spell
her - sixteen, that's a fact - we meet  in a room in my
basement - six -thirty a.m. - before tall  hallways swallow
us in the name of mathematics - biology -  history - her
shoulder blade, this - is math - her  laughter rippling
the windows, biology - meeting  as the sun quakes
in its infinite hall, this - history -  and English, how
my mouth knows to quake - is when  my father opens
the door - his face, an apology of perfect  doves, how he
closes it again - lets us be, before everything  decides against
us.
When our breasts arrived as a kind of currency, we’d tug our camisoles low, use our newfangled bodies to haggle with the ice cream man. The winner was the girl who received her
chocolate cone for free, who sucked on candy
cigarettes the same way she wore a training bra. That summer my pockets grew forests of hand-tied maraschino cherry stems: tampered evidence that I might one
day be worthy of kissing. In exchange for rides on the handlebars of their bikes, we’d let the boys bite the beads off our candy necklaces until the chokers resembled punched out teeth. From their slobber, blue and violet stained my throat where the sweetness had once been, so I suppose, Your Honor, I was preparing for him.
1  For the magical tires of taxis, conjuring invisible lanes of traffic, swerving this
way & that, swift and  sweet as banana smoke—a call-and-response with astonished
tourists, hearts in throats  2  For
the holy molecules of the Atlantic, rippling waves of foam into white sands;
rising into  rainforested hills; into
ethereal tolls of cathedral bells; into fountains of clouds; up up up into
orgasms of summer rain.    3  For
the refrain of a carioca’s curves,
orbiting Sambódromo like a galaxy of bronze suns; for the hint  of her smile, faint as the sweetness of coconut
water; hair, lush as the pulp of caipirinha limes  4  For
time, bending on bandstands asway with bossa nova; fruit stands of blood
oranges, cashew fruit,  and acerolas ;
newsstands, a cacophony of headlines in Portuguese, Spanish, and other colonial  languages  5  For
posses of capuchin monkeys, marauding refrigerators for mangos; for bullets
raining across  favelas like the kisses of violent lovers; for hillsides of
black faces, whites of their eyes shining  sharp as teeth  6  For
each dirt seam in the green, rainforested robe of Corcovado; for the paths to
redemption, rising  through the clouds; for the arms of the Christ,
wide enough to welcome all mankind’s  unwashed  7  For
the hips of Oxum, emerging from the Mazomba River; summoning samba on pandeiros and  cuicas ; coloring
the slums with her tongue of tangerine and honey  8  For
gangs of hang gliders, painting clouds over Pedra Bonita; for each Rocinha rooftop junkie  hallucinating Christ the
Redeemer; for the roar of Maracana, raising the sky for an immaculate,
mid-field goal by Ronaldo.   9  For
sandbars; juice bars; sidewalk sports bars—a sea of yellow and green #9 jerseys
overflowing  every cobblestone street in Lapa  10  For
the last reais of an unsuspecting
tourist, pickpocketed by the long, blue arm of the sea; for the  mistress of the blue hour—in the avenue,
nude—searching for her black negligee; for  the dream nets of fishermen, dragging the moon
through Guanabara Bay like an orange  11  For
the 42 arches of Arcos da Lapa; for Portuguese graffiti dancing a capoeira of color; for street  parties of bohemians & thieves, drunk on a
cocktail of cachaça, bamboo flutes, and samba
de  roda  12  For
excesses of flesh—Carnival costumes barely holding breasts; churrascaria waiters carving  avalanches of beef; Tijuca, a wonderland of fruit,
enough to feed all future generations in  heaven  13  For
the futvoley players; the surfers;
the cyclists & the sunbathers; joggers’ holy tendons, hoisting the  sun like bananeiras in the liquid gold of dawn  14  For
the blessed hands of the laborers—the bellhops, the barbers; the florists, the
butchers; the sex  workers; the police with their unseen arms; all
serving, all earning, all hustling with their  shoulders pressed to the holy wheel of everything  15  All
is holy, all is aglow, all is marvelous: 
The gas heater
talks to me in my sleep. All evening I turn  the radio’s
dials. It shivers, cracks, sputters, mad as my yen  but explicable.
In California, we couldn’t afford true  heat in
winter—only space heaters. Sometimes when the chill  grew unbearable
I’d lift my dress and let the warmth leak  onto my knees. I
kneeled there like a giraffe, the first impure  thought I ever
had—heat, flushing the blood skywards  to my giddy head.
The trouble with New York is that ice  doesn’t melt on
limbs. Did I never warn you: my heart  is an ambulance
driving through the snow? The heater’s ersatz  breath flares
over my ears. I listen to its language until at night  I dream about my
heater’s purr instead of the marvelous heat  of another body.
Yours or never. Is it space or substance?  In these sad
hours, we choose not to know. These days the light  falls dimmer so
we forget supper, forget to write, miss  calls, miss all
trains going westward, home. Sometimes I wake up  naked under a fur
coat, sweating. Lover, I want to be indifferent  to heat. My own
appalls me. I want to bury my hands like pigeons  in the snow. When
the whole room brims and broils, it is one  wildfire eating
another. Four nosebleeds stain the afternoon.  When I laugh, no
one detects the awful trouble I’m in.  Tonight let’s
waste the last of this fuel. You may hold me  responsible, but
wait until tomorrow, darling, for the threat  of snow
blindness. The frozen jukebox can’t play us a song.  When I am blind,
every light seems bigger, rutilant in the glaring  snow. When it’s
freezing, every lie seems true. Trapped inside  its delicate
construction, a brazen igloo, a den of wolf-warmth. 
Say: I hope your lover is a broken tugboat.
Say:  You will wake up in the body of
Sacagawea  with white man allergies. Say: If you
run over a fox,  you’ll take his heart with you and,
one by one,  foxes will run into the highway,
giving themselves  over to the night, and before you
know it,  poof! there goes the ecosystem. Good.  Say: May you never see the old world.  Don’t say: your mama’s so fat.
Instead:  your mama ain’t never made winter
soup  of her dead husband, doesn’t know  how to take marrow and make heat,  uses both hands to roll dice,  motherfucker. Say: Son of a
Mayflower.  Say: Daughter of the  American
Revolution.  Good. Say: I hope your backyard  erupts into a field of three-leaf
clovers  which smell unmistakably like wet
dog.  Say: Your firstborn will be a
terrible,  but dedicated, violinist. Say:  Your great grandparents will die,  and your grandparents will die, and  your parents will die, and you will  never quite remember the story  they always told about some town  with a name as braided as rope, some  kind of splinters in a man’s palms.  
As adversaries we made good lovers, made heat where there was little else to hold in common but youth and wanderlust until I found her with a former valentine reclining under skyrockets of wilted mistletoe, where the yuletide ebbed and “Auld Lang Syne” wheezed away on chariots of snow. My buckling knees upturned a crate of Clementines which drummed a stumblehearted rhythm across the snowcrust at her feet. Yellow gloves to my elbows in the suds late closing at Spiseloppen, an eatery for hippies and bikers from Pusher Street who tipped me with blocks of hash. The waitress first palmed bits of sintered brick like deposit slips at the window where I had cried Klare! then shuffled trays of pint glasses and flatware in water blued by sanitizing tablets, and I waved a latex thanks to the flame-haired socialists who toasted me as they toasted the chefs as well. Like a cat on pine needles, I danced the waitress out to smoke a chillum with the piano man. Much of an hour. Who could interrupt her stunning a parked window with her pout, soothing wrinkles from her apron? Damp flame with a burnt Prince Light behind my ear, I began to mimic liquid and the moment’s departure like crowds ungathering, the waitress leading me kittenish and heart- starved across cold cobble in the rawboned motif of a morning. I was the only chirping, songlets and the eking moon, throat bells keening, I moved my mind toward her mouth. Stuffed tiger, she said, I will carry you home in my teeth.
We drop our lives. The pieces burst forth into a
thousand blackbirds. My diaphragm is glass.  When I exhale, the anchors dropped in me free the
boat. The boat has a dorsal fin and learns how  to sink and inhale at the same time. I am a mess
of eyeliner when making love in Lancaster.  Selves I’ll never be in Athol, I birth a pack of
wolves. No one knows the scabs I’ve rolled in. By  three drinks I won’t say no to setting fires with
my breasts. Each, a bomb to dismantle or  detonate. Amy called it “engine‟ but engines
sputter. What I remember of hearts is snakeskin  shedding into silk and shadow into milk. I think
of blown pistons and an oil leak. I think of auto  mechanics in the sky, soldering sunset back from
rain. Burst flesh draws every shark on a bar  stool. Where are you going and who have you been?
A mattress without coverings and an  ashtray full of fingers. I’ve lost a way to point
to want. Instead, I hope to cut a room with  shoulders like a beg. The signal says, “pray.‟ By
pray, I mean step through the door of skin to  grace the fire. There is a place for us. A, your
skin cells parade my softest corners, curling to the  echo of a neckline. Your blue eyes set my veins
to blue. You are my left atrium, writing “I want  to know you forever” on its walls with invisible
ink. Palm to the forehead like exorcism and she  ties a black string around the sternum fire
escape. All my suns rust up against each other. I am in  myself, asking my mother not to die again. She
does and does. The orchids in me bend and  blend. Their spines of stem are fortified by
storm, now ask about the lilac bloom. Open the lips  and sing me. Listen. I am cluttered with hands. 
There is no air anymore, vibrations maybe. My son died on Friday. Yesterday morning I
had a call from his cell phone. I answered. There was a voice on the other end
like a robot but also like my son. He was speaking maybe through an electric
fan. Today, the cell rings again—his ring, El Coco —I don’t answer. Maybe
they have the cell now, too.  Today
is Sunday. When the cell rings, first the radio sputters then the cell rings.
My wife says they cut off the fingers to dial the numbers. My daughter says
they cut off the lips to sip Coca Cola. My brother says they cut off the ears
and listen. My mother says she is dead, and she never had a real name. My
father says something I don’t understand. He is dead, too. The desert says
coyote.  -Coyote.  My
son has a heart covered in black dog hairs, and when it beats, the hairs grow a
little longer, filling the ribs like burnt wires, bursting up into the
airwaves. The drone hangs above the desert on a string. It swings back and
forth tangled in the wires maybe. The head says the numbers, and it turns, the
tiny plane, it turns over the vibrations like a worker bee. Maybe the drone is
dancing, saying something sweet.  -Here is
something sticky and sweet. In the sand.  It has
no son. It has no brothers or sisters. No wife. It has no mother, no father.
Because the Bullet whistles just as the kettle  but waking the morning after  being shot in the back is hard  when the wound’s still asleep.  Because later is a slow dance  made to mimic the undead  and raising a casket is strength  no lover’s tongue can handle.  Because the phoenix is myth,  but the sword swallower is real  and coughing up ash  proves more fire than rising from it.  Because the heart was not made to
burn  but does it so well,  the lips not made to lie,  yet purse into pillows so perfectly.  Because the fireproof  know no birth in being set ablaze  and the flammable forget  too often to discard stubborn cinder.  Because love is a bullet  hole in entrance and exit  except when it sticks  silent as a slug beneath stone. 
Drone:  There was a time  I lived in a
house  in a city that
lived  in a thicket of
ice.  In the winter, no
one came.  Our cupboards,
full of sand--  our open mouths,
open  to catch, to
catch.  Queen:  My grandmother
told me  there was a time  when the skies in
winter were bomb  raids of
transparent crows.  The air was cold,
there was the threat  of the birds and
the leaves,  but an absence of
winged things.  It was a time
like a snow globe,  she said. The
house we lived in  she bought for
cash.  Worker:  There was a time  when cash meant  something.  Other than the
ice  that freezes the
day  in half—one piece
makes you  richer, the other
brings you sleep.  In that time,  the region in our
city  changed from bone  desert to tundra.
Glass skies ripe.  &
undercurrents of big beautiful fish  & the tales
folks  tell about them.  My grandmother
did not  tell tales of
water  or truth through
the winters,  through the
cupboards,  but netted the
lies coming  through our
teeth.  Slick like a
whale's  when swallowing
kelp.  That was when the
bombs  fell, or the
leaves, only  when the dark
broke out  like a loon, or a
coot--  raving and
contaminated. one. two. three. four. five. six. seven. eight. nine. x.    they buried my grandfather alive with his entire library. the last time harry houdini walked beneath stage lights he knew he was going to die. the doctors warned him in plain english another blow to the chest you'll be finished, kid. maxwell had a smoker's heart the size of an abandoned sky scraper.  massive.   empty.    only good for casting shadows beating proud and cold against that crooked cityscape. the doctors warned him in plain english. when they found him in a pool of himself beneath that queens streetlight his face held surprise how a child's hand holds illusion. the first time houdini escaped from his casket he's quoted as having said, the weight of earth is killing. they buried him alive with no photographs of his family beneath that hillside overlooking the city of his birth he can almost taste his childhood in the dark stale air he's learned to treat like a woman from within his office of coffin and paper there is no skylight cutting knives through the darkness no light to read by and besides the suffocation this is the hardest to breathe how oxygen must taste from a gas chamber's belly a family's forgotten tongue a phantom limb twitching with a dance still in the blood instead he studies his memories fingers the damp pages careful catalogues, the cartography of his family the magician performed his own burial three times.                  always barely surviving. he remembers the girlchild conceived on a bed of rye whiskey the wife with shotguns for eyes that only bloomed when he'd make himself caress her triggers the three sons he treated as a dictionary he remembers them now as a pasture of forgotten sunflowers faces bent in mourning to the ground a field of forgotten immigrants detained by chain links in the armory of his house. pulling dead rabbits out the empty to feed his children. the weight of earth is killing. each time my mother pulled her father from the drunk of his car where he had been living dead for years stale cigarettes floating in an ocean of mistakes a bottle of gin in the shape of a woman a shredded manuscript stained as his teeth he felt this weight. as far as i know i have never died but have often been mistaken for dead and often been buried alive embalmed in a bottle of bottom shelf whatever i am this constant walking apology this hijack of grandpa's hijinks and stage tricks this pigeon pull from mouth and naming poems this sawing in half with a microphone to show his drunk ghost still intact i know what it feels like to be drowning in earth clawing my way through dirt toward surface always barely surviving call this.    magic.
Night presses the gunmetal O of its open mouth against my own & I can’t help how I answer. He is the taste of smoke, mesquite-laced tip of the tongue. Silhouetted, a body always pulling away, but shirt collar in my fists, I pull him back. Need another double-black kiss. I’ve got more hunger than my body can hold. Bloated with want, I’m the man who waits for the moon to drown before I let the lake grab my ankles & take me into its muddy mouth. They say a city is at the bottom of all that water. Oh, marauder. Make me a drink. I’m on my way. 
I watched him, silent, beside me, take the rotten earth into his mouth, and, sober, with little shame, chew . . . In that altar between the gums of his teeth and his teeth, he worked the many tired leaves of it, downed, until it went ghost, not a thing at all really—or only liquid now: earth streaming from his lips, redone in bright terrible braids, pairs of them, and spat into a jar that could’ve been like prayer itself: how faith can be that one container, bare-breasted, which holds. I watched him, growing out to the heat of it, like a root. And though I knew this had something to do with power, I ignored it, for once being the thing that only looks at— eyes open, mouth ready, pregnant with the burn.     My classmate is making fun of the way I’m drinking my Coke; twenty-five years have passed and still me in the bleachers alone, she in cheerleading skirt and bright makeup like Van Gogh’s palette. There must be some correct method for tipping the bottle, the perfect angle. Her mimic assures me I must look like a horse attempting to breastfeed. I try to lip-read as she bends toward the other cheerleader, their velvet smiles bouncing around the noisy gym. Should I admit I liked the arced design her nosebleed left in the girls’ bathroom later? The moment I envisioned I’d punched that straight nose and felt retribution radiate through my knuckles? My action + her blood = Georgia O’Keeffe red on porcelain? I no longer drink Coke, but still this mental memento whenever I raise a beer to my lips, this bitter burning.
To understand the draw of neon beer signs, I must return to Main Street on a Friday night, the door of Bucky’s Bar opening and the laughter and hair band rock pouring out like sand, like the sounds from some faraway beach. To understand why chipped tables and plastic pitchers make everything else seem golden, we must return to the Corner Bar that Rocks in Moorhead where the long-haired men stood, pool cues lightly in hand, lifted their eyes just long enough in my direction, that bar stool pleather like a winning ticket between my fingers. To realize my grandfather’s dismay when I brought home hairsprayed rockers, we must remember he was raised on crew cuts and ‘yessirs and drank milk from the teat like a real man. The modern-day “real men” of whom Grandpa approved wore baseball hats and shaved daily and said, I could rape you right now if I wanted after a movie on their couch, told how the other bitch threw around accusations and no one believed her anyway, her reputation ruined, her smiling photo still on the desk like a trophy. To understand how difficult it is to drive home when your hands are shaking and you’re thinking about the long-haired man who warmed your boots with his hair dryer so your feet would be warm in the January snow, you must return to regret and loss and that moment of understanding about gut instinct, the way the All American boy opened the door for himself but not for you. 
I tell my students to start with that line and see what happens, find out what their skulls are good for. I’m thinking of Bobby Sands, of course, but they don’t know history, they can’t even tell me who Chuck D is, though they’ve all watched Flavor of Love with varying degrees of allegro. One of them says Bobby is between jobs. Too many of them say anorexia nervosa like they know what it means to bake a fat, sweet cake and serve it all to their older sisters, watching every bite like a firework. I’m surprised when one says that he doesn’t know Bobby and then writes something unrelated, a poem about mountaintop removal. Why not name the mountain Bobby, I want to ask, but that would be a stupid name for a mountain, right? My friend Bobby Weekend, who I named years ago, calls me later in the day and says he’s three months clean, he’s not even thirsty anymore, and I say good. I don’t tell him that he will be, again. He knows. His nickname almost didn’t stick because one day, drunk, he climbed on top of a moving car and fractured his skull on the windshield, and everybody started calling him Bobby Windshield, and we thought it was funny, back then. It’s not like we called him Bobby Nightstick, or Bobby Overdose, or Bobby Heartbreak. It’s not like he didn’t laugh a goon’s laugh and piss his new name off the roof.
I swear she kissed me first, but I have no evidence. I know the wine danced in the glass like a siren, all lean in and slow blink, I know the magnets in my palms spun until keys flung themselves toward us from all directions. conjurers always have to be watching our hands. spells dove from simple gesture, simple wishing, glancing touch. I know that I make things happen. I’m less good at making them stop. the want always wants more. that the wine danced is just evidence of magic messing with the everyday. this happens most often after dark. after the sun’s been forgotten long enough for the moon to seem like honest light. for the cab to seem like a vocabulary lesson and the long ride to a small room, a test of how much our tongues can lift before the temperature shifts. to dove is to rise like a creature with perfect bones. to drift a hand across a forearm at a bar is not magic or a promise, but evidence of how want flints against itself to become visible. when asked to explain how magnets work in layman’s terms, the scientist said I really can't do a good job, any job of explaining magnetic force in terms  of something else that you’re more familiar with because I don’t understand it in terms  of anything else that you’re more familiar with. why does the word palm dissolve in the mouth? how to explain what stays on the body for days, the kissed arm a stain of mouths, the belly a well of hands, hands, want and want and unstopping want. to watch our hands is not to stop them from conjuring but to know where they’re headed. to know what they’ve sheltered, all they’ve let go. to dove is to build something for as long as it’s needed, then release. this does not stop the wanting. does not unravel the spell or make the magnet any less magic. it does make for a more beautiful morning, though. the sun so much promise, so lit, it almost hurts to look at it. 
when your ex-girlfriend's sister corners you in the kitchen do not scream fire or slam the oven door on your hand. the empty wine bottles by the trash only seem to be rattling. the teapot is not actually screeching like a rape whistle. yes, you are caught between the window and the fridge, drinkless. yes, she wants to know what your queer status is. and yes, the kitchen door did just shiver on its hinges. no, that didn't happen. are those carolers at the door? or just the broken stereo. what is she saying? in the next room, your somewhat husband tosses back another vodka and laughs. you can hear the glass bottle clink against the glass, can hear a garage door open down the block, hear the neighbor's children turning in their beds. a woman in front of you is breathing impatiently. she is angry. the crumbs on the counter scramble into an arrow pointing to the door, the door under which your ex- girlfriend's husband's Irish tongue slides and kittens across the floor toward the woman's solid, khaki-covered ankles and you say what ? and she says many things about privilege and moving through the world like a straight girl and confusing students with your loose-fitting definitions and when you say weren't you married? like, to a dude? she says yes. but I never went back. you have to choose . and you can hear the filaments in the ceiling fixture sizzle. the glue under the linoleum starting to bubble. all the liquor in the house is in the other room and your mouth is a desert with a side of sand, you are stranded on the moon with a woman who thinks you can make the atmosphere breathable just by believing it, or rather you are on the moon and she's back in the spaceship telling you to take off your helmet, the weather's beautiful from where she's standing. really, you should go ahead and try it. 
The day’s first     gin is throat dry, sharp and        pure.        Ice still whole     when you get another.      You drink until       the angle of half- light is lost         until the glass is               asleep by the door   and the glass empty       and the glass carried.            The words swallow          and all next year the distilled shimmer in forgetting       the mind floats and widens below   anything bio- logical.    The mind with its musical light never surfacing the never    mind infused in an    abyss deeper than the         mind until your       body is only this and fleeing           the body with- in your body and the damage     is also parched like this  
Let’s get wasted as avocados, solemn and shapely in their alligator skins, lucid, sweet-talking lovers laid bare on rough blankets, two-for-a-dollar magic sacked and clutched in a child’s alley-way hand. Let’s get foamed, salty-eyed, dismembered into smoothness, gilded and glyphed onto a retired stripper’s back, smoked and spooled, grifters of the sea, shucked to a mineral glow. Let’s get stupid. Opalescent. God-complexioned. Viscera strangled to a shimmer. Ghosted, vanquished, viscous as hashish, lacquered and whispered into the Guadalquivir’s ear. Let’s get squalid and romantic in the squid-pink light roughing up the tulips, then let’s stumble down the throat of 3 a.m. to the titty bar where Magda will stroke our faces like children before breaking our jaws with those ungodly breasts and we will cry out with a tenderness that betrays our hunger, our voices thatched into a roof that collapses under her weight, twinkling like half-formed hearts terrorizing her vastness, green and wild as another country. Bearable music wincing between moans.   
Tonight my dead are restless, reincarnating themselves with names like Glissando and Surreptitious . I want a tree to be a tree again, not this trick of light, chaos of muscle curved into the neck of a violin. Autumn welds itself to the seams of August and we are saddled by its heat, the heart of silence smooth as a gun. You are somewhere iridescent and unholy, a sharp horizon of a man, traveling circus broken into luminous machinery, a caravan pounding like horses along the highway. You, dog-toothed piano, Queen whose glittered lashes eat up the dark. Your words are thumbprints on the eyelids of the gods. Your body is the book I break into, hijacked of meaning. Your voice, ejaculation of moonlight, your speeding ticket sex, gold-veined heart—tonight you are my only shelter. I inhabit you like a squatter, burning my one small light in this cemetery of thieves.     
The chopping board suffers the snick of the knife as Tom Waits smears smog into the steam. Risotto, I am told, merely requires patience, good wine and good music. Somewhere between asparagus and lemon zest, misplaced in the incessant stirring, I sprinkle my children’s names into the pot. The cooking wine is sharp angles in my mouth. I am saving the good bottle for company that is not coming. 
It is a simple snapshot, woman with wineglass paused at her mouth, giving the right of way to a half-hidden smile. It is a smile worth waiting for. Note that around her eyes it does not hide. Note that her eyes are focused out the window, the sunlight echoed there. Pay attention to the easy slope of her shoulders, the lens is just a third voice in the conversation, whispering. Listen to the conversation, see how it doesn’t make her hand shake. Delight in her messy hair. Trace the cautious grooves that she will soon name wrinkles. Look at her not care. Look at the care the photographer took with this simple snapshot. Examine the wineglass closely. See him echoed there, paying attention to the sunlight, paused. They have waited years for this smile. 
Moons Over My Hammy is a sandwich I know dick about. I’m not above Denny’s 3:00 AM breakfast. I’m just from Cincinnati, which means if you’re classically inebriated with the moon out, that is some shit you do at Waffle House, where the hash brown options describe my sixteen-year-old brain cells tonight at Mark Baker’s dad’s townhouse (who is gone on business), and we play Kings until seven people have chugged the equivalent of four Natural Lights, each, from a flower vase, and my parents told me, Just no alcohol and that’s final , which is high school speak for cover-your-tracks , which is fucking impossible for a sixteen year old. I wear American Eagle everything, because it’s an affordable Abercrombie, in order to look like someone who has made out with more than three girls (two of which while I was on vacation). Tonight, Alicia Westen spends an hour over my lap at Mark’s dad’s vomiting into a plastic garbage bag I am holding, each time passing echoey loud gas, which will define her more in our minds than that her father will die unexpectedly from a heart attack in seventeen months. Carrie Ballard will laugh the loudest, even though in two years, she will fellate three juniors in one night, and we will write it into the senior skit for our graduating class of 630, and Coach Ambrose will find me the morning of the assembly, and say man-to-man, to follow through with that skit is the kind of thing that damages someone for life , so I smile while backing away and say It is out of my control . Tonight Ox and I throw two punches that both miss, then lock ourselves in Mark’s dad’s bedroom to cry and say we love each other, while Mark screams and pounds the door, and people will tell that story eleven years from now. Tonight, Jay Oliver is a sixteen-year-old on mushrooms who doesn’t need to deal drugs, wearing Ox’s XXXL highlighter orange jump-suit, being chased through Tannenger Woods by a suburban traffic cop who shatters his femur on an oak tree. And we definitely meet at Waffle House at three in the morning where we know Joanne the waitress by name, pool our quarters to play Meatloaf’s “I Would do Anything for Love” 36 times back to back on the juke box, and I fall out of my chair on purpose to laugh on the ground. I have not lost my virginity, my grandparents, or spoken a word aloud about my father falling in love with another woman. Mark Baker uses the word “gay” seventeen times, refusing to apologize. It is 4:00 A.M in 1999 at Waffle House. I am drunk enough to loudly call him racist. I throw up in the bathroom before taking my scattered, smothered, covered hash browns to go, stumble the full five miles of moonlight back to my bedroom, weeping the entire way. 
I say this place where I rest my cheek on her back between her shoulder blades is as splendid as any city even the one beating streetlight in the balmy evening just outside her window. This winter is unseasonably warm. We ripple together, total ﬂesh, gone back to our mammal selves, looking for new light as the sun sets early as it will all year. It is tempting to mistake chemistry for destiny, how easily we together make this togetherness, how I know without knowing she wants my ﬁngers curled inside her, then my beard to baptize with that iron ink the moon calls forth from her every time Earth's shadow silks across its face. And how I gulp. Morning will come & I'll neglect to bathe, wanting her animal smell on me all day so I'll discover, on the train, the purple cursive piebald along my ring ﬁnger, what her body, in its delight, wrote on me in the same language of vowels she sang all night into the pillow while the stars burned away.
the last time I thought of you was on an airplane to Chicago beneath, I saw the Pennsylvania landscape in snow and I swear       I saw horses kneeling in fields, drinking at frozen basins, running uneasy in their own silence I’ve grown accustomed to holding my breath through any pleasure or pain sometimes, I understand the plight of horses their need to use what they have             Turning fear into power is not easy but they fool you and with their weight pin you against the stall door when you least expect it if only for a moment what soreness in their jawline          the bridle must cause when something unexpected touches their face        they twitch twitch at               steel spurs on ribs, at the feel of leg on leg days when I am rereading fragments of Seferis these are the things that I cannot forget: The snow and the water frozen in the hoofmarks of the horses 
Mother Says:  we didn’t know birth control just the sex got it from my grandma ten or twelve of her children parading on the carpet’s 1930s weave she could bear down pain her way through a bolder weight between her legs her last was born under a tree leaves lumped like soft loaves of wheat bread an egyptian cushion we were told how wide she opened the wind inside her pushing the tree reaching down pulling him out we never questioned the facts we just wanted a lil something-something everywhere on the beach behind the zoo my first time was in a stalled car rain and a boy’s fingers bucketing down, tapping on my back and breasts that night, i did not have my grandma’s strength but i too, opened up    Father Told Me:  back then, the body did not have just the hunger grandmother’s morals caught us vinegar or golden seal or buttermilk curdling sweetness hidden under choir robes her heavy-handed lessons on sex stained me guilty in pomegranate in blood orange in bible ink brightness to remind my fingers not to touch my hands anxiety cramped afraid to grasp or grope grandmother’s alluded anger the fear of being brought before her my palms inability to catch to shuck off any tears my eyes checkered innocent for years until your mother tinged my vision she filled my tongue made it swollen until a gush pomegranate, blood orange no shame in kissing your future i was trapped in her, drunk in the wine cooler white of her white a fruit worth breaking grandmother’s god and her gaze poised and precise       my legs, bridge wide my skin, back seat tough and leathery my body, rain drenched on the inside and you arriving faster than the next song 
Sean and I slink down to my Buick with the green handle of funeral whiskey & 2 Mason jars. Into my coffin with the death drink. Rain, pouring the door closed on loss. I sip and smoke alongside the stories, chasers for the hearse we didn’t have in July. We kill the thing. One final dip of wrist. Talk through ghostly haze. Absence, threadbare shroud. Pity, my invitation for a lonesome party. Sip and smoke. Say and say and say: layered shots of when, why, where, who. The names mix and marry. I float face down in past flesh: it lets me touch the living without shame. 
Woods shove limbs of us through broken oaths, broth of bones, believing the leaves to be brutally alive, this hand you took in your hand reeled in rain, yielded calla lilies through spokes of frosted shadows. And the throat worn thin by the land, windows shuttered to its blowing, curtains merely stirring the sleeplessness you made me. It will ease my heart a little, a little while at least, to have cracked enamel husks, something needling between us, as the loaded beasts stumble through the bruised dawn, trod the drop across the reservoir, kneel at its corpse and drink. I’m talking to students about bulls & fists in Ellison’s Invisible Man. You’re on some interstate rushing towards me. I imagine you’ve sat zazeen, your feet tucked underneath you, your hands—pugilist in another life—resting, open & upward. You’ll breathe evenly today; window down, the wind will catch each exhalation releasing your wife’s body from underneath your tongue. Soon, your mouth will mirror my body’s loose gyrations; the day’s meditation set conveniently aside. Tonight, I will sit cross-legged on the hotel bed, my naked fingertips barely touching, my falling breasts rising with every om circulating from your diaphragm to your larynx to vocal chords to palette to your red lips. The moon will be full tonight, Love. Imagine your palms on my stomach. We haven’t touched in years. I am reminded of the thirty years of bodies you’ve rested & raved & turmoiled in, the children you didn’t release, the first body & the next & the next & so on, you wept into. Your image ending with you. Your pale, soft hand on my brown stomach, planted there. I am bleeding & you are speaking haiku into me. In Gaellic, you say something about your pasts, about your body bouncing from one square ring to another, your flights into various bodies, your heart exposed to camera lens, to black pen on white paper. Your untethered body drifts to your six years of solitude with your newly found god beating sexual desire out of you. You are a fighter, remember. Your breath remembers. I don’t recall the power of prayer when your fingers push into me, but of need, yours, mine, my lover’s, your wife’s, all tucked into the pillowcase, waiting for our heads to meet, to fall, to drift into slumber. 
You have woken up on a sliver of his king-sized bed every morning for a year. In the first hour of open eyes, you let him make love to you—five times. You are thinking of adding vanilla extract to his pancake batter, of arranging blueberries on his plate in the shape of your names. Of the places outside his big city window he has not yet paraded you through. There are still barstools in this borough that don’t know you’re his girl. Afterwards, you point to the shower, the doorknob, to last night’s stripped-off clothing waiting for your body to fill it— the day that darkens so fast. When you inch out of bed he asks Where do you think  you’re going? The story does not change. He has never, and will not now snatch your wrist. Will not pin, force. Will not smack a chorus of yeses from you— you are a girl. You have learned to bargain with laughter before. But this morning your giggle is a foreign currency. A kicked-in fence. You explain the wound between your legs. How the well has dried up. Feels like thick cotton rags folded inside you. The story does not change. He does not grab you by the braids. There is no hand wrapped around your mouth like duct tape. There never was and there won’t be now. Instead, he charms the guilt from your hips. Says you are a feast and he, The Famine. How selfish it would be to hoard such fruit. You explain a second time: fat cotton rags folded inside. Dry as licking cinnamon and sand. Wound, you say. A small rip. He does not claw open your dress. Rather, he says If our appetites don’t align, we probably will not work. You whimper, beg, say Five times already this morning, Baby. Pain. Rip. Cinnamon and sand. He says  Probably will not work. Doesn’t lift a finger, but smirks as you throw yourself down. Pin your own shoulder back. Split your favorite dress on purpose. As you rip 
Somewhere a match is igniting a cigarette and there is laughter in the flame. Two friends sitting in a doorway, sharing a bottle. The streets are exhausted.  I will try to tell everything: how words are the only people I know All the warehouses along West street, their graffiti and wasted condoms, half asleep cars still clucking in the heat, the whole place begging to be quiet. Even the men who work graveyard at the loading docks are trying not to speak.  that the sight of this world falls onto my hands like hot ash Every river is a shivering half of the sky,  but this one is a breath of air, motionless, between here and the abandoned ghost ship of the city. Where the buildings once were, the darkness of their shadows.  and it burns a print over my palms, a picture slowly developing The flash of sirens works slow minuets around the bedroom walls. A neighbor is taking special care not to wake her baby. Her footsteps a certain song, one of secrecy.  or a map drawn so long ago the city is forgotten, an old pain. 
in the year of bad but necessary decisions a boy I would later love yelled at me for getting into the back of a pickup truck driven by strangers with my little sister  in Wisconsin. it wasn't the smartest thing I'd done to date, but certainly the most entertaining. in the years of drinking as the key to domestic tranquility  I tacked discount fabric to the walls to cover the tangerine the previous tenant had painted over the textured wallpaper. I went to work every morning. at night the rats would run the walls and if he were home he might throw a shoe against the wall to make them stop. often he wasn't home. I'd let them run and run. the night a black wool dress pressed against the windows. we slept with the windows open because we couldn't control the heat in the years of constant overdraft, in the years  of mouths in stairwells, in the years of erupting bookshelves and faces dissolving in acid and powder my body grew a spongy, undeliberate heart. my hands hung useless  at the ends of shrugging arms. in the year of choosing love over reason, I paid a stranger to catalogue my stories while I cried  and blamed my parents. I lived above an alley in an apartment painted yellow because it received no natural light. it was my love's dream home so we lived in it. when she left  I stayed for months, counting the seams in the concrete ceiling. listening to the trucks empty the dumpsters every morning, every morning. in the year of escape by any means necessary I recovered my accent. started believing in ghosts again. calling them by my grandfather's name. in the year of escape by any means necessary again, I remembered my sister's face as we climbed into the back of the pickup driven by strangers. the wind on our necks  off the lake, how she hesitated at the tailgate and looked at me, how she took the boy's hand and stepped up and in, thinking, as I was, I'm sure of it,  we're together. what's the worst that could happen. 
Rita moved into the Big House on Alcatraz and winked like a fox in a chicken coop at the fading mirage of Redbone. She patted her belly, smiled at his mother, cooed at his father like a blues juke joint brewed in her blood. She sat on the stoop of Alcatraz, the biggest house painted like the sky, sitting spread eagle in the middle of Berkeley’s intersection. The Big House was named after the penitentiary reckless enough to have its own island. Rita sat on the sprawling white teeth of the stairs and dreamed. She dreamed there was no color red—only Bam and Rita and babies. She dreamed she was always pregnant and the walls caved in and curved out. She dreamed the waves of babies flushed themselves in reverse from her past mistakes and into her patient arms. Her breasts swelled warm with the idea. The heat unfolded in her chest dashed quickly across her sternum before spreading dense through her belly. The fire rumbled through her body causing a wretched tear to shoot from her throat. She lay her head, heavy and spinning, on the white wood and felt the hot rush, like the Oakland Hills brushfire, dance around her belly and settle calmly in her lap. Her eyes flickered. She could only see the babies, all of the tight-eyed babies surrounding her feet, she was too busy dreaming to notice all the blood. 
the mouth is a mighty sword/the sword's tongue be numb in the mouth of the lord/the lord be wondering why the mouth move so much/why the knees ain’t as nimble as the mouth/how thieving the mouth be/busting noise and causing other mouths to quiver/a violent act in shutting mouths with your own/but no one owns the mouth/the mouth owns everyone/no one knows they just a guest of the mouth/most of these fools think they run the mouth/find out quick when the mouth sit still/find out truth when the mouth upturn ugly at the sight of happy/learn who the real boss be when the mouth pull apart something beautiful at the sight of blood/blood be the mouth's only friend/blood and tongue and teeth love the mouth vicious/they be like "look how the mouth protect us little things"/how the mouth pry itself open and wide for everything/how the mouth look like a cave/how the mouth hide a body, a whole body inside its pink/how the mouth let a man make his home inside/how the mouth hide a woman's smile and voice inside its belly/how the inside of a mouth is the only place women can stay if they silent 
Since I took to you like a firstborn, my words have grown: apples from the branches of your bones. I’ve learned the slow sounds of your harvest: resinous comb, too-good symmetry, kingdom worth kneeling for. You tear through me to make room for your light, stitch sleep beneath my lids & sing to me from hymnals of rhyme. You are my desperate hosanna, spine a scaffolding for my grief. Is there a name for this— something beyond straw baby, beyond lion’s mane and meteor? My insatiable myth, my Geppetto of gold, let me undress your malaise— I want to bear it all for you: the crowning, the suddenly being claimed— but you couldn’t exist without your love of loss, & so I will stop at quiet chasm, at most favored of disciples, will be a cloud of witness, letting your darkest aches dance in my lungs, letting the quiet epiphany of your hands swallow me whole. Flamenco is like the blues. Of course this assumes you understand the blues and know what blood tastes like; let me start again. Like a cigarette that smokes you backwards. Like lightning stumbling down the stairs drunk with three old friends she never introduced. Acid rain stained and scorched through nine generations of a homeless library. What came before flamenco became flamenco like grapes becoming wine, pounded underfoot, like wine becoming vinegar in the bottom of the barrel or the secret hall of your intestine. It’s like chewing your way out of prison. Of course this assumes you smell the larger prison of the world outside, metallic tang and phosphor of its weeping eye, it’s like digging into that eye to build a nest for your children or a grave to fuck and joke in. Flamenco is about death first and sex second, even when it’s laughing; in fact, sex has to make room for a lot of things, a hundred songs about your mother, for example, and songs about lost homelands, and jokes - but death is the oldest mother, death is the girl’s middle name, and the first place you came from, and the punchline. Something happens to the body in its role as filament of history, when the city builds a gate and decides which tents must pitch themselves outside of it, which languages be buried in the ash, whose backs will break to keep the hinges oiled. This isn’t about (just) skin, (just) sex, (just) flint, but the body comes to harbor traces, a sense of humor, slag heap of the absurd, marks where death saw margin and laid a supple hand. Flamenco is like your first shot or first grapefruit, what they drained from the cord when they cut you in the operating room, and this assumes you know it’s music, that all of this is music -- like trying to stop a fire by jumping down and swallowing the matches. 
The spirit of death wore a turtleneck and kept his hair back in a ponytail band. The spirit of death had flowy pants on. When the spirit of death finished dancing, the American girl said it was creepy, and the German girl said he was just so effeminate, and the American mother said well, he was clearly _____. Where I leave a silence they shot Lorca and he died against a wall. Here are the spoken and unspoken rules broken by the spirit of death: A man does not dance while a woman sings. He dances while a man sings and a man plays the guitar, and if a woman dances a man is singing, and if a woman sings no one will dance. A man while dancing does not raise his arms above the level of his shoulders; he does not curve one up, one down like pouring liquor; he does not curve anything, least of all his body, least of all the his body’s spine and groove as though he might bend in the wind or to other purposes. His turns are quick and merciless; his feet are knives and cudgels to keep the snapping ground at bay. Lorca shivered in New York like a jasmine bush and could not help going home to die. Here are the rules death forces all of us to break: your body cannot start an earthquake. Your body cannot barbecue its bones till they leap and sizzle on the surface of night; you’re not a coal-walker, a home for gods and monsters; inside you is not a vacuum sucking and bending light as you implode. The _____ man bent and bent, and where I leave a silence Lorca eulogized his best friend, or love of his heart, saying horn of the lily through the green groins, or spearing delirium through green English, and let his language collapse. I tell you he had a tornado inside him. Of course the spirit of death would come to Sevilla like this, would hear a woman singing and rush to fill the pounding shoes with moths, surging inside bodies who loved like his, for whom desire is a door that must be axed through when the house burns down, your mother and your lover and your laughter must stream into the dark now as the house burns down, and the spirit of death angle gender into its split and spinning shadow, this is the truth, death queers us all, the music sang him so. 
Dolphins have been piling up on the beach since January. Fish are dying so thick and fast their bodies pave the rivers. These stories keep making the news and I keep flipping to talk shows where a crying woman begs her absent husband Come back and take care of this thing you laid down and made with me. Somewhere a boy stands under a tree of sleeping blackbirds, firecracker shaking in his hands. 
They told me I fell from the q-tip legs of a white boy, a sweet one at that. Said he jived into my mother, the floor; sugar dusted me in with the long stroke of a silver heel, but how was I supposed to believe that mess? I knew my daddy was something hiding in the sky. I heard him shout my name in the wet wind, when the clouds went dark-skinned and all them light bulbs start flickering and God’s mama ain’t yelled at him yet to stop playing with the switch. He beat beats into those fat, black drums, told me to dance hair grease slick on a Sunday or a Friday or any day that black folks might gather in someone’s name and sweat/sing/faint. Sometimes, pops would stick out a white hot hand too quick to hold, laugh after he snatched it back, make me move this way, that way, all ways, always had me moving, sweating for the sweet and shock of his touch before the sun came back with his rude ass light/truth. That’s when my daddy disappear, and I live then in the limbs of sycamore in September colored sinners seeking salvation, can give up anything for God ‘cept me they know ain’t nothing sacrilege or secular about me Devil don’t make nothing this good to you. Have you seen black folks wrap themselves in me? Could be at a wedding or grocery store, I strike like the ghost, making bones beg for wind, for fat and cocoa butter rolling off the skin for how each step that calls out holy and shake and fire you seen a woman get happy wherever she remember God? you’ve seen her dance me. You seen a joy in the hips. I masquerade any song into a hymn of boogie, they know me like a spiritual like tithes, they all know that my name mean honey on the burn in the body’s language. When the world ends, the roaches will dance me while they scream however their kind screams at the whisper name, good news spread by the first body that catches the hum of lightning in a leg and they’re off. Have you ever danced the slide? That’s a dumb question. Of course you know how I creep into every joint seduce them to bend in my name. Did you know they said a white man made me? I’ve been moving so long don’t remember where I coming from, but when’s the last time you seen a white boy do this? 
Beyond here, there are dragons, and men and women who are somehow able to ignore the dragons. Men and women who live with dragons. Beyond here, things are dangerous. But that’s not to say there’s nothing dangerous here. Because there is. There are knives at the back of dark drawers, a burner that will never completely turn off. There is a bookstore across the street from the bar next to the all-night coffee shop. There are universities and rooftops.  Jukeboxes that make or break a night. There is a woman with red hair, blue eyes and tattoo of a small girl asleep beside a dead tree. You’ve got friends here.  One is epileptic.  Most have seen you naked. Most have seen the blood blisters.  Most have seen you shrink. They’ve seen you grow so small you’re barely a thing any more. You lift with the breeze.  A single hand could not hold you. Many many hands could not hold you. They would not settle, but would make motion after motion. Because you are tiny. This will come in handy when you meet the dragons, breathing sulphur, chewing bone, waiting, or if not waiting, ready.  
When the time arrived for revolution, our hands bloomed white with carnations. The man with the steel and the man with the machete stripped sugarcane from stalks and sat like children to gnaw the fiber. The sun gave up the earth and the world as we knew it ended not in fire but in the midnight darkness of a winter road. We accepted this; a land without light excited us. We used our tongues to taste the embered air and our shoulders with no armor to know the wind's direction. We walk the length of the forest without you, though some nights you're beside us and again we're showering in summer light and again we're lying our bodies across a field of dead leaves in autumn. I wish I could show you how good I've become at counting to ten by tapping my fingers against hip bones when rain pounds the wickered dark. I know how to breathe underwater now. I know what's beyond the wish we had for a changed world. In my solitude I'm free to remember you. Some days the memory aches like spice on the heart's drum; some days it's a blue wing, lifting. 
I have known days held like a matador’s cape, as the trained sun kicks up dirt. It is more like a man to wear these clothes. It is easier to speak volumes with craw- stuffed stitching and leave the wind to articulate. If you hold the fabric the right way, you can have an entire relationship without opening your mouth: Hello , says one breeze, How about coffee? another. Each spat of wind I like you; I love you; I don’t love you any more; words as illusions—never really there. It looks like there is a body behind the cape. Some- times there still is, if you can get through to the quiet flesh in the suit that won’t stop talking. How many corners the grin can have, all the labyrinths sewed into the gaudy outfit of the bullfighter, the distractions of fuchsia and omni-lingual gold— how much sharper for the English native to leave out “of bulls” and deem him matador : killer. How words dilute. Anyone who has ever said they can’t tie a necktie is doing it wrong; it is supposed to tie itself, to slither around and through until the Windsor knot is wrapped tight enough to hide the apple in your throat and your chest sports a forked tongue. It was surely a man who first painted the fig leaves. They fell out of his eyes, jealous of the ripe fruit’s claim on gravity. For hundreds of years Eve’s mouth remained unpainted while men’s suits gained more pockets, as was the fashion. I once over- heard a man at a funeral say it was a damn shame, wasting a suit by burying a man in it. We hang ourselves in closets every night. The epaulets of the matador hide the hanger marks that grasp his shoulders. Did you think me bold? Did you think me bestial, wounded, maddened or sad—did you know me lost or human when I lifted my shirt off, high enough to puncture the light? I have known clothes to fall this way. I have seen how the carpet wears them, in ways we never could: effortlessly. Comfortably. Without thought. 
this room holds a rocking chair a hospital blanket eager to swaddle your grandmother who waited long enough to speak your name and carry it back to the other side  
As you asked me not to open the door
            I shouldn’t have –
but what are shoulds? Should I have touched
your face that first night? Overcome
with curiosity, my fear was your blue beard 
between my legs –
            a nightmare I couldn’t shake,
and now must receive, the feather of it,
each hair’s nightly collapse against my own
webbing.

When you left, I went to your swan’s coop,
snapped every slender neck
in the lot. Then the other fowl, those bewildered 
chicks puffing and pecking aimlessly at their own 
scatter never looked up.

How angry I was, to have a key I couldn’t use. 
I cut my locks so you would have nothing to take 
hold of, loosed then lifted each curl
with your gold scissors. How the high marks the low.

I explored every room save that one –

           moving from treasure to treasure naked as the night, 
           sought you out object to object, lair by lair, 
           sat on every divan, scratched my head
           against every pillow.

So after months without, I gave way,  
pulled the key from my small purse and found them there, 
all of them, like birds brined and preserved on drying hooks, 
their black cloaks so stiff against the brick, 
            
I did not scream. I thought – stupid starlings – 

            A cool salt draft kept the blood-soaked floor 
as sand might, so I did not slip,
            not then.
From the window I considered the fall, but
I, was so pleased to be alive, to realize I now had you, 
if only briefly, all to myself. Sweet-blade,
so what the truncated future? It is the licks I know
are coming that will buckle and betray me.
to allow it like hibiscus to wend over the tongue 
where it opens at the gate, lending its red, unknowable 
taste. What wonder the palate may embrace – in a flick 
behind the teeth: loquacious, “liepschen, liepschen.” 
Let us praise the labium that shapes such syllables, and 
parlay of their attendant assumptions like a shuttlecock
struck back and forth over its simple backyard net.
Let us not neglect, but laud the mature mouth ready 
for more than a dollop, the spoonful of lip, loon,
April, billow, or some simple pronoun. No. It wants jouissance,
Dostoevsky, provocations heating the exchange, say 
chipotles in the chocolate. Consider the uvular awakenings
of the day, the throat stretched to signify its pleasure and release. 
Your name spun through the wind-box, whipped up from the bass 
of me. How I want to say it, and hear my own, again. 
I never remember the knuckles, though 
his hand was bare, though their hands were bare. 
I remember the impressions left on this skin, the 
wilting and the welting. I don’t remember the sound, 
not one smack. I remember the falls, myself falling 
to the floor or sidewalk, or against the brick wall 
my head met after a push. There were many pushes. 
Girls pushed. I didn’t push. I punched. Pulled one 
down by the hair and kneed her as my head bled.
Girls didn’t punch until high school. I had always 
punched. What kind of girl are you? 
The kind who wants to live, I said, and I did want to 
until I didn’t anymore. But I wanted the leaving 
to be on my terms, so I hit my father back. 
He owned me, like any good, country father, he 
waited for a husband to tame what he couldn’t corral,
to throw a rope like fingers around my neck.
Fingerholds — I remember those, and me making a fist
wrongly, and punching the air when I missed a boy and 
I didn’t mean to miss but to hit the line below the belly, 
the beltline. W________ broke me in the snow 
my first year North. I’m still afraid to say his name. 
I wore shoes too thin for the weather (who had ever seen
such snow?) and had a Georgia lilt, like molasses 
on a sore throat, sweet, raw, and he hated the sound of it. 
He was black and I was black and I was so happy 
to be in Detroit, and he aimed for my heart-
shaped mouth, my gapped teeth, my too-sweet tongue. 
I felt the juvenile weight of him above me like snow after dark 
falling steady and hard. I’m gone teach you to talk reg’lar, 
and I stopped speaking at all. I kept my swollen mouth shut, 
and a straight razor in my math book, and dreamt of a bat 
cracking against his chest. A woman like me 
with soft hands, not hands of the field, but 
hands meant to stroke and soothe, needs a weapon, 
so I studied The Art of War, and watched boxing and
where else was all this rage to go? Is this too dramatic?
Find another story. Find a lie. In love, body after body
fell beneath my own, though my own was broken, 
and I made love like a sea creature, fluid as if boneless, 
though my bones would rattle if not for the fat I cherish.
Wouldn’t you? How I grew to love the heavyweights, 
myself with one in the ring. How I imagined him punching 
me, and punching me again, saying I’m sorry, so sorry, 
to have to love you this way. 
I am torn muscle, I am the broken
knuckles, naked as the hovering dark;

A mouth waiting to swallow bloody
spittle, bruised floor, the front row shirtsleeves
sweated through, the bookie’s cackle.

Hunger blisters, hunger shivers, too.
Just like a man. Just like me, the rest
of us: teeth sharpened, waiting

for a kneecap to twist, a body to crumble
like pillars of a rotted temple, weakened
by rain. Weakened by the fist of it.
I.

To gain the flowering shrubs
I gave my knee to the ground –
walked as though my knee

was meant to wind up for days.
I did not give my mother to the ground.
She’s eye-height now, but

I still had to give
the ground something
to get her out again,

to beg it to let me see her inside
the envelope of air. You know,
I pressed my palms

against the walls
so I could hold my knee just so
while walking up the stairs.

When she came out of the kiln remade,
I was surprised to see
she looked more like salt than ash –

my mama, who loved salt,
both given to the ground
in the way the dead always are

and given to some trees
that offer red seeds to the birds
before they burst with white flowers.


II.

When we were children
I gave the driveway a chunk
of my knee, playing basketball

with my brother.
White and gray pebbles pressed
all the way to the bone,

and my brother pressing a rag
to soak up the blood.
The bone as white as my teeth,

I wanted to touch it
but he held my hands folded up
and folded me up small to rest.

I imagine that I was bird-sized in his palm.
When we got the ashes
I wanted to touch them

to see whether something as white as chalk
could be as cold as it looked,
shocked that what was left of her

brown body wasn’t brown as well.
The hinge of the wooden box was ajar
already, a bent elbow, a welcoming wing,

open – my mama in the cold white chips,
and me, as when she was alive, not sure how close
I could get without breaking a rule.
I smell him in the leather
of his favorite chair
mornings after he’s gone,
hold brown hairs
found in the dustpan to the light.

The neighbor ladies, who stand
behind the edges of their taupe curtains,
smile as they tell me,
He'll rip you limb from limb. 

They swear his three heads
have turned cats to stone,
that he breaks birds
out of the sky to split apart
their small bodies.

No secret can keep
from being ugly at its bones.
But evil hides its face
in common things. The roses

that bring princesses down with one prick
grow alongside safe flowers,
with petals so red
they look ready to eat.
He has not shown me his face,

but when light ekes under the bedroom door
I watch the black outline of him
lope across the room
to find pieces of his face.

His dark muttering needs no fixed point,
no anchor. By morning,
he is the warm shape of a man
left twisted in the sheets.

I trace my own jaw in the mirror,
draw the differences, the scruff and shag
beneath the ear, build him
from the air around my reflection.

I could not be more bowled over
if I knew the color of his eyes.To my daughters I need to say: Go with the one who loves you biblically. The one whose love lifts its head to you despite its broken neck. Whose body bursts sixteen arms electric to carry you, gentle the way old grief is gentle. Love the love that is messy in all its too much, The body that rides best your body, whose mouth saddles the naked salt of your far gone hips, whose tongue translates the rock language of all your elegant scars. Go with the one who cries out for her tragic sisters as she chops the winter’s wood, the one whose skin triggers your heart into a heaven of blood waltzes. Go with the one who resembles most your father. Not the father you can point out on a map, but the father who is here, is your home, is the key to your front door. Know that your first love will only be the first. And the second and third and even fourth will unprepare you for the most important: The Blessed. The Beast. The Last Love, which is, of course, the most terrifying kind. Because which of us wants to go with what can murder us? Can reveal to us our true heart’s end and its thirty years spent in poverty? Can mimic the sound of our bird-throated mothers, replicate the warmth of our brothers’ tempers? Can pull us out of ourselves until we are no longer sisters or daughters or sword swallowers but, instead, women who give and lead and take and want and want and want and want, because there is no shame in wanting. And you will hear yourself say: Last Love, I wish to die so I may come back to you new and never tasted by any other mouth but yours. And I want to be the hands that pull your children out of you and tuck them deep inside myself until they are ready to be the children of such a royal and staggering love. Or you will say: Last Love, I am old, and have spent myself on the courageless, have wasted too many clocks on less-deserving men, so I hurl myself at the throne of you and lie humbly at your feet. Last Love, let me never roll out of this heavy dream of you, let the day I was born mean my life will end where you end. Let the man behind the church do what he did if it brings me to you. Let the girls in the locker room corner me again if it brings me to you. Let this wild depression throw me beneath its hooves if it brings me to you. Let me pronounce my hoarded joy if it brings me to you. Let my father break me again and again if it brings me to you. Last love, I have let other men borrow your children. Forgive me. Last love, I once vowed my heart to another. Forgive me. Last Love, I have let my blind and anxious hands wander into a room and come out empty. Forgive me. Last Love, I have cursed the women you loved before me. Forgive me. Last Love, I envy your mother’s body where you resided first. Forgive me. Last Love, I am all that is left. Forgive me. Last Love, I did not see you coming. Forgive me. Last Love, every day without you was a life I crawled out of. Amen. Last Love, you are my Last Love. Amen. Last Love, I am all that is left. Amen. I am all that is left. Amen. 
The men made promises but failed. Somewhere in Ohio a small woman knelt down to scalp the soil of its weeds. Dirt and dirt and dirt. Ingrid, the worst part is true: only the lovestruck boy kept his word. He left you sleeping, your coffined hands a soft relief. A job well-done. Forgive me, I wanted to follow that boy back to the funeral parlor, to kiss the edge of each careful finger. Thank him for that quiet thread: the unlit bridge from lip to lip. 
My twin has been in jail for a hundred years: she teaches the other inmates the ways to skin a cat. I don’t know how. Before she went away: we didn't speak like human beings. We spoke like animals: scent, intuition, wary circles. The crime she committed? Ask me the color of her eyes, her favorite TV show; ask me what she eats in the mornings or how long she has been the stronger twin. Yes. We sent letters; she wouldn’t see me. In our twenties she mocked me: book mouse, coward, little bitch, baby baby baby. I listened to all of our mother's stories: There are men in the trees, waiting . I asked: waiting for what? My twin knew without asking. When we were children we thought our father kept our souls locked in his gun safe: safe. We ran feral; damming and undamming creeks, slingshoting sparrows, dewinging bees. Nothing we did could touch our souls. I broke the skin of my knees, elbows: the damage of a body in motion. We grew up in the mountains we learned survival: the taste of lichen, squirrel, pine sap needles, whittled sticks to stakes, followed our father's rough strokes against the hanging deer. We could tell the types of trees: Mountain-table from Shagback. Hemlock from pine. This for kindling, this for pine nuts, this for smoking meat. She came to see me before they caught her. Smiling. Always, she has been the stronger twin. How many ways are there to skin a cat, a deer, a man? In her letters, my twin says she dreams of the day we unlocked the gun safe and we both felt: a great rending – our soul had been in our bodies all along; it was split between us.     
them mama tell them it wild over there she say over there buses quit running like utilities or resources or dead boys in them hundreds they schools lock doors after the tardy bell like prison standards is low like the waistline of uniform pants dropout rates is high dropouts is high like them girls shorts come the month of May for them police officers is hall monitors them businesses over there fail like the schools most all fail except liquor stores them never close over there them streets burning them blocks hot them people fired it wild them police over there is overworked and not working they don’t got enough of them them they do got too busy sitting in walgreens parking lot trying to avoid the fire *The Hundreds is a nickname for the Far South Side of Chicago. The name was given in the 80s and 90s because of the crime the area became known for. This slogan was made popular by a local t-shirt company in that neighborhood. 
it was The Box the TV station I had to sneak in Grandma’s basement like a girlfriend it was the command the reminder we all come from the party the keep on dancin’ we had to do the capoiera in Brooklyn rain it was tears the open weeping of an eleven year old me after years of gangsta rap and gospel and Motown and music that moved but couldn’t define me it was finding the glory of reality in the instrumental it was the girls giggling unable to pronounce Talib Kweli it was me struggling to pronounce myself 
Seems I’m prone to walking these streets at night, unarmed.        Somedays all I carry is the song, this whippoorwill’s blues of crushed delight. The nightjar bird calls and carries my soul along. Street signs all point away from me. I’m blood, soaked stained asphalt. I’m fifteen thousand feet rope drag ruined and can’t escape their hoods. On the colored side of the cemetery; I’m meat. My ma can’t name my drawn and slaughtered parts. I say, forgive. My sister, Betty, she let go her hate. My son— all I pray is he cares for his boy, pray he keeps his heart light as night bird’s song and soft as my feet. I’m done. I’m in the cool dark air, a man unmade, the bloody refrain the black boys sing whose songs swell the body. 
All I know is that everything I say sleeps together. It's the same dark coffee yesterday, today and tomorrow and I forget about cream as if it were the dream of a body. However lonely I was before, the waiters just get more sexual bringing me sugar without any intention of sticking it into my cup. All I know is how to get home. All I know is how women remove their gloves at the bar, stripping them off like birds. If I wanted to nab any of them at a beach, their joyless breasts would say to me: noise, water, meat—that's it. My waiter is sincere when he remarks how the light at this time of night is a dress that shuts interminably. He says the mouth is a tool— root for it. Use it to tell me I have a nice ass when no one is looking. Say with it mercy more often. When I look up to thank him, he smiles like a woman. He says to me: keep the change—give us grace instead.     I realize there are really no doctors here. No eye-man or blood-guy or anyone to separate white from wine colored pills: keeping Codeine from the common aspirin. The male nurses are out in the dark park dreaming of soda & snow. Orderlies try to be secret about getting blood from their shirt fronts, muttering the Lord fucking well taketh away  is right! Some get a dose of heavy rope or Hydro- codone, but every patient knows it's a honey water tea with whiskey if they're lucky. It is easy to say to myself, God hath brought me here. It's easy to suck the bullet from the shoulder of a second- grader & spit meekly into silver trays, easy to knit the heart back to its warm wall, easy to slap a scanner & a siren on a van & haul it through the night. There—I have caught your one drop of blood, your one red bead before it broke at all against the gold air around Mary. I keep it in my pocket. I keep it for emergencies.
to bind the center of a peach pit heart like a covered form; to smile tooth-wide without looking too much alive; to cinch a curved body like a rag; to avoid water- melon and chicken; to seed thoughts of bloodline fantasy – are you one part Indian or two parts Creole? ; to wear coffee-colored dresses and cotton headscarves only in the dark; to unremember the village of old women who lifted their skirts and birthed you; to resist the hush of spirituals; to enunciate the h and roll your r’s; to avoid okra and the black geodes of jazz; to fill the cracks with dreams of southern porches and plums big as a well; to pull-out the tar-brushed womb; to drink sweet tea in dainty cups, deliberate as a geisha waiting to wear new bones again 
First it was Champ – our seventeen-hand Morgan with one good eye – neck-deep in a sandpit in a green wheat field. Sand buried him from teardrop hoof to shoulder. Only the rigid head left, and the gentle, burning eye. I did nothing while the sand crushed silently. And Champ also silent, despite his steady aching. His desertion. * Then it was my grandfather – driving up the gravel road (dustless somehow) in his gold cadillac and picture-perfect moustache. I blinked and a frame edged in around him, sealed him off with antique lacquer, and he nothing more than an inversion, a sliver of the fifties’ radiant decay, a hard echo in the glass. * And myself – I dream too often – rows of ovens unbolting, one by one, their large, bald, concentric throats – or dirt’s blunt bitterness prying my mouth open, to lump itself inside, to glue limb to pale root – and me grinning all the while, as though I kept catastrophe cupped tight in the heart. * And still the snowstorms shear our house, icing tiles to the grass, while the oldest maple taps his lean finger on my bedroom window. And you still bloom inside me, folded in utero, locked nerve and bone to disordered chorus. Sweet evidence, you can’t hear the wind gnawing the eaves ragged, or catch the slow, cold flutes pulling us into deep slumber. oh my gratin, you are lovely shirtless skinful baked in cheeses and the clippings of the moon, oh a man cannot describe the jets of sweat and cinnamon that fall to nether regions where hair meets hair, where air is frightened by the lack of loving out tonight, it’s not enough to discipline the wind with wisps of saffron; cardamom and fenugreek must speak in tongues of scent, oh a woman to a man is more than whiskers bent or basting meat with juices, she is dominoes each one polka -frosted like a cake, this meal is birthright like the bleeding of the thumb when lover sucks the cut and tastes iron and the copper and the heart’s sweet electrolytes 
Boy, your morning breath tastes like something at its ripest canned & saved for only me. I want to record and record and record the sounds of you finishing on a limited edition set of cassettes. Boy you are worth betting on, biting over, flexing at. When you come home with all those canvas bags of food and flowers you saved from fences for me I just wanna empty you like a jug of homemade juice straight into the back of my throat, that skin-red aisle of my body built to shuttle what you got into the places where I do my needing BY TAYLOR MARDIS KATZ  
            demon blues  cannot be sung.                     not really. A human voice can’t make the sounds: the hissing of a small town god in tin foil, bottles breaking in a parking lot, Johnny’s beater car,             its screeching tires. The wife-beater with the cigarette holes. The torn jeans stained with paint. His arms tattooed with roses            blooming: Johnny, looking like the hustler Christ when he picked me up and swung me in a circle,                  laughing. How he took my hand and pressed it to his smooth face, clean-shaven                          after a year in prison. How I thought,  huh.  maybe tonight.  Maybe is a kind of witchcraft; anyone who loves an addict knows its practice. But that night in Richmond to my eyes we were brothers,                sailors, hard-drinking and brave. Our legs were muscling for space in the wooden booth of a dive bar and I spent 20 dollars on the jukebox, and I was proud to keep rough company, to be wasted in public,  to not have a plan or a place to stay. I went to take a piss while he called up old friends on my phone. I drew our names in sharpie on the wall. No heart, no arrow, just                       our names. Later, we stumbled 8 blocks to somebody’s house— a girl he used to date. I laid out on the couch and listened while they fucked in the next room,               for hours. Night-table lamp knocked over,      smashed, the bedframe smack, his whimpering, a record I could play           and play, and always get a kick, but you can’t dial that on any radio that I’ve found. Not really. I wish I could explain.       His voice. It sounded like a brick kissing the statue’s face. Anvils falling. The hammer’s one-note song. It sounded just like everyday disaster. Just like I imagined that it would                     with me. 
Mrs. Snail drags her gut over grass, leaving a wake of slick bent stalks as she inches toward the clearing where Mr. Snail lingers to greet her. It takes forever to arrive at the moment, and once there they ripple in it, press and press—more naked than naked, glistening pink organs with calcite coils slung on their backs. How could those cups contain such extravagant bodies? Waves of craving pass through the seam where they're suctioned close. Eyestalks curl and probe, gazing with whatever awareness snails gaze with—though to us neither looks more butch than the other, nor lovelier; we can't tell Mr. from Mrs. because they both are both. One's head leans into the other, then tips back yielding—rapturous, scandalous. How can any beast touch so lushly? As if you were wholly tongue and I was wholly tongue, and the shells of our mouths hung to the side as we shoved bud to bud. As if we both could slide from under our spiraling worlds, pour skin to skin, and swim. 
Oh My God, the clothes in the dryer as if they've run through a storm to slide and rub in a manic tumble unzipped, button-loose every sleeve ends in an open gasp this elbow snaking that knee pulls my collar to your waist and the whole room turns to steam Oh My God, the utensils in the drawer liquid silver skins to pry and mix—yank the drawer and hear them stir, look what the juicer does to the fruit, bring me your sticky finger, watch this slow spiral into soft cork, the neck's stretch as the wine shudders inside us Oh My God, the hats on the hatstand Oh My God, the bulbs in the lamps Oh My God, the gravel in the drive bodies freed from glaciers touched again and again until they're spread out and spent humming in tune with our tremulous earth 
Rock, paper, scissors: I will be the first to wear the dick. It quivers a little as I heft it hand to hand; still, I trust it to remain inanimate. We’re not here to play make believe. The scent of new leather, the straps that flap awkwardly at my thighs: anchors to the ordinary world. She helps me with the buckles. I’m reminded of the time she took me on the roller coaster. How we waited in line under the rickety structure, my palms sweaty with the promise I’d made, how it loomed, testing my faith in physics and in her. It’s got to be something like swinging a hammer. Leverage. Momentum. Intent on pleasing the woman I love, I’m just hoping I can do this right. My doubts vanish at her sharp intake of breath. If I thought we could co-opt the cock without inheriting its legacy, it was only that I did not know how beautifully her hips would fit my hands. I am the subject now. Thrust, the original dance. On the roller coaster, as the cars crested the first hill, in the held-breath stillness at the top of the rise, my heart pounded in anticipation of the inevitable drop. Then the seat fell away from me and if not for the bar across my body, I’d have gone hurtling into the blue. It is precisely the same giddy terror I feel now. Gravity regains control; the secret rushes in. This is why they think they own us. 
the night's thick with circling predators. i used to untie myself and walk into its hunger. peel away fingers and skin until eyes climbed into back pockets, tongue watering the sidewalk. in my wake, a field of belts sprouted from the concrete, flailing their leathered famine, patient to bind and to lash. the night, i walked that desperate stretch until the sun unbuckled itself from the dark, in that half light i met many men all with the same hands. i wore the night’s bridle in my hair turning its axis, the backseats of taxi cabs spilling over with limbs, flood of spit from between the sewer’s teeth, lips bit until they brayed and bled.  my god, my good god, to be a lamb again, dressed in my finest garments, young, unsheared, pressed. .. my god, my good god, to be a lamb again, dressed for slaughter. before claws ripped through the beds of my nails, before incisors split gums wide. before eyes narrowed into the slits of a sickle, i was perfect. my body, my good body, still wet with my mother’s last blood, red legs unfolding petals, graceless under my torso. my whole hand wrapped around a finger. language, a simple dance, i’d just learned to step inside. but nostalgia always wears an ugly crown of teeth. the greasy stain of my young body pressed between encyclopedias, mouth a rash with no remedy, skin the hungry cabinet i crawled out from within. this street of one eyed gods, the flashlight king this name moaned in the dark, the shadows sing. …  moan my name , the dark shadows sang back pressed against a brick wall in my thick coat howling only when the boy’s mouth is a perfect circle. i have been a man with many names he calls out the one scrawled inside my jacket that gleaming pocket watch, gold leaf over plastic, hand over mouth, i bite down until blood flows from his fingers, a signature claiming my lips. when police shine their search light, it is a perfect circle, my throat a scarlet wound marked by the kill. that boy, gone now, clutching the lamb folded in him. me, a snarled wool stain awaiting interrogation. i used to untie the night, before it swallowed me. my god, my awful body, my good teeth. 
the difference between men and women i’m told early on somehow happens in bathrooms. in my synagogue there was a single bullet hole in the mirror above the men’s room sink or at the time i imagined it the perfect splintered circle of an absent god’s mouth pursed and kissing his own reflection. this is how i’ve learned to understand men. the women’s bathroom was a more elaborate place. i remember crimson ornamentation dripping from the ceiling. ottoman with a fat plush beard. silk napkins folded by three perfect clean mirrors. this is how i remember it. why i am always trying to crawl back inside. why i was scolded with smiling arms by the rabbi for mistaking that room for mine.  oh sam – you are such a good boy. and here i am in this ugly stall again pulling myself apart. wrenching my skin up to heaven, a collection of nerve endings breaking down. i can hear my family cry out for forgiveness in a huge room to a dead book, my right hand is a bullet wound, the mouth of an absent god. my god my cock is a hideous thing pressed between all these holy books. my god is a man with a dozen bleeding mouths. a prayer, an explosion of cold letters. a new white flower for my black suit jacket. 
i wondered why she said no when i asked if i could fuck her, how i learned about tops, still sweet san francisco, broken bus pass, girl, pass me your broken, girl, you taught me how to top while i was bottom dwelling, girl, try harder, give me some charcoal, let me be the fattest cathedral, the smoking jacket that i sewed into my skin, the way i counted down the days until finger bones inside a mountain because the emphasis is virgin, burning down the closet, learning how to fuck you harder, we only get better, we start to polish our brass like swallowed teeth in the burden of a chewing stomach, so when i saw you up inside my neck, my neck a river of clothes pins holding my breath on the line, boy, be a silent carnival, boy, give me some salt rock, boy, try harder, let me sing as heavy as a cracked compass, let me go down polished. 
it says that the hands that planted the stain should be crooked and fat on the bone, that the curve of finger should flex like a purposeful wand, there should be no back fire, there should be no graveyard dance, there should be a moon falling out of your mouth, there should be a howl, a drip, a cloak, a portal, teeth patterns on the thighs, circular motion, breaking of the sun, the sun, the sun, here is the rainfall, here is the light to find your way home. here, two gems gleaming in your skull, deep gloves, wrists, your wrists tied up in my ribbons, vacant lot where the ghosts turn to dogs, your voice engaging in ritual, there should be a howl, because inside you there is a spectacular power that spins pentacles and spits sweet, skeptic and broomstick, weathervane and downpour, emptying of all potions, a whisper following the release, there should be a howl, bruised knees, and calling for the sun, the sun, the sun. 
The first time you fuck your best friend’s mother you really really didn’t mean to. The second time you fuck your best friend’s mother you tell yourself it’ll never happen again— but the third time you fuck your best friend’s mother you are willing to admit that maybe this is the formation of a habit. You are nineteen and she is raven-haired and has legs that go for days and she has given birth to your favorite person in the whole world. It seems almost logical that you two might come together— The fourth time, you begin to rationalize how this isn’t really hurting anyone. Her husband is gone 9 months out of the year and you are so smitten and confident and nineteen that the fifth time you push her up against the wall and bury your face in her throat. Under the ringing chime of your belt buckle, she lets out a little sound of pleased surprise and you think you could have lived your whole life and never heard that sound but now, the lack of it is going to ring in the voice of every twenty year old who is afraid to ask for what she really wants from you or every twenty-one year old who wants to have sex with the lights off or every twenty-two year old who fakes an orgasm because the world has taught her such self-possession is unseemly— It’s not that you’re in love with her. It’s just that you’ve been spoiled. After the thirtieth time, you lie in her husband’s bed and realize that you would gladly let this ruin you and that it very well might. You put these hours with her behind a door so you do not come to your best friend stranger-lipped or as a liar. When he asks you about women, or tells you about love, you open the door and the only thing that comes out is some made-up name and her black hair the same as his the way her mouth has the same cupid’s bow, how they smile the same, how much you care about him and how differently you care about her. How she has given you this secret to keep like you are an oyster and all she has ever wanted is a necklace. 
The Boys Are Always Talking  about their cocks, naming names—Rebecca, Elizabeth, Ashley—we see these girls all lined up, waiting to admire the boys’ cocks. And the boys talk about size of their cocks, seven inches becomes ten, then thirteen. They tell us how they measured their cocks after their first wet dream: they woke up sweaty, quick-covered, got their cocks hard again, pulled out the ruler. Boys and cocks everywhere. A boy shows his cock to a girl on the playground. Another boy watches girls from a parked car while he touches his cock. On the subway, boys unzip their pants, put cocks on display. Baby boys discover their tiny cocks during every diaper change. I didn’t see my own clit was until I was twenty-three. I had to hold a mirror just to see it rise like slow-motion stalagmite. Had to hold back my own skin just to show it to myself. 
Youngblood wasn't ready for me. Somebody told him I was a soft kinda bitch. He liked to tell me I was the first woman that wouldn't accept his shit. Whether or not that's true, he learned real fast that I ain't afraid to hit back.  He was still young then, a little bit of a fool.  But hell, me too. He used to rub himself before I'd let him slap me. He probably don't want me to share his business but I'll notify you when I give a damn. His hands were so fast, Jesus. Even when I knew it was coming. Even when I told him to. But don't get it twisted now, this wasn't for free. He got two or three hits in before I laid into his ass. He'd be sliding in and out while I was stroking with one arm and ramming him with the other. He wasn't loud in bed, more of a growler. I don't know what he does with his women now. We ended things pretty smoothly, but I know for a fact he hates me. While we had fun for a while, I wasn't supposed to cut him open. All I asked was to hear his middle name. Youngblood Priest was too damn cool of a real man's name, and I'd rather fuck a man than a hologram. I asked him to tell me on our second date. He hit me. The second to last time we shared a bed, he was growling like some kinda lion being trampled to death. I didn't understand; far as I knew my lovin’ was the same. Maybe I was mad, didn't know I was beating him harder. But when he was done, he fell on the sheets, laid his head where he'd just pulled out, and he whispered. It was a strange name. A little boring, a little too painful for my man to say aloud. And he didn't tell me why he said it. I just know his eyes were a pair of caves. I knew I wasn't crawlin’ in. If I tell it to you, the word that clawed out of his mouth, could you keep it quiet? Hell no. He'd kill me. But I'll admit, something still shakes in me. I want him to remember the time he gave some crazy bitch his other name. And, if he heard it again, from somebody else's mouth, would he know it had slipped from me?  If it was really a love thing, like he said, like he swung, like he growled, could that name have only come from me? 
She tastes like whiskey, which reminds me of you and when she comes, her head thrown back like it’s on a broken hinge, I grip the doorknobs of her shoulders and don’t think about how your hips offered perfect handles for my palms. Later, she wants a shirt, and it’s yours I grab from the top of the drawer, folded in with all my other secrets. Her calves say mid and west , which is where we are, her body as smooth and forgiving as the land outside. Shadows camouflage her back, slats of shutter waving down it like an undecipherable data code. She shows me her pinwheels, body slides, and the look she gives her favorite customers, the ones she would go home with if she hadn’t met them when they were watching her dance. The look asks, could you know me better? When we switch the lights off, I keep my eyes open. I’m looking back, and trying to answer. 
We are ugly in the bent-up, contused blue light of too much tequila, bodies stuck to the cold tile of the bathroom floor, begging harder and almost . After, you slouch spent against the door asking why do you love me . If love is not a color or a night, but the ocean bucking above the dock again and again, salt to heal, salt to burn. Is there a good kind of pain. This damp heat, these familiar bodies. All this world is a room we fucked in, and that place, too, and there. Sand grains rough the back, splintering. Morning comes, and daylight for once feels overindulgent and too bright. The boats know how to catch the swell and ride it. If our bodies were not capable of such destruction, they could be beautiful. 
I used to lick your pelvic tattoos (tribal) expected the blue skin to taste different we were so nineties like your alcoholic father who ran off and the South American midwife you were named for some nights we drove a borrowed car on back- roads of White River Junction everything was taut then except those pants which rode your hips like someone in a movie hanging on to the ledge of a building after they lose their footing ever, ever, there was no- where to go except back over the river or into our bodies before you vanished leaving a gift and when I opened the blue box there you were rendered in miniature surrounded by pills holding a giant bud of Hindu Kush as a valentine but you know what? Fuck you nostalgia the future will be great or at least fine pot is legal in some states now you’re an architect and it’s been past twenty years and I can still sketch that bluish totem tattoo, the negative space of your hipbones with ballpoint from memory this poem began with the word glory (rise and shine) until I erased it and started over but I remember your hot breath melting iced window- glass frost-bitten mornings to reveal the sun breaking like a bone over squat downtown, the funeral home’s sample headstones, dawn this contravention this defiance this transgression dawn with her perfect unforgiving early light this yes body this yours truly this deciphering  
when he walks into my office he’s greeted by his name  not the name I molded around my tongue until I spat him back slack & saltless the name that loitered corners of my mouth with words like stop & don’t & shit & holy but his name, his government, his mother’s honest work how she first said it out of breath & wet everywhere the one that makes his neck spin when he catches a rhyme of it, when he hears chain, pain, stain his name, not the one he gave me when I knew his body like a worn map, latitudes & longitudes that hold the wildest brush, what dark valleys crave teeth where the land cries for God under slick pressure, his lonely & impressive peaks. He handed me everything: his most precious skin, gallons of sweat, trusted me enough to give over his flesh, his air, his heir, his liquid legacy, not enough to give me the power to call to him from across the street & not look like I’m conjuring ghost. 
Forgive me Audre Lorde, I have sinned but we both could give a damn about that. Forgive me Lorde, the master’s tools brought my house down. I begged him with my own hands. I’ve been floorboards, wing nuts & slow blues at his pale hard feet, his full moon flesh my new moon flesh, waxed nights of bloodcandles, wince, grazing teeth & no history until morning, ruined by his glued, yarned experiment at our natural, his braided unwashed attack against our tentacled blaze is pulled sugar to my mouth. Lorde, he doesn’t know how long it takes to look the mirror in the eye, love what the world won’t. Lorde, forgive me for not grabbing the shears, forgive me the night I let him stay in my bed after he said race wasn’t real, for harboring him in our earth caked skin & not making him walk to the store, around the store, drive anywhere while he was covered in our brown bright hand-me-down. Lorde, there are brown boys I never called back, sweet as God, gorgeous sun descended men, perfect & plump but none of them made me fail as joyous, none of them so undid my spine’s subtle tension, I don’t want to tell you none of them went to college, but it’s true. Lorde, we just didn’t relate past our hued past & isn’t that what uppity people say? Is the new spelling of my name T-O-M? Does it matter anymore? I want to tell you about the president, but not what some say about him. I don’t want to tell you about being 4 & playing with white barbies, about going to college in a small town, about rent & the men who paid it for a while, their wrinkling ghosting bodies, about who lives in Brooklyn, about Chicago & how she bled, and that Davis boy or how ain’t nothing changed & nothing hasn’t, this half dream world, good enough utopia, & still, his hair. Lorde, what is your word? He’s in my bed, dreads splayed, taking up too much space. Audre, gravity is pulling me everywhere. I sit on the edge, if I fall, I not sure where I’ll go. 
The other girls who write Wolverine slash are so vanilla that when they flick the bean, they circle a vanilla pod with their thumbs. They burrow two fingers into their own liquid depths to mine what’s marketed in stores as vanilla extract. They imagine him as a tender lover, a beast tamed by Jean’s closeness, the smell of her hair with its hints of Venetian plaster and ash which seem to say: now she burns only for him. If he’s impatient, it’s only that his needs are vacillating between tender heart and turgid manhood. He wants her so bad his claws pop an erection – ten tiny vanguards of his lust. But Wolverine holds them in. He does that for Her. His Phoenix. His Red. Growls as he bends her over the vanity, assumes the missionary position. It’s tragic. Like finding the bulge in his spandex suit is just molded plastic. 
outside the latin grocery, two crates full of mangoes in the shape of plump commas, the size of children’s palms. yellow-hued, brown-freckled, here and there streaks of green, an uncommon flush of rose. deep within my own tendons some other fruit swells and aches, heavy as an unsung song—tonight it’ll burst, yield a clotted dark honey, a thin red rain on my shorts. curled beside me, you’ll press both hands on the razored skin below my belly where a child could be. i’ve started to love the body’s thunderstorm, drug it less. limit what i feel and i’ll quickly forget limitlessness, our shared need to be generous or close. i choose six, three in each hand. my cycle begins to set teeth on the inside of my abdomen. i remember standing on the beach in cuba once with a girl, peeling their small ripe skins back with our mouths, sucking the pulp then the threads from each other’s tongues, clear down to the pit, then throwing the pits and skins into the bright sea & diving in afterwards. there must be groves  of mango trees down there , she said. imagine the warm salted dark, silvered by fish nibbling their new treasure—first unaccustomed, then expert, their tiny fins seeking, while mangoes float on firm stems, a cloud of planets. that day i’d fled from language, swimming like a fool till each limb went slack—i floated, i was just an eyelash on the turning waves, curious about drowning— can we say the beauty that comes into us after we go, before we leave our lives? everything said, finally, nothing wasted, like a finished bloom bedded into and becoming soil, a loosening blood rinsing me clean. it’s just a dollar for all six: heft of liquid sweet. two for me, two for you, & two for the ones who like small things. Wreckage, thy name is progress. Chair with one shorter leg left at the dump. The apartment close date keeps shifting. No amount of packing tape will hold. I wake up on the black and white floor of the restaurant bathroom as my cousin bangs on the door. I try to wipe up the puke. I learn to sharpen my own knives. Blue balloon drifting over trees, cut string still clenched. Sitting on his lap, crying, I feel him getting hard. I don’t know what to do with my hands. Chewed for a long time, kale turns sweet. He strips off his sweaty gym clothes. I turn away but not before noticing he looks more cut. Attention span of a firefly. I leave town for a week and forget my chargers. He overnights them with a note: Recharge yourself. I love you. Who really needs to wash their face every day? Shiny dime left on the ground because it’s face down. 
There’s a woman in me who drinks poison like water, thinks it’s what she needs to stay alive. I wish she’d learn to savor water’s plain taste, enjoy quench and calm. But give her hurricane and drowned peony blooms and she smiles, raises her face to the rain and says, Hit me . I can’t stand feeling wind on my skin because it’s not your hands. I don’t know how not to hand you the match, how not to let you strike it and light this house on fire, how not to relish disappearing into ash, my bones crumbled, an exploded plum all that’s left of my heart. The ground that is not true ground but spindled grief. After you’ve swum in the ocean, felt the current, wave-crash, and depth that goes deeper, deeper, and darker, to choose a lake, with its smooth and silt, no matter how fresh the water, how relieved the skin to be rid of the salt’s sting, is to ignore the hunger of the man brave enough to love the sea. 
The boy in my kitchen wears your face how the walls wear their white paint—could be any kitchen. But there is a strange precision to the way light hits and it holds. It takes everything I have to not peel it off and search for something else of you there, in that absence. Or, to not peel it off and offer everything I have. My broken cell phone. My timid sleep. My ability to orgasm. My entire sophomore year. Everything you took or trained. Everything that fell through our murky water and came up clean. Somewhere, your hands part a girl where she is most like the ocean. Your hands dictate the rising tide of her body, you full and furious moon. I do not sink down in the dirty linoleum, float face up in silence. Do not wring the salt from this wet animal tongue. Do not even move to reach inside his mouth, this boy who, after all, is not you. But he smiles, parts his own lips. And I wait, like I have been waiting, for you to drown me in your desperate, spoiled sound. 
The year she vanished & did not take me with her, I ate to spite my mother only skins of fruit. Forsaking sweetness, syrup, sins of flesh & pulp, I gnawed soft kiwi pelts, sinew tough mango hides. Verdant husks & garnet rinds left lesions on my tongue. The bitter citrus stung me senseless, blistered my fingers. Fever sore, I soothed my sour blooming body with charred hands between my knees. Mouth white with pith, with reaping I tilled clitoral copse, remade her. Burnt sugar pollen. Nightshade sap. Relapsing back into my life, brittle as September, she, the thorn-crowned, nettling, asked me what I had grown into. 
Cordoba, Argentina Dusk swarms with a heavy breath of ash- fires among the leaves. Back in the country of my mother’s birth, I try to mimic them as I breathe in my own glow, a cigarette trapped between my lips. It was here my mother once told me, the fireflies are spirits, our dead family members alive in the tails of insects. I was six, holding my father’s beer can. He smoked to the filter, tossed the bocha with the other hand, stamped out his cherry cinder. I pointed to the smudge of sylph, memory on his boot, and asked him how many he’d held, how many he’d put out in his life. Raising a fresh cigarette to his lips, he quieted me and kissed two fingers— too few . 
stay dirty for months; belts of storms shotgun against them, loud like little brothers. The night pulls June bugs from out the mouths of hills. The Russian olive for windbreak, rain dark as pitch where houses toddle on stilts to avoid the wash, where violence sits across from every victim, feeds each one wooden spools of wire to stitch up the graves inside. Twelve years later, the same April shoots of primrose sleep under starved cloud, forget and forget themselves in the spaces between all the names for empty that will never fill. These hills still sink and redden, flush as clay in places under the granite fist of boulder where the bracken of hands refuse to dig. In late winter lamplight, winds from the haunted north hum  the darkness will nick your fingers into cheatgrass,  my darling, and I knew it to be just true enough to keep my knuckles tucked. I watched the hill thieves as a boy, and the Black Crowned Night Heron, too, lulled to sleep by a quarter moon, thirsting. Outside the windows, a coyote chews a ghost bleached bone in a desert that reaches into nothing. Under this hard skin, life is buried young, unable to push back against what moves through its children, too soon to know the difference between our coins and their eyes. Often, we are ribboned into a knothole of memories that tie us to the last unburned aspens – they rake in the sky, like mother – with the great choiring of leaves. 
I have suffered near enough this March— for to break, then break more, for to swallow my disease, for to fuck my hand again dry and tired, spit blood and pieces of bone into my palm before I shake hands with men who all have my father’s face, to enter deep into that riot in our palms, pull my knotted name out, pull my mother from the field where she is bent under the rubble of broken thunder— is to call this my life and burn it down black around me, is to tuck ashes in the pocket between gum and lip, taste the fire, misfortune. Around the corner, March peels itself away from the sky in shavings. I try to find my face where I slick back my teeth and kneel in front of my father, where rain licks the street black, where I can’t find the right shade of burial. 
He brought the owls into their marriage. The owls caused crying through the walls and in the bath tub with the baby. She was four days out of labor when she found out about the owls. He said the owls had been with him since childhood, sitting on his shoulder, talons drawing casual blood. When he first met her, he drove to a field in the rain, held his arm up, screamed at the owls to fly away. On the way home, with no feathers in his van, he thought he lost them, but they were circling high, attached to him like kites. Owls in the eaves of the house now, owl droppings all over the rug. He tried to kill the owls with plastic bags and the river but they clawed their way out, claimed to love him more, sat on her bed posts while their heads turned and turned. When she was in the hospital giving birth to their baby, the owls were swooping over the field, night vision making everything red. She always thought the cuts on his arm were from working in the garden. How could she have known what he was feeding at the edge of the trees. 
I. Honey, I am just a girl with some insides who wants you to take your socks off. Ride the subway with your bangs in your eyes. Let your chest fill with dirt. Say winter and mean gasping , flowers you forget to put in water. II. Honey, it’s okay that we are the aftermath. Our veins are not rivers of lava anymore and this is better. When all evidence of lightning is gone, I like you pinned against a wall. III. Honey, kiss me with more tongue than I’m used to. Put on your black bra, wrap a kite string around my wrist. Think about this starlessness we have found, your boots filling with snow. IV. Honey, I feel it when you want me and when you don’t. When the bathtub is dirty but you still sink in, the lit candle promising a shore littered with shells that break under our feet. 
bee bee tee tee muffin & butta chillin on the hood of a blue hooptie googly-eyed zubida goin in on some clementines across the street a gang of jews in parochial white shirts & black suits a hasidic school of fish zoomin up ocean avenue & here comes trouble in hot pants & new red jellies little crystal who has a penchant for talkin fresh to grown folk & gettin slapped chock-full with bright ideas dares us to yell hail hitler muffin asks what it means crystal keeps quiet a trick she learned when her foster sister took a hammer to her cousin’s head for snitchin he fell to his knees howlin in red & white striped pajamas fell festive onto the living room floor it’s a wonderful life goin in the vcr crystal hammers us with silence her secret weapon wet cement poured down our throats hail hitler whoever say it gets 50 cents & a packa sunflower seeds she hustles our greed for silver & salt but i know crystal hurts people is a wicked phlebotomist digs into them the way a toddler digs into his baby sister with such satisfaction butta takes the bait a cloudburst of hail hitlers fallin on the jews & everyone except crystal hauls ass without money or seeds without knowin why 
my first foray into love’s gold-toothed bait and switch my harlem-bred pop-up book of sin whose fists brought us closer together sharpened my taste for designer shades said if i ever left he’d blow out my candles but his eyes, sad scraps of gray betrayed him every time we exchanged secrets spoke the dark gospel of henny cocaine, any narcotic-medusa, smoked ‘til we were stone he said dead ain’t one size fits all he said dead wasn’t part of his repertoire now look at my pretty-man mess how his chest open-and-shuts lockets bone, winks blood elders put in their teeth to say he was tortured into bodybag—bring back the days of fistfights but the streets say butcher knives, brass knucks, ice picks, say heat ain’t just for cooking and where he comes from fifty more soldier the corner and where he comes from fifty more ready to bang to adjourn life his murder changes nothing— his murder changes everything i once called him mongrel to be put down in an alley, said i wouldn’t miss ‘im if he died i once called him bahamian sunrise said his mouth could grow a new eden all that shine he had up in it 
This morning, I heard you broke two bones in your girlfriend’s face. I heard it while I was following a recipe for poached eggs. Stirring my wooden spoon to brew a whirlpool in the boiling water, adding vinegar when a friend broke the news like this:  you know. Adam. Moved to the city and became a big shot.  Tall. Red eyes. Well, he kicked his girlfriend. I remember you deejayed my brother’s thirteenth birthday party and you didn’t put your napkin on your lap at the Seder. How you asked me to pour the Manischevitz without saying please. Wouldn’t do it yourself. Adam. Moved to the city and now  he’s kicking women. I was thankful that I didn’t own a gun. How easy it would be.  Big. Shot. I scooped the eggs from their vinegar bath and laid six knives on the table.  Adam. Probably a sociopath. Tall and kicking  his girlfriend. I hated you— your foot. Your rage. Your other parts that made you a man. Tall. Red-eyed big shot. A yellow yolk bleeding on my plate. Isn’t his brother getting married  next week? Bet he’s still gonna call him  Best Man.  Another adds she’s in the hospital. She’s not  pressing charges. I pepper everyone’s eggs with my own conviction. Adam. The Best Man. Turn your face into a dartboard so fast.  Sociopath. Couldn’t even fold a napkin. Red bullseye. Mug shot. Not the boy who needed me to pour him a glass. She has a glass face, and you shattered it. Probably a sociopath.  Moved to the city and now he’s a sociopath. My own red eye wanting nothing but more red. Someone is saying they want you locked up and dropping the soap. I laugh like a big shot. Justice— my favorite kind of violence. And shit, the phone is ringing. Someone is leaving a message on the machine for us all to hear— when the police answered the call,  they were so mean to Adam, your mother weeps,  they said the most awful things  to my baby. 
that’s a pretty big broken,                                    ain’t it?        a                      bleeding they don’t ever see. i            try to swim; take off this pretty ghost.                          ever since i lost my baby, i’ve had this black roaming around           me: a feral omen. out to the ocean. i           try to swim swim swim swim, god! don’t sing. i’m       off       saving. 
Her biggest worry?  The attendant trauma of outliving one's peers . Not the aggression, or, I don't know, the adamantium claws, but the aversion to aging. Can you believe that? Clearly, someone needs a refresher course on the nuances of superhuman existential crisis. *** What teenager doesn't want to outpace the grave? And in such style! Wrinkles that settle for weeks at a time and then vanish like gossip, broken bones bold enough to re-set themselves, birthday parties ad infinitum ? Sign me up, dominant gene. I have always wanted to be impossible math. *** Mom simply wishes that Dad knew how to die. She blames him for our collective despair, calls his powers  the overt biological expression of a truly supernatural ego . It’s true. In some ways, he is an amorphous cage our whole family is trapped inside of, a haunting older than the house we live in. Whenever they fight, our home becomes a box full of hot light. It takes weeks, months, for the three of us to heal. 
You see the boy gleaming underneath the neighbor's motion detectors, face cut with the clothesline's shadow, like his mouth was frothing with tar, or blueberries, or maybe that's what hunger looks like, like a forty minute drive, like gas money, and I want to ask him how much he spent to get here, so I can offer half, or at least know how much I am worth, so later, when he's pulling out my spine with whatever instrument makes the least amount of noise, I can gauge the right amount of soap, and boil, or maybe just lay in its filth, like that dinner table with the plates rusting over, how I promised to clear it last week, but just fell asleep on the couch with my pants unbuttoned. 
One study states nearly 50% of men enjoy money more than sex. Hence, I have a problem with statistics. When a twenty dollar bill lands spread-eagle on stage, it isn’t Hamilton the crowd cheers, but the stripper who swoops it up by the most unorthodox means. I know this sounds misogynistic in a way that’s expected from inmates or frat boys but hear me out. Friday nights I studied economics and the lithe body of whichever sorority sister paid me any attention. I spent the rest of the weekend dancing at an all-male strip club and at least five guys a night would beg me to join them in the bathroom stall then flash two hundreds. Whatever sadness drives men to pay for sex I don’t possess. Monday morning showed up early wearing the desperate faces of those dismal men. If I had a choice I’d choose sex over cash every time. No amount of money can teach the dumb and wretched body not to want what it could never afford. 
aziza meets charlie parker in  an unspecified bar on 52nd street  and she looked at him and he was a forest of floating caskets and that was just in the eyes and she was his appetites shovel him at the joints and it is frightening to see a wrist mid-excavation the shock the same as seeing your mother naked to see the scars of your birth on her abdomen she can tell he wants to run away but he has at least ten small graves keeping his body at the counter and what she did next was out of pity and there was no behavior to give it a name a name is one of many small borrowings and she wanted to own something that day she took his liter of whiskey broke the bottle into a set of shark teeth and carved a front door into her neck she looked at charlie and coughed walk inside this city is perishable but it’s warm here bird don’t you know I would die for you I thought it was a bird.  The skimmed rush.  The hush as before a fowl fixes its head up from shadow water sickened by its own nature, narcissus- reversed.  unfortunate predatory consequence.  the luck.  heron spots two ducklings nesting on an outcrop  of rocks. Swift-like. heron bounces off the lake, a hollowed pebble.  in one swallow babes go down.  pulsing inside heron’s throat until they succumb.  mama mallard squawks and plods—helpless, she flies low away.  how long do mother ducks mourn—until the next day next month, until pitch pines shake barren or a naked beggar shakes on his kitchen floor like breccia in a rainstick, begging: 2 bird bags, 4 quarters, 1 gram? His daughters  empty cupboards, offer open tin at his feet —eat, eat— until  heron comes.   when sick, fowl fit in veins like ducks in necks—vortex of sorts. some knew this. yet, none bothered to explain how hero(i)n made him fly  why hero(i)n made him well, less starved. 
there we both were in the garden or our bedroom, we’d made love or had just finished arguing about the bush— hydrangea or rhododendron— purple ivies were climbing our back fence, the thai basil was wilting, one of us had forgotten to water her or was it autumn and she was dying on her own? either way, the infested pepper dangling by frayed browning stemthreads caught both our attention —how did that worm get inside?— you mumbled something about larvae. but I knew it was a winged thing a puncture, a black and wicked door. 
I have survived too many times. The car accident, the under-toe, the horse’s slip in the mud—his entire weight on top of me. The full bottle of vodka, the brief sleep at the wheel, all those asthma attacks pock-marking the hallways of my elementary school. Each victory I believe, except for one. Years ago, I jumped out an eleven-story window, over an eight- foot gap to the slanted shingles of an adjacent roof. I remember seeing the sky most of all and sometimes my hands, feral and clawing at the slate. I made it safely to the top, balanced on the narrow of that building like a weather vane, the purple night moving just for me as I spread my arms like a storybook idiot. I can’t remember why I do most things. This is most things. If there was a rotted knot in my brain it grew in the center. Sometimes, I think about this climb and the fear I forgot to feel floods over me. When I sit for too long my back aches like it is broken and I know I must have fallen. I am still there. Head split open. Just a blood orange crushed on a sidewalk, I must be. 
It started when I mailed him slices of my fingertips in plain envelopes. He suction cupped some to his torso like hungry leeches and rubbed the rest against his skin until they disappeared like chalk. He, loving me more, sent his entire pinky finger in a shoe box. I inserted it like a tampon, not even needing to bleed. So I sent him molars to jingle in his pockets like spare change, both my ears threaded on strings to hang from his rearview mirror and once, when he was particularly stressed, I sewed up a breast for him to squeeze. It was Christmas when I received his white high-top, still on his leg, cracked off just below the knee. In ink running up his calf was written, remember when we’d go  dancing just to go dancing? When I received a sagging manila envelope via priority mail, it leaked and ran down the delivery man’s forearm like sap from a tree. It was still pulsing as I tried to open it with no fingers to break the seal. No teeth to tear through the paper. Now, I lay scattered across his apartment, miles from my empty skull, and as his thumbs are in my silverware drawer, his eyes bobbing in my fishbowl, all I can wonder is if he notices, I haven’t swept my floor in weeks.  
Awake between them in the front seat, guardrails flashing past — mother crossing her arm over my chest in case of impact, whimpering as he barked, Should I smash into this post? Silent between them, I watched the road for those neon signs — not the red ones flashing No, but the liquid green Vacancy , promising, in a night carved from tar, someone waited up for us, someone had keys for every hook and would call us by our names. 
The flamingo feathers its nest with sawgrass and stones The rabbit that visits each day at four is found dead next To the monkey’s cage the father’s hand is far too fond Of the daughter’s breast her bedroom carpet the color Of just-shed blood and the mother whacks the daughter One hundred times each night with a brush so her hair Shines brighter than the Big Dipper in the April sky The pet rabbit purchased after the first rabbit died does Not last long anyway the daughter cannot ever forget The stars are always there glaring down at her during The day she sees them each time she faints and each time She turns the lights off in her bedroom God’s eyes bore Through her and pin her to the bed where she screams For help she dreams of leaving even her turtle ran away 
I. At breakfast the girl spits out gazelle fur with every sip of tea. It clings to the walls, her saliva like glue. Gets stuck between her teeth. At night she coughs up more hairballs than the cat. She’s all instinct and scent. Smells too much of her father. He’s been sniffing around. Her fur has come in and her ears grow long. She’s skittish. On guard. The girl’s mother hires a dressmaker to cover her daughter’s changed form, but the woman doesn’t have patterns that fit the four-legged creature standing before her. She advises the mother to fashion a bed out of straw. Make the girl comfortable. What else can you do? The girl knows. But her long tongue can’t wrap itself around the word flee . The other girls call her wild and the teacher leashes her to the treadmill in gym. Over and over she runs the same course, clenches her teeth against tongue and tastes blood. II. One day, just like that, the girl sheds her fur. Her ears recede until they can no longer be seen, and she starts humming. Her head narrows at the top and widens at the base and when struck, sounds a hollow thunk.  Inside­—a constant drone. She walks as though travelling through liquid gone thick and viscous. At night, when the girl’s father comes to her bed, he complains of stings. She pedals her bike around town. Flowers bend toward her as she passes and she aches to bathe in their yellow dust. The girl is last sighted near the bus station. The people who saw her that day swear she shimmered like a hot-road mirage. She was there and then she wasn’t and the seat of her bicycle was swathed in bees. 
I could’ve married a country boy. I could’ve married, slipped a shawl around my frame at night and watched him weed the garden. I knew men of work and red clay. They were not sensitive like you. If one struck me, as they were wont to do, I’d take his truck through town, tie a brick to the gas, and let the river have it. But I would take him back, because women trapped in that small town made do. You once told me that your father had another wife, another family, another house with his name on the door. There isn’t enough dirt for the ways men lie. In bed, I want to believe you when you say you need two things in this life: a supple shouldered girl and a car that never dies. by Sarah Sweeney     
So says the myth: women who come to the temple of Ixchel will be blessed in marriage and fertility. I arrive having left a man behind, having nothing to be blessed or cursed, simply acknowledged. He erases all trace of me these mornings, raking fingers through soaped water to scrub my perfumed sheen off everything, a fury of long hair swept in a dustpan— while faraway I kneel, my burnt shins on stone, breathing salt in the air, that roiling Caribe behind me. Seven years we surpassed all odds: his love for chicken wings and every sport, sleeping as late as possible while I awoke ready to gnash through life like a rabid coyote. Didn’t he know I’d flee somewhere like Mexico, bleach my hair, forego modern appliances to lean my bronzed back on prickled stucco while the guy pushing paletas  spritzes my face with water? The men here call me Sarita bonita . Each kisses my palm and offers me fruit. 
My refrigerator is full of the desiccated corpses of ginger roots, greens dissolving into pools of browns, sour cream growing something medicinal. Drawers open to cankered citrus, grapes half-way to raisins, exotic fruits looking more exotic, though less edible, than when they arrived. The mushrooms grow fungus on top of fungus. Even root vegetables are powerless against me: carrots swoon and potatoes wave waxy new appendages. Every victim of my neglect a dream meal deferred: boeuf bourguignon, coq au vin, risotto, stir fry, pasta primavera, duck a l’orange. Every desecrated fruit and flower and root a dinner for two that refused to be dinner for one. 
He tells me that once he crawled through a woman and didn’t realize it until the way back. He tells me that he thought it was a pile of smoldering clothing—that he didn’t think the stick on his air tank was anything other than burning polyester and plastic. He tells me he still smells her when he is alone. He tells me he thought the cracking under his palms was wood—that he didn’t know how easily the frame of her could break. He tells me he only saw what he had done after searching for over an hour. He tells me he gathered what was left and carried her out to the ambulance as if something could be done—that the ambulance driver didn’t know what to do with the remains—didn’t know if a body bag was appropriate at this point. He tells me he can’t smoke cigarettes anymore because he is afraid of becoming like her. He tells me he is afraid his lungs will catch fire and become a doorway. 
Keep the body three days in darkness. the body is not whole Drape the body at the breast. Let the skin fall slack and cold. the body is molasses rot Supple the bones. Fold down the ears. Seal the jaw. the body is petrified blues Stitch the eyelids to the brow. Plug the nostrils with ginger root. the body is splintered palm Line the lungs with perfume. Harvest the hairs. Drain out the gall. the body is disrupted night Listen for when the sea is not calm. Carry the body to the lip of the tide. the body is unfiltered sound Bind the limbs with sea vines. Rub sand where scars are found. the body is mercurial glow Lower the body down. Watch the waves close. Watch the vines float. 
When I was saved the first time, I lay on a trampoline with his hand down my cut-offs, excused the action with a sigh of summer and another long-drawn breath to follow.  Don't go to sleep, why you gotta go to sleep when the dark unfolds like petals under heat summer  summer —exhale—expand to fill the space between stars fallen silent, dark, another hole punched in the sky's sparse light. And when you say summer in your sigh, what you really say is I have been a spent match  head & the answer to every opening must be yes so I said it all without thinking & fell open like a flower one day closer to dead. 
This summer, our curtains are always pulled shut. When I wake, it’s to the sound of metal scraping stone. Bulldozers tear chunks of brick from the building next door. You say,  We’ve lived here too long , & you might be right: the sheets are slowly stiffening, the headboard creaking away from the frame. Your hair shakes out sawdust when you climb on top. Everything we own together is covered in film—the lint on the radiator, the spit on my neck, debris outside our windows, grime in the hall where you’ve tracked your work back in. This summer, I live in a plash of various salts from your body. I burrow despite your leaving. I say, You smell like dirt , but mean,  Your teeth are square blessings  when they graze . Tomorrow morning will be just like this. You will thank my earlobes for liking the touch. You will thank my elbows for bending that way. Even though you are leaving me, this will not be a gesture of solace. Even on your neck         the scent of pine. 6:45am 8:13am 11:15am 5:30pm 5:55pm 7:20pm    dream is still circling. got me hanging upside down, wings straining to cover the rawest parts. sun come snarling in, stretching out my ankles, wrists. i am long. a winding slave trail shuffling to the cliff. his legs wide open sucking in the artificial light of the e train. i am left a tiny patch of seat. my knees nail themselves together. bloodied, whispering. this meeting is a pit of razor voices, a mud sling of big words and egos. they do not see me. i open my mouth. i close it. i open my mouth. someone says the thing i was going to say. i open my mouth. a raven flies in and clips my tongue. when i walk, they ask to touch my hair. i bare my teeth and run. when i run my hair jingles: collision of hooked moons, spines, dog chains and spoons. in front of the grocery there is a man with holes gnawing at his shoes. bags                         and bags, cradled in a cart. man says house of stone, breast of aching clay. says you don't remember? i lie cold in the dry bathtub. i am still afraid of drowning.       She crept into my room, took me outside into the mosquito night thick with the gutted hums of fishermen’s wives, piercing the flesh of a sleep walking sky. She taught me that cobwebs are hammocks for spirits, a stop along the way to rest their weary skins, a knot on the thread of their pilgrimage to a place they had almost touched once. In those days, a village could grow legs. Wedge itself deep into the throat of mountains where horses couldn’t smell it, where footsteps couldn’t sear its memory onto peeling roads.       Dear mama: Dear mama:    The orchids have teeth the machetes are ornaments rusting upon the walls. I want to build you a temple of teeth but my hands are too tender my hands are for stringing the rice grains of rosaries. On the ocean roams a shadow of splinters the fish are hurling themselves onto the shore the shore will break into birds of dust the scales are mirrors blinding the sun. On the ocean roams a shadow of splinters how will I swim to you when the day is done? 
faggots take photographs of our beheaded torsos below staged light. faggots bite lips for the guillotine flash – cuts off a first or second head. meat breathing before a camera. the camera swallows and is always hungry. faggots pick a best side, emphasize the size of one body part or another lips  parted how a curtain opens on a sad play. faggots stay hard into the third act. faggots eye-fuck the fourth wall until it sweats. faggots fall on all fours while we get the shot right. ass spread as a curtain. forget the body, while knowing only its mass. imagine all those thrown out photographs will outlast you. each cross-eyed love-handled image, pressed together in a giant book. forget the body, soil can make even the hardest thing decompose. faggots blow loads for photos, throw our hair back and laugh. faggots slow dance with plastic and pray to whatever infection resists penicillin this week. say, i will take him hard in my mouth and not call it disease or a loaded gun. faggots come just like you. faggots run hollywood but hate how hungry we look on screen. faggots dream in acronyms. faggots wrapped in rainbow flags look like a roll of quarters. faggots swallow and are always hungry. we forget the body but hunger for its mass. Butthole  oh putrid rose. oh floral gift from some dead god i buried alive only to excavate and find, still fresh. oh myriad sweet sounds i make with it: trumpet, trombone, tornado, goblin. oh mouth that gapes and swallows. oh mouth that hungers for new tongue. oh stomach that rests so far from the colon but still calls him cousin. oh come, oh old world magic, oh small hungry prince, oh great equalizer. how many octaves can you tuba? how many eloquent speeches come right from the gut? what countless phallic shapes have you named husband? what knuckle tucked into you a dyke holding up all this stale water. sweet you who birthed iron when i took too many women’s multivitamins claiming there’s no such thing as gender. praise, how you expand and shrink like a house’s water pipes from winter into its heat. praise how when you bleed you’re always trying to tell me something. praise you, tiny gymnast, beast with a breathing halo, gold band that weds my strange body to this strange strange earth 
For God so loved the world he drove it straight into a brick wall, and the world folded around him, and the world removed thirty percent of the flesh from his face, and the world broke three of his ribs, and the world was on fire, and the world was pried open by a host of angels, and the world was sprayed with chemicals and water, and the world was placed on the back of a large tow truck, and the world was evaluated by an insurance agent, and the world was declared a total loss, and the world was replaced with a new world. 
For God so loved the world he took it orally, three times a day, with adequate food and water per his psychiatrist’s instructions, and he found the world started to control him, he found the world removed the angels from his lips and from his ears, and he missed the angels, and he cried out to them at night, and he could not remember his dreams, and he awoke only to take the world anew, one by one, into his stomach, into his blood, until the world became his flesh, until the world began to breathe for him, until the world began to speak for him, until the world began to think for him, and he and the world were one. 
In their tiled-coffee-smelling world of yellow kitchen Mama and her girlfriends go on and on about grown men and women things, clicking their tongues with the shame of Did you hear/  Girl, I know/ Now,  ain’t got a pot to piss in/  Can’t tell  some women anything /Oh hell,  I can’t hear myself think/ That girl’s  gonna go deaf /Fourteen  What she know about heartbreak? There are things I can’t ask her, so I ask Nina, on my back with the cracking sleeve of her face resting on my stomach, mouthing questions to my living room ceiling. My palm is on the speaker’s pulse. Mama’s coming heavy-footed down the hall, hollering into the room   If you don’t turn that down / If you just  have to play those records now  play Chaka, Whitney, or Janet/It’s too early f or all that gloomy shit/ It’s wearing  on my nerves. But I want the crow- faced woman whose mouth could swallow a blackbird whole. Whose sound could blow down dollhouses, sweep away plastic people and give me a voice that names the vacant lots in my chest after loves I haven’t met yet but wish they’d hurry up and make me sound like this. My first will sound like shatter  when I’m seventeen, and he’s showing off, throwing a rock through a factory window, making a broken face of glass for me to admire, the night he makes me feel what I’m doing to him down there in his parked Volvo. My second will carry plaster in the scabs of his knuckles. Will know where to break me against the edges of moonlight, the rigid arms of doorframes. Will teach me the sound of a kitchen floor’s hard, linoleum apology. Because there are things I can’t tell Mama so I tell Nina, on my back cause I'm ashamed, and I know she will tell me how she’s done it all. How she knows that grainy mourning stuck in my teeth. With my palm on the speaker’s pulse. I let the needle drop on any song and wait. 
it’s said that we don’t choose who we love, but I disagree. or maybe choice is an illusion, a night-colored train streaking over the highway. it beelines toward the moon, who’s lit up and singing drunk. the canopy of trees that hold the railroad bridge could be moon-bathed or snow-dipped, depending on the temperature of air the car bends apart as it winds over a mountain that tucks Tennessee’s deepest corner into bed with Georgia. the windows are up, so I can’t tell the season. or maybe time is an illusion, glowing headlights in the black river of I-24, not seen by the one who’s driving, but witnessed as a pair of red comets by people on porches set back from the road. 
Arizona stretches before me, as my father's skin opens for the surgeon. The lump— this bluff, no, that mesa—no, it’s wedged in his neck. The tumor so close to his nerves means legs lose control. I grip the wheel, pass the exit for Meteor City Road. If I stopped, I could stare into the crater. The bicycle lashed to the trunk of my car spins its wheels, useless. In memory the asteroid is always falling; the surgeon’s knife continues to slice. I press the gas, carve into the 2,017 miles tensed between us. 
I took Pioneer Day out back and shot it in the head. -CSU Chico President Robin Wilson At the center of Fifth and Ivy, a carnival of youth, liquor-slick and ready to be set alight. The order to disperse crackles, newspaper blackens in a trash can's flames. From the choir of jeers a bottle is hurled and deflected, batons are raised. Riot shields in phalanx like Roman constabulary quelling the Dionysian cult. As if Bacchus and his piping satyrs were among those who heeded Playboy's crude map tracing Highway-99 up the Sacramento Valley straight to America's Number One Party School . Channel 24 loops the tape of overturned police cars, their chassis gas-drenched, spewing braids of smoke while all the boys, Southern California-born, blue eyes dancing with reflected fire, wipe sweat from the crowns of their heads and watch West Chico burn again. A hundred years before these blocks were Chinese homes, restaurants and laundries turned to char by the Supreme Order of the Caucasians . Pioneer sons protecting their white citadel. While the rubble was swept from the streets and the council passed its decrees I slept inside my mother, her blood becoming mine. I was born to a season of wildfires. On the highest floor my mother cradled me before hospital windows where through plumes of ash we beheld the cauterized plain. 
Hector nails a Chola with pink eye in the Taco Bell bathroom, tapes a Glock  to his ankle afterwards, tells us to wait outside Hector says:  living is forgetting, forget anyone who ever touched you Chica Dade County heat melts carburetors, tombstones This parking lot is a fleck in the galaxy and we are pebbles in its mouth I want to open my stone body, thaw my sadness here, next to Hector as he strokes it out I want this heat to melt my ghosts to powder blue scars and promises I can swallow my carbon mouth, velvet touched and craving a thousand walls of blacktop Ahead of us, the Gulf, we drive and drive 
all them black boys in the ‘hood had they wallets unearthed in cities they ain’t never seen before & they was all empty ‘cept for maybe the bones of the last woman to hold them in her arms & call them by the name they blessed the earth with & all of the horns on my block crawled back into they cases & marched to new mouths & fathers had nothing to press their lips to & make sing & i think this why brandon’s mother left & what difference is there in those things which we lose & those things which decide to gift us with a kind of feral silence? the change that leapt from our pockets into the cracked basketball courts & the older brothers  who never found their way back home 
I wonder if you will be hungry when you come to me. My only son. A mouth like a pulpit. Fist-first. I close my legs to madness, men. I whisper not yet . I will still be who I am when your voice drips down the humid walls of me. Spark spun, half-mute, roofing nail in the soft sole of my foot. I’ll off your milk like slaver, like a screen-door season. Finger for a father. Coal for an ovary. The lime root of a rotten tooth. I dare you, I dog you – choose a hole in me and fall from it. 
What only children know: bread  soaked in warm milk until gummy, chinking teeth in a drawer that reeks of cedar, of mother, of the parts of her body we haven’t seen in years, small places, hidey holes, the home under the church pew, all shoes and ashy ankles, taste his heel (sour like grapes or blistered backwater), grandmother’s apple butter? knees stained with grass, tin choked tulips, smiling crucibles, mouthing mammal, no, doorknob, no, mammal, all the while pounding out (this is a duet, mind you) “Heart and Soul” on the ivory keys of the belt buckle that holds up his belly, holds in his heart, intestines, his coils of black matter I’ve memorized. Girls. All of them stinking of silence. The world we made, nothing but crumbs and corners now. White trash, primer, black paint sealed windows. My mother whispering into the phone, a eye-lidless man and his serrated pocket watch at the door. Knocking, knocking. We’re crouching, crouching between bedposts and laugh lines like live wires. The walls were raining ashtrays. The baseball bat, the hammer yearning to swing, to sing for a human head. 
Paring Knife He begins by sliding the edge against stone until it sparks. That's my father paring the apple. His long fingers catch the skin like a prize. My father tilting the blade, sharp against each pencil, bringing the color back. When he's through, he rests the knife on the kitchen windowsill, gated and diamond-crossed, stained from cigarettes, boardwalk air. In the evenings, he places an apple, quartered, beside the pencils and looks at me with gladness because I've asked for such small things.  Samovar I ask my mother for something small I can hold onto. She sends me his wallet and a stopped pocket watch. That's all, she said. The wallet? Leather Americana embossed with flowers, a name that's not his. Painfully clean. Months later, I find one two-dollar bill in a secret pocket. He kept it that way. Even dead, he's got me laughing, a wallet named Peter and an antique bill. I cut my hair and it felt like crying. What I want: a kitchen with good sunlight, kerchief for my table and my father's samovar, gold with blue flowers. Look: papa standing on a chair, concertina in his hands (his one childhood photo). What I have: his white ceramic cup painted a soviet winter scene, permanently stained, and black lace from the week we buried him. I forget how to make dinner. I fuck the wrong girl. Damn it. What I want is good light, something clean. 
Nothing's Gonna Stop Us Now  was breaking air waves the year I was made. But not in Odessa, through a white barred window, a tenement with floors made of the cleanest dirt that side of the Black Sea. Dora wasn't home. Who knows where a woman that age goes when she goes? Pulling potatoes, diamonds, out the new paved road? Breaking thermometers over mortars to cast her curing spell? A shmear to burn the blossom, a mushroom from a man's thigh. What she did she did alone. Let them say we're crazy, I don't care about that. * It was Dora gave her daughter permission, a privacy owed a woman in her thirties. Put your arms around me, baby never look back . And it was not love. And it was not beautiful. Not a fig bursting in the seeded cavern of her mouth. Not the quenching of a thousand fires old as her name, Tamar, warrior queen, thrice blessed. It was sex, simple, black bread and butter. She was a woman who needed a man she could trust her son with. My father: Invalid of the First Degree.   Let the world around us just fall apart. * And what was left of youth stayed tucked behind them in the old wood, starched and blued like a school shirt made to last from sibling to sibling. And if this world runs out of lovers  we'll still have each other. On the velour couch, Tamara remembers: Boris on blood thinners and me at my age? Year you were born, they said 90% chance your baby will be a monster. Your father said           Whatever comes is ours.  
Do not look for me at the front of the church, In a white box, smile pressed into the corners Of my mouth. Do not expect me shorn properly & slicked into a fresh-pressed, respectable suit. Do not seek the silent reflection or comfort Of a creaky pew & a good old hymn. Go Instead to the darkest alley you can find On Main Street. Talk to the man who listened To the wonders of my day, as if fairytale, Who shared my bed at least twice a month. Mention my name & watch his eyes alight With the taste of four-cheese macaroni & artichoke-spinach dip. Undress as he recounts The amazing grace of the nape of my neck, The briny eyespit caked there, & when He falls into you & calls my name, give thanks. 
The man at the desk points to the pink bathroom door and asks Don’t you want that one? I shrug and say sure. A coworker says She and I answer. We play boys vs. girls in gym class and I wait in the middle of the court to see which direction the tide of students will pull me. My father warns that biology knows best and I nod. My physics teacher says he’s not sure he’s comfortable with that nickname so I never raise my hand. My mother tells me to be patient until college. I crawl under the covers for three years. I go out for dinner and take whatever the server brings me. A stranger stares at me on the train and I melt into the doors. My girlfriend mumbles that she wishes I’d just be normal . I stuff myself into the back of her closet. The traffic light turns yellow. Stays yellow. Always yellow. Question: what has two heads, yellow teeth  and eyes made of grape jelly?  What has green stripes, nostrils that flare like caves  and a tail that dissolves like a braid of smoke?  At the community center in the center  of Detroit, the kids draw the strangest horses.  The greatest racehorse of all time was Secretariat.  We don’t see horses like Secretariat in Detroit,  so if one kid imagines a stallion that gallops through McDonalds,  and another has purple wheels instead of legs,  no one asks any questions.  When Secretariat ran a race, he usually won.  The horses the kids make, here, are different.  Some have manes that whip  like flags or confetti or streamers in the breeze.  Others look more like deformed dogs. Every single horse is running.  Secretariat ran like no other horse. The Derby,  The Belmont, The Preakness—all of them saw  this horse explode across the finish line  far in front of his rivals. Applause. Lonelier than God.  Aaron says his horse runs from the devil.  And Tania says her horse runs from the prince.  Their teacher tells me, for Aaron, the “devil” is a city of rust,  a house empty and charred and tasting like gasoline.  For Tania, the “prince” is a father whose temper  rumbles like trains in those old movies—it barrels through  the dark, unstoppable, and everyone  knows the tracks ahead are splintered, and everyone  knows the sound of the wreck.  Jason says his horse runs from an ambulance siren  that sings its song a little closer every night.  Dana says her horse runs straight to heaven  to be with her brother: his body  no longer a doorway opened by the heel of a boot.  I’m a guest in this classroom, and feel like a tourist  in a country where all the postcards are made of pain.  They ask me if I have any poems about horses.  I don’t.  So I just tell a story of a horse  that ran until it was no longer a horse.  Then one child hands me her drawing.  Around it, she’s made a massive heart,  and this makes sense because winning jockeys  always talk about how much “heart” their horses have.  How can you measure heart?  I have never seen this much ache in a single room.  After the class has ended, the teacher pins  each drawing to the board.  She is so careful, her hands shake.  “When they come back,” she says, “I want them to feel  like they’ve built a museum,  like they’ve accomplished something amazing.”  On the day Secretariat died, they cut his body apart.  When his heart was removed,  it should have been comparable to a small melon,  it should have weighed six to seven pounds.  It was over three times that size. 
I am learning to love you,  my fingers unruly.  What thrives without  special treatment?  Not all species are hardy,  easy to grow from seed.  Let us  remember how innocent we were.  Some species  prefer full sun, others tolerate  the shade—  Love, didn’t I know you first  by your body’s particulate sweat?—Some  species are overlooked, mistaken  for weeds, choked by the neighboring,  and there was a time I was one  of many thin stalks none would want to cut.   Y ou move among the many-  breasted hives, my heart under your foot,  sister of a stone . It’s true I gave  you the memory of my sister to keep, seed  of her ghost—   and you, here like this,  pressing back—it comes   back readily , and I turn  to you, caught,  your mouth opening.  I feared  my father most, and fought his voice’s   hard darkening—toughest of all species,    it survives on its own, and though the propensity to hybridize creates confusion,  you and I continue to bend into and away  from each other, dark pairing .  I understand  the fear  of a child growing  into a woman, one   who might show love—kneeling down    to drink again the riotous tangling of my legs in yours.  Don’t we have to cut away rungs from this  wild climbing? Here  is grace,  such verdant and frost-  burnt propagating.    
to ask for rain is to know you are already dead. that a dead boy is still dead when filled with what isn’t his. that a black boy is a dead boy: he won’t own shit either. to be one swallow away from breath, one warning away from prophet. to be the browse and browsed (over), a talent of mouth. to remember the happy ending in every book. to forget they were all white. to name desire as everyone who hasn’t killed you yet. to know a dead boy forgot to talk    a black boy forgets his drain    so a dead black boy shuts up when his mouth is full. knows the question was never rain                                                         just a thing close to water [1] .  [1]  what he means to say is:  i was lonely once. then again. then again. then again. 
All along the creek  flecks of gold                                                                mirror the cold water  silt, overalls, bulls, roots  growing under the old white barn  where the dying colt, his tail caught in thistles  bleats out through a dark mouth  The barn wood smells of dirt when her face is pressed into the hayloft’s floor.  Her pond must be full of ripples.  Her hair must be in the ground.  A quick kick from the small horse    a swift lift-off from the hand that’s inside her shirt  pounding the backs of buttons & buttercup sleeves.  The kindness of gasoline  near her mouth                                     the darkest side of bones   moths, straw, dust, boots  kicking under her young white legs  where there are rare hands, alcohol    a hymn of insects ﻿ 
In Monteverde  the women were rainy seasons. Stray dogs lumbered to stoops, their teats dragging. Phone lines drooped under lamb smoke and fat birds full of rice. It was the year I lived among clouds — torqued and skittish. I had my own ideas about love: stormy countries, women named Nadege, buckets of lucky fish. I told myself the moon was full and the trumpets loud. I couldn ’ t sober up. I thought only of monsoons, hot springs, my breath in the heart of a balloon. The truth is morning smelled of bruised mangoes and wet dog. Each evening the street below was dirty, flooded. At night, red dust settled between my teeth. My back hammocked in the rotting bed. With every clench of my jaw, I could hear the grit of a country unbuilding me. 
I am mad and must be forgiven— mad as the lamb  in a wolf ’ s throat. Again, I ’ m over the idea of surrender, how the lamb bleats to nothing. The grass bends in sorrow with dewed blood on its bladetips, new trail for the hunters to build a fence around the carcass. There will be no grave for the helpless — so help me not.  It ’ s not my time  yet—I ’ ll wait to break like fifty thousand starlings hatched in the same nest.  Or I ’ ll bury the wolf deep into the woodchips, deep as the promise I must make to myself: run. Gather my legs in a slingshot and rush till no one hears my rustling on the ground. 
This is how you make pancakes:  Buy some butter  Even if the butter is bitter. Sift together flour, baking powder, & sugar. Pour milk & butter into the batter  to make the batter better. Grab the whisks—beat eggs eagerly. Pour canola oil into the skillet. Mix until smooth, fool. Fancy how many perfectly round  pancakes you can flip. Serve brown, hot, & exhausted. Whisper the secret of your recipe promised for your grave when a pretty white lady asks you for it. Pretend she thinks your pancakes are as sweet as you. This is how your daughter discovers she cannot lick the batter: shoot your eyes to the clouds, wear a cheeky smile. Make the smallness of your wit humorous.  Accept 20% interest on your own pancake business.  Buy some butter  Even if the butter is bitter  Put it in the batter  To make the batter better  Better than her bitter butter  But your batter is not bitter Be not bitter. This is how it feels to be eaten out of a box in front of your child: Give the silver ladle to families who consume you. Bury the pickaninny head scarf. Your death wish chariot— pearls and pressed curls. Give them the same buck-toothed smile painted red, less lip.     
1. The Mason Boys ’  sneakers crunched against rusted leaves as the dying rat beat against the plastic bag. They pushed its writhing body away from theirs, dropped it into a dumpster & rushed upstairs to soap their hands, each flicking death water on each other ’ s eyelids.  2.  “ Boys, c ’ mon in here & get these pancakes! ”  said Mama: not fat & aproned, a chef in a silk dress who watched CNN, skipped Sunday church sessions, smoked NewPort100s & kissed the wrinkles on her sons ’  foreheads. Their pre-pubescent mouths gulped & slurped syrup. They later asked to back-flip in the corners of a gardenless backyard, jumped the black fence instead, into the grime of an alley in search of black birds.  3. The crimson, off-white & blue blues cop car sped onto the potholes of Jefferson Street. “ Betcha I can run faster than that car ”  Malcolm Mason bid.  “ Nuh Uhn, I can. ”  Martin Mason declared. Their black raced, heaving. Thighs like boulders, bulging. Martin Mason scooped up woodchips & rock, teasingly hurled them at his brother. A pebble thwarted, pounced against the car window. The cops drove faster.  4. Mama, with two gray crinkled curls at the front of her afro poked her head out of her window. The streetlight was a dusty orange glow: spiders & mosquitoes smashed & electrified inside. Their darkened dead bodies dimmed the street. Mama tipped her cigarette into a white ashtray, crossed her legs near the window & inhaled the smoke. She thought about the silk slip her Grandma Hattie told her to wear beneath skirts. The crossed legs. How to be a proper woman raised amongst improper men. Most midnights when the boys feigned sleep, she wore silk lavender skin-tight dresses, 6-inch heels, mascara & blonde wigs. Men touched her bare arms at bars. She danced with them & returned home to scrape egg from her own skillet.  5. The Mason boys ran behind the bushes, they ran behind the willowed trees. They ran into a pit bull who barked & howled. Their fright, almost found. They ran inside their skin, inside the black where they were rabbits. A black bird hovered above the tree branches where they shivered a shhh from the sweat of their skin. The black bird beat his wings wildly with the wind. Inside the black, their boyhood hid.   6. Nina Simone blared from Mama ’ s window. “ Just two more plays. Boys will be boys, ” she thought. A hooker with missing front teeth & deep burgundy lipstick stopped in front of her gate. She slow danced by herself, arms wrapped around her back as if she was in the arms of a lover. “ You jamming up there girl! ”  the hooker yelled up to the second floor. Mama studied her aloneness like a recipe.  
now he’s pushing himself up into. a life into time. a once in a life that is gathering speed — his point to prove — is swiftly becoming a not just once. the knot of you, rescinding. out of you, pouring, the product of a swallowed [i don’t want to anymore], which feels to him like welcoming slick. damn the skin crying its quicksilver at his slither, the rapid breath that can’t believe it’s expected to be unbelieving again. and he’s into a groove that is darkly reminiscent of crossways and rolling stops: [what do you like to do] into [how soon can i come over] into [address] and now, out of sheath out of sheath comes the sound of you scrawling into time, sheath, a myth of how this was an incident like any other, and for you, what’s the truth if not this. knot of you, fraying away from what’s felt. weak moan in the hollow nasal innards of [i want] is both [take me] and [take this away from me] and it is still a moan out of. 
today you went to brunch with / today at the winery with / again today i watched you watch a series of primetime sitcoms with no significant black characters  and bat not a lash. at the base of your neck, soft bristles my fingers brush lightly; on the sofa, i breathe your soap’s sandalwood remainder —  * now a loud party rotates. one of your friends, another’s puzzled partner,  and i all bond over the brownness of our arms and ramble an overview of rap music, a dance of thrown shoulders, loud red tongues, well- greased hair. my hand in yours. at moments, i want to give you a list of what is crippling. one: that i can never leave my body.  *  [us] is a stock mental image: a white lily centerpiece, the deep-marine tabletop circling. our green-eyed, brown-skinned child, i keep saying (sometimes in silence), would be gorgeous. and all of this must be smashed. i love (that) you (make me forget). i am out of place. among the slow petals, a black briar, snagged. 
Our desks are in a circle in our classroom & it just so happens I’m sitting next to my white professor & all my black girl hair is flung over one shoulder & I can see everyone’s face & my professor, we’re talking about the 1920s & my professor, he says nigger & before that we were talking about Ralph Ellison & before that we were talking about Claude McKay & we skipped over Nella Larson & made fun of Gwendolyn a bit, but c’est la vie & my professor, he runs right through nigger like it’s not a wall my whole history is pinned up against & nigger sits in the middle of all of our desks & it’s like I’m the only one who can see it & everyone else in the room turns white even though they’re not; they’re pink & pale & sandy & tree-colored but still, everyone I mean everything turns white & I’m just a dot & I’m just a black girl with black girl hair & my black girl hips balanced in this dark red chair & we all know nigger is tree-colored & I can’t remember my face & my tongue bleeds right into my teeth & my mouth is full of spit & he didn’t mean it that way & this is academia & here comes the whole train of them, right? & don’t tell me I can’t say that word but you can & be mature / professional / quiet / good & freedom of speech & here they come & here’s the list of their freedoms they fight for (but not mine) & I’m being honest, he really didn’t mean it that way & it’s just a word & my tongue & my teeth & language is such a complicated series of ropes and ladders & black folk be climbing and hanging at the same time & he only read it in context & it’s in the context of the reading & it’s in the reading & we all know nigger is tree-colored, which is to say, we all know nigger has black people hanging off the g’s, which is to say, some words carry ghosts no matter what because context & context is everything & my professor is talking about & is talking about & is talking about & is talking about & is talking about & is talking about & is talking about & just like that, the whole room is haunted. 
A Mexican restaurant is no place for a married man’s hands to wander. When his left slides up my skirt, I stop it, but wonder if I’m slick enough for his ring to slip inside me. Imagine the gold rooting, the sour accomplice stink. My tongue forked for the lies to pass easy. No should be the obvious reflex, not wrestling with my parting knees, my eyes unblinking, my mouth’s sudden  taste for salt. 
The oldest sat in the passenger seat. He grew his first moustache  at thirteen. His little brother’s chest was still a birdcage  sitting in the backseat of his best friend’s Chevy. Jason was crooked gap grin,  dirty jokes, and the only white face. Among the five boys,  he was the smallest by one and a quarter inches. His dick jokes  all had the same punch line. Jason sat in the backseat  between two black boys, each one of them next to a rolled down window.  In the front, two more black boys, two more open windows.  All five boys in the car sang in unison with the radio and prayed  to the same god. For years now they had whispered in the back of their church  about girls who stood in the front of the church whispering  about them. The four black boys in the car  thought about their mothers when they passed the sedan,  white and unmarked. Jason sat in the middle of the backseat  with no warning rising up in him. His mother had never bought flowers  for a young man’s funeral or advised her son how to avoid attending his own:  Say ‘Yes, Officer’ and ‘No, Officer. ’Keep your hands on the wheel.  Every boy but Jason, breathed deep and remembered their lines.  When the red and blue and noise tangled in the air above the car,  the Chevy answered by bringing its body,  already more rusted than when they left home,  to the shoulder of the road. Four of the boys  were pale as dead men. The officer pulled them all out of the car  with only his voice and his badge. Jason was praying to the same god  his friends were. Those four black boys, eyeing the blue uniform  and the familiar face it wore. Jason got half-hidden sideways looks  when the officer pulled him away from the others  and spoke to him in hushed tones: Are you okay?  He did not understand. In the side view mirror, he saw his friends.  The man’s eyes repeated, Are you okay? He stepped closer  to the boy, close enough to offer the secret handshake  of his concern: With them? Jason's friends, several feet and a world away,  stood staring at the ground, looking apologetic, thinking  of their mothers, of black dresses, of their own crime scene faces.  Jason, somehow whiter now than when they had left home, nodded  like an apology to the boys he grew up with. Back in the car,  the radio offered up a song they could all sing like a hymn  to the same god.  
There were no puddles  pouring out of the children ’ s  knees even when the smoke  was highest.  Yes, I can tell you  the clothes tied  to the hair  on the floor moaned  like vacant orchards.  I felt hands  where there were none,  and quiet births  tunneled from the mouths  yawning in the dark.  North was whichever way  the mannequins  were pointing. In another story, we are not born as goodbyes to an older country but tremors of the last night’s monsoon—the wet discarded rinds pulled from an aging fruit tree bending towards the small shock of light caning through the palms. Here we are not men who question the God we were given. We are the elements and filled with hunger. I am still dark. And I am still not told that this is beautiful. Here, we are children laying in the grass. Our bellies sick with sugar cane, the dead stalk strewn about in tribute. Here we are again, in the same field, as grown men, who never learned their lesson. Maybe we understand our parents better. Maybe we finally love them in the ways they always deserved. In this story, I am stumbling drunk down a street with two blown lamp posts. Even here, I can’t get most things right. When you catch up to me I am dizzy against the wall struggling to take a piss. Kuya, you tell me, tabi tabi po. Your voice filled with worry, reminding me that we still owe pittance to all of our gods, even those that are small and trade in mischief. From here, you help me walk the rest of the way home. And you listen to me tell you all that is troubling. Each of us taking turns to wipe the sweat off our foreheads. Everything is so quiet. Nothing but the sound of gravel scraping underfoot. late again. scurrying off down the blackened, blackest holes. where are you, always, when i need a voice in my head. where babies are made. mother. madhatter hippie hair. the color of tits. and tongues. and that’s the sort of pink the china rubber ceilings. oh, all tan and gleaming, stuffed with liquor of your belly. to make antennas in the walls. bounce me out against of course, you must get past the doctors long enough to make metal will shrink it. someone will call together a party on the lawn. down a rabbit hole, someone will grow it. someone caterpillar. i guess we all knew magic, if you slip a baby like a mess of tea in your belly to the birth of a giant sat me beside you like a tiger lily, or an alice tree bark mother, was a hole in the trunk. i guess whatever you managed to clump carried. much like a wicker basket of water to birth me rather, your hair, i should say held the water all day long stuffed in teacups. all day long stuffed in teacups. rather, your hair, i should say held the water much like a wicker basket of water to birth me i guess whatever you managed to clump carried. tree bark mother, was a hole in the trunk. sat me beside you like a tiger lily, or an alice like a mess of tea in your belly to the birth of a giant caterpillar. i guess we all knew magic, if you slip a baby down a rabbit hole, someone will grow it. someone will shrink it. someone will call together a party on the lawn. of course, you must get past the doctors long enough to make metal of your belly. to make antennas in the walls. bounce me out against the china rubber ceilings. oh, all tan and gleaming, stuffed with liquor the color of tits. and tongues. and that’s the sort of pink where babies are made. mother. madhatter hippie hair. where are you, always, when i need a voice in my head. late again. scurrying off down the blackened, blackest holes.     
His family well-off—his daddy do Hollywood films his skin a kind of pearl everyone wraps their fingers around when they hear the news. He was ill, they say, but not my boyfriend, who carried his father’s infamous name & thick herringbone chain around his neck. His entire life a hand-me-down. When they say he was ill —the young man in Isla Vista, who made shells dance the ground like a snatched necklace — they mean to say mental , but not my sweetheart when he raised a gun eye-level at me on his front porch. This boy had a European father, an ocean view. He was sick in a way, a way reserved for clean, fragile things. He was not quite right, a rich, white aristocrat who hated blondes. Quite unlike the boy who loved me—shirtless & oak-shaded, stinking of summer when he dropped the pistol to his penis, smirked at me for not having a sense of humor, his gold teeth loud as the corner streetlight. 
there is a difference between a schizo’ & any other crazy on the street him the one live downstairs in the first apt when you come in through the front way     he the poster child for paranoid one week off his meds & he got everybody sniffin for the scent of gasoline or sneakin up the fire escape because no one want a bullet lodged in the head a trench knife plunged beneath the shoulder blade all ‘cause they wanna take the stairs there is a    difference between a fiend & any other crazy on the street him the one sittin over there beneath the light chewin on his ugly words      hyper off that candy stuff    he a bona fide cracked head see how he always got some trinket to sell a fresh change of clothes he got a home somewhere & everything in it got a price    that little rock consuming everything escape! because no one not even that demon inside his sunken head can hide a conversation      make sense of his high   anymore his mouth a blade       a slick skin      a taut brown leather stretch around his busy skull there is a difference    between the drunk sleepin outside crazy    feverish on the couch in my lobby on the other side of my wall takes some gettin used to i hear the chronic cough see the bulb sizzlin out beneath the door he fear discovery in his dim crushed throat        he the sufferer prison t he  sinner’s bouquet a halo circling his illness never beat the bottle love missin what they used to have now mean nothin       cheatin became his life & he can’t escape because no one wanna lose the gift of a sound mind the difference      shallow good between him & i reality is a dream for us both  a blade-thin difference fills cells the money a dividing wall and it be prison       
MLK Blvd, Lexington, KY  —my mama’s womb was a grave i crawled out of —the world, a constant walk, corner to corner —i lost my cool innuh can following the bottom of this tiny well i two-toe tote everywhere —my face is an awkward slant —hear? if rain is company, i live on umbrella street HAha! —my intellect got knots —i come up on a discarded cigar, some reefer let the smoke crash, crest of wave against the cliff of my forehead —you might take me for a dragon distilled down to stumbled gravity & snuffed out groove —my head be a mop of bebop & debris —been searchin for the curb so long, nobody can find me —phantom like a pay phone —i’ve outlived all my gods —cracked cusp of bone —laid open vein —every thought of mine, a new direction, can’t make it home —can’t make it back to the ground for my mind movin 
i lie in the pitch, worshipping it. the one thing that stands between my six-foot-two paranoid schizophrenic neighbor and i. outside his apt #1 he slurs                   shouts nigger! at god’s throat & there is only a rain-warped cedar door in his way. two finger-widths of air holding it from the ground foyer light spilling in loud underneath                           a misaligned bolt         a malign head hectoring the lobby (i am inhaling his cigarette). three inches of cracked wood, thinner than the walls, keep damien from walking right                                   into the room              i rent on a city corner. converted antebellum house, the teeth of it rotting. the ruins. last night he blocked the staircase, demanded                                             with cuss words           a kiss ---- & ------ were w/ me then. how safe i felt while they made love in my bed after, so forgotten facing the wall                                                             playing                       dead 
Years after, my mother  explained you beat  everyone equally, even  the real sons. What a relief.   You stepped further  into each one of us,  until you reforged  our faces, animated  our bodies and continued  to swing. I looked  through you to my mother, and saw a dead girl shining  through her ring finger,  banded and bandaged,  sewing a torn-up jumper:  you slipping in and out  of the same worn fabric,  as if the rent could be mended. 
The singularity  of the dapple I will  move into, the last  glisters of autumn. I tell myself  it was I  who began it,  the fusing  of each  spell, and the subtractive,  ebb bays of brass:  Boy I saddle who cannot  shake me, and I will not  slide off. 
maybe it was the years          you were an orphan to me. how songs flew from my mouth
like rings off a candy necklace how I dug            and dug in the Halloween of your heart for something cherishable only to find the ghost was real. a dancer in the ballroom of my chest foxtrotting past every promised trophy and regret maybe it was the way you polished each apology an endless well agate of our youth anniversary silver chasing love to the depth at which it can only survive to survive— a cathedral window your love a thing    of blood sweating down her neck. every time you lay together made animal in the sweetheart heat maybe it was the ultrasound ripped from her fist like magic with a wizard's hands I knew too that hot desire with you the way it made me want to rent a car drive to New Hampshire and buy a sawed off arm-of-God. the way it made me want to walk into the forest with no shoes and feel my head like a balloon full of lead if only I could let a little air out how it made me want to lay down on the moss and birth a spewing maul of cubs. I understood why she walked there in a daze and why you called the cops with an entire ocean pressing down on you. she broke a million prisms refracting light. how you could be a bullet that fit so easily in the mouth your love a trigger        we could never get to go off. 
So I'm reading your book, the part where you let go of your imaginary friends & I stop because mine are suddenly back. It's terrible, they never liked me. I didn't remember that until now, until you opened your hand, they hated me. Why the hell would I invent playmates who stopped playing when I approached, who sighed when I spoke? There was actually a day when I begged, begged to go with them to the cellar. They refused & blocked the door. Forty years they've been down there. They look it, too; rotten playsuits, stick bodies, scribbles for eyes. They squint, slow to react, slow to guess what's next, even when I push them into the car. 
that cough sounds bad / a shoe sliding on grit / when you were a boy / your mamma told you babies came from homeless men / they woke to find them in their beards / cocooned in dirt / cornmeal / they left them behind nice houses / they knew god was testing them / giving them a chance to make good / so they wouldn’t come back as bums again / mamma said your life was set in mud / because your daddy kept you / then cut his beard / you got his taste for chalk / between rips of lighter fluid / blind in both legs too / all the money you beg goes to soap / razors / you slap your own face / all day / say no one learns nothing  this way 
Kinesophobia  the fear of not moving  Arrowheads of birds fleeing a burning city, manic, now divebombing repeatedly against this flying buttress of bone, volley after volley, as if looking for a way out through my mouth; 206 divining rods jerryrigged together with wire into a skeleton, pulling in every direction away from this drought, would prefer to quarter me than settle for this drought; bounce voice graveled into rasp, followed by a sharp choke then an urgent hand pulling a bullet from my throat after yet another misfire, yet another gutcheck turned gunjam, 3 more of these and I could fill a bandolier, maybe even start my own hipster pop-up shop selling 9mm regret to ruin pornographers & urban farmers & any other transplant who answered the beckon of the body, who call a place outside their city home and mean it; hostage strapped to a bomb with no timer, just an obnoxious knock like an old apartment radiator and a list of demands left with a beautiful woman in Brazil I'm terrified I'll never meet; static float, electric ghost, felt but never seen, like the totem's spin at the end of Inception , or the sex Harper & Jordan never have in that movie “The Best Man,” unactualized combustion, concentric limbo; last second pass to role player with time running out, pump fake with zero on the shot clock, bright burn that does not know its own death or night, reluctant star; better still—what is it called when you laugh twice as loud at things half as funny so you don't call off the search parties for yourself, and the flare of a strong drink fired into the panic of birds is proof of life, a vital sign? what is it called when you look at your bedroom walls and see teeth? when you are shown a flashcard of a house & your first thought is heavy molar? when you're put in front of a full length mirror and all you can say is gristle? 
You clumsy bootlegger. Little daffodil. I watered you with an ocean and you plucked one little vein? Downed a couple bottles of pills and got yourself carted off to the ER? I gifted you the will of gunpowder, a matchstick tongue, and all you managed was a shredded sweater and a police warning? You should be legend by now. Girl in an orange jumpsuit, a headline. I built you from the purest napalm, fed you wine and bourbon. Preened you in the dark, hammered lullabies into your thin skull. I painted over the walls, wrote the poems. I shook your goddamn boots. Now you want out? Think you’ll wrestle me out of you with prescriptions? A good man’s good love and some breathing exercises? You think I can’t tame that ? I always come home. Always. Ravenous. Loaded. You know better than anybody: I’m bigger than God.  
“You live through all of it, the impact, the moment absorbed in the body” – Luke Bauerlein  The poet writes about shards,  how his body kept them, skin  grew over and eventually released  the bits back into the world, something  foreign and useless, and I am  familiar with the effect, having   picked the itchy glass of a Nissan  from my own elbow as a child,   a full year after the Lincoln sped head-on  into our lane, and it isn’t very   different, or different at all,  from how I wake at 3:06 AM   every day though it’s been  over three years and his shadow   still rides the length of my body  as if it now belongs to me, how  my skin took in and grew over  his violence and now spits it back   out in small fragments each time  a man stands too close on the subway. 
The organ knows its place  filling its hands with nesting birds & conserving its locked music  for human touch. You assume the burning  belongs to you anytime there is fire.  Note your tendency to overwork anything you do.  Where is this baby, the 15-ounce royal  vegetable gendering itself in your uterus?  She is made from dogs & the blind music  your throat makes at love. You are no better  at growing babies than other mothers.  Though maybe marriage is a pole you climb each morning,  there is no fire. I have sensed  your nest & its scant hollows. The birthed  eggs wiped clean from slick & feather.  I hold your hair back from its vomit.  My thumbs find the hollows behind your ears  & draw circles there. I recite anything I can remember,  the recipe for brown bread, the dates of saints,  the alphabet of rain spelling itself on the roof.  A bird once flew directly into the car radiator.  There was sound & burning. But nothing  to mourn & no real reason to stop.  There is no help for this. An organ makes  no promises. There is the box  & the bulk. Nests of unborn song.  It’s just furniture if you have no hands.  Burning is a form of arrogance. You must learn to  climb the pole with your mouth. 
I heard about your sister. And you know  what I mean by that. How you can only bear to hear  1 song & that you don’t have to want  to want to do anything. Maybe I learned the wrong lesson  when I took my sister’s arm & said No  one deserves to be loved like that. Or said  Don’t die, let’s just both stand up while highway lights  make decisions across the landforms of a  sequined dress & liquid eyeliner. It ’ s just us  but there ’ s nothing special about everything  all the time, & you know that.  *  Marquee romance as punishment & I panic every  time you spend your holidays. Paper horns & the biology  of emptiness. Did you also drink Guinness naked  in bed alone? It’s too late sweet pea. The needle is already  inside you. You’ll know sorrow when you trust  only 1-syllable words. Until then it’s still pretty. You find  the language that needs you. And maybe no language  ever needed you bad enough.  *  No one ever once thought  I would have a son. I barely have  brothers. But I’m a wall between biology  & my sisters. May they feel their mother more  faintly.  *  Your hand gathering my hair like handfuls  of shelled black beans.  It goes  together because I say it goes together. You don’t get to  pick anything about this language, which  needed me & found me itself. This quality is silence  until I say there isn’t any. I paid the bartender extra  to serve shots of water. When he said  You’re an idiot I said Just say it’s fucking  Patron.  *  Don’t let me teach you anything I know  about bodies. If you’re this close I already  handed you some horrible needle. Things keep  being new & whatsoever. I kicked you w/ my pretty  face & every kick a different death. And I love  1 thing.  You can fear the body if you want. Pleasure  stupid. Breath is automatic. But you will lose  when you bet against your lungs.  Out is impulse. In is in, it just is. The word  mom no miracle. Don’t you know we name ourselves  after what the body already  knows to do? 
I'm dying.   Forget everything I just said. I don't even believe the things I say. Only about 17% of them are true.   Hit me with a baseball bat.   Then I'll say I'm sorry better.   I'm sorry.   I didn't mean to say that.   Someone should be sorry for this. Someone should fix this. I will.   I understand.   I'm trying. I'm gonna try harder.   Throw me in the road.   I'm sorry. I really like it out there under the cars, I didn't mean.   I know.   I know what that does to you I know.   Don't you think I look really right with a dotted yellow line down the middle?   Sorry, I know I said I   BABY.   I'm sorry, OKAY?   Why did you think I would do that?   I'm not hurt.   You didn't do anything.   I'm sorry I haven't been paying enough attention to you, apologizing for not paying enough attention to you takes up all my time.   I know I did it wrong.   Why would you care about me?   I'm sorry, I was falling down a well in the earth.   I'm sorry, what did you say?   I'm getting better.   I think I know what I did wrong.   I didn't mean to.   Just make me die.   Sorry, I didn't say that.   As I lay in the crosswalk, I suddenly thought—someone put me here. 
I am every kind of threat. High-pink code red. Auntie B is my father ’ s ambassador to my psych ward knifedom. She brings    her grandkids, eyes sweet with fear     over having another grown folks mess seeding their dreams. The horizon is a rusted sickle, iron sky reflected salt flat and   billowing like a portal trying to shudder its eyes.     In the parking lot B  let slip                                                                      she was once prisoner to  the ward, and maybe this is where birds are born and where we die,   in                                   a castle made of piss buckets                        moat                        drawbridge paved   with glittering           psychotropic            bricks crow’s nest        shock                    no wind   The kids need to use the visitor restroom  and B snatches the clock’s wig the moment they leave. Are you ashamed of the family? Is that why you don’t keep in touch? Isn’t it you who made the sand glass? When were you here before? Not your daughter hauled up from the mudflats after a dreamemory of  an undulating spider of calloused hands in      and         B’s omissions. What did it to you Auntie?   If you want to play chicken                the lithium is starting to kick                                 and bet I   won’t          remember                  to        blink.  
in 2001, Mark Taylor, the first student shot at Columbine, sued Solvay Pharmaceuticals. Taylor claimed their medication induced homocidality and psychopathy in Eric Harris.   Night, the cosmic song.  Blame, a teenage god.  The fury and the glowing of a boy’s face  washed in media, the television’s cold light  and his dull eyes, worshipful, that bask in horror movie  and in sugar  and the drug.  Faith commands pills to his lips,  each blue as lightless sky  and boot polish and spit  the brutal foment of the teeth  and blame, and how we hoped we could believe that medicine  would call for night’s deep kiss  and pull the deep blood from our children.  Animal, the whips of smoke that vomit from the windows  of a high school library  black as an eyelash.  Ink, to come from armied secrets,  bombs and bad weather, and rage  and rage.   Left untreated, an unbalanced mind  will suffer.  Ignored, it suffers nothing.  Nobody.  It grips the neck of each small joy,  its fingers squeezing on the tattered edges of the air  and blame, the trigger to a gun. 
The doctor asks my mother why I broke. She blames our neighborhood. El barrio with all the fast girls, the bodegas and the men on the corner playing dominoes until the sun yells Capicu. In her version of the story I am a lonely race car, engine on, wasting gas on men who will never love me. The doctor asks me why I broke. I blame my mother and the frostbite in her fingers. I explain that I am just like her, sick and cold. He wants to meet with us both. I tell him he can find her body in the refrigerator next to the insulin. In my version of the story I am a lonely race car, engine off, who knows that waiting for someone to love you will drive you crazy. 
Mom  I’ll pay my brothers bail.  Mom, a grave cant stay freshly dug foreve r . Mom, Poppy is asleep in front of the head-stone again  Mom  I can ’ t sleep here.  Mom, the fish-head gape of his gut  like a mouth in awe  is not a fear I can unlearn  Mom  He is breaking                                                    again   Mom the knife is still here.   Mom, I’m here too  I hate every inch of me this  me  Mom, ash spreads  Mom, ash spreads  The wind is an open sore. I’m all roots and burn  Mom, I’m burning Mom, I’m burning Mom, I’m burning  The house is a heavy memory-break  My teeth are full of hollo w , barking laughter.  Mom  We forget and call it healing  Mom, we forgive everything but ourselves. But we laugh loudest don ’ t we,  Mom? Mom   I am in love again  she makes me a forest fire.  Mom, I met a man twice my age once and never told you.  The pulse of his ring finger in my mouth made me a dead planet which am I?  Mom  My brother is dying and I exist. I exist.  I am shouting at the empty and always running.   Mom  I took his hair in my fingers and said it would be ok  My tongue is still rattled in the taste of it. Mom, there's a lie in my fire  but I’m still burning. Mom  this house breathes like the neck of a swamp.  My teeth still feel like that knife. His blood is everywhere still.  Bleach just makes it whiter.  Mom  he is learning to walk again and I can’t bring myself to watch.  Mom, I love you was never something we needed to say but he said it over and over again in the blinding white;  it’s not understood anymore mom.  This ache is too familiar . Mom I can't do it.  Mom I can't Mom I can't Mom I can't Mom I can't Mom  The grave is growing over still. 
This letter is written on thin strips of foam glued together in the shape of a dust storm. (This letter says, I didn’t have  a place to love .) This letter functions as a wormhole. (This letter says, Both places and ladies seem to spoil .) This letter provides scaffolding for the nerves and veins that will grow around it in time. (This letter says, I seen,  but now I’m blunted .) This letter hangs in a child’s nursery. (This letter says, Sleeping, everything is out in the open. ) This letter is a tunnel used by ants when they travel underground. (This letter says, Because I’d do it, too,  if I’d thought of it first. ) This letter is as three-dimensional as a body. (This letter says, Gag and taser his ass to set  a boy right. ) This letter can be climbed to scale fences and peer over rooftops. (This letter says, Are some people  lazy? Fact is, it’s all of them. ) This letter is a platform that the pitiful jump from. (This letter says, Okay. You gotta  not be okay. ) This letter lives inside two worlds: one of imposed order and one of sweet discord. (This letter says,  I sit in meetings learning to love sucking dick .) Held to the ear, this letter lets you hear the ocean. (This letter says, Ass  and glory in youth .) This letter is the boning for a fine gown hanging in a dressmaker’s display window. (This letter says,  I mean fuck the world. ) This letter can be read and read again. (This letter says, Worthless words concerning what I feel. ) This letter is a Chinese finger trap. (This letter says,  Everything sucks today. I wasn’t even going to bother. ) 
Last night flood replaced drought. No world but water. A network of cities and villages buried the way ghost towns are flooded when lakes are dammed to create power. You and I flocked to one of those lakes when I was a child, unaware of the grave stones shifting beneath us, not even the marble stone placed for a boy-child named Johnny Parks. Our heads were turned upward, toward sun and blistering sky. The water I float on now is something else, not lake, but part of me. Call it core, call it essence—it is what ties me to you. My arms reach as far as they can to touch who I am becoming: the wet one, the wild one, the only one capable of all this destruction. One house at a time, one feed lot, one church and its steeple, the people inside running to flee me, all of them doomed. i'd conjure Basquiat—brown skin, paint-flecked  hair: a curious matted sculpture of dust  salt water   feathers   sand   aloe   gold leaf  body: impossibly lean but not starved  ambitious maybe     vegan probably  i’d topple out of bars   bum cigarettes  not to smoke so much as smolder—watch white  boys watch my lips wrap around small white things  to them i am hip-hop: not Kanye   not even  Kanye’s alter ego all soft speech & code switch  i’ma Kanye album to get fucked & fucked up to  some beautiful dark twisted fantasy  but i am more James Brown swag than Kanye shrug  hips: a funky drummer          the big payback 
because eventually everything is reduced to abstraction like too loud song becoming  a blues note—a footnote for the news   then static  then dynamic because eventually everything  is reduced  abstract like blackness becomes black  caricature like a too-tight glove      courtroom antics  cue the greek chorus of anti-semitic semantics  because eventually everything is re-juiced  electrified abs track & field niggers high jump  while black blurs master hurdles    did massa say  how high? how feet how knuckle how buttock how thigh  become bluestreak how running while black becomes  literal not abstract like running for hobby  pale knobby knees     literal like bullet     then blurrr— then static If the desert is naked it will worship no one.         If I am the desert, a tarantula coils between my legs I bring the married man           to my bed because he is homeless & knows                                to ignore the vows I make  veiled in the dark                          on my hands & knees              his body before me  posed like a church. I go too far at night     roaming dry land until the stars appear                & he gazes at my teeth. I want him to spill   more on me than his jaw                             tusks rising in the heat. When I sleep beside him, my eyes              full of sand, I dream my love a wild boar               heavy & fat                             breaths trudging the forest, I wound it with my arrow                               crack its thick coat of skin                          I drag it home             I lug it to the table like a bride before him                                                I let the light say eat it  to its desert leave its heart for no one 
fertility will make us mothers—moans to be seeded and cropped.  we chose the dusk to run the field but clouds  of pollen glazed our skirts, made our bellies  titillate. at dawn they calculate abundance  by the swelling. the most suffocating  body is queen: her tits, huge wooden spoon servings  of piquant. her dark haloed nipples, a hive  a shack  of heirlooms—honey  when she squats low, something like the sky  about her, watch them come out she births the shadows   
1  I cannot control who loves me or how  they do. I control my jaw  its orchestra of bite and spit, if necessary  its holding of a man’s bruised tongue—  I chew.  2  The interviewer exhumes the contents: the funeral,  casket, the man waiting behind the door: suited, bouquet  of sealed lips. The shovel he tells her is for you  to slip inside you won’t have your name, but you won’t be alone  3  her face  opens    her laughter    spits    she calls him a fool   her eyes    narrowed   to  the  scent of his sweat   she says  I cannot   choose how I will  die but I can   choose  what will kill me      she lifts her shirt   to breathe   she lifts her shirt    to show him    to give   him  a name  for god: her chest arched open for arrows a hole she whispers can give a key its purpose  4  Ask the right question How do you keep warm?  I keep breathing. Listen: I keep breathing. 
Big black dog walks   along beach. The night is also a dark thing.                 Ocean glittering like it’s supposed to.   & the streetlights. Light has always                      been a sign of life. We are obsessed with stars because they prove we’re not alone.               Tiny cities. Sometimes, I can’t tell                        whether or not I am dead.  Now is one of those times. I wait to see bodies, & when I do, they’re moving. That is how I know.    Sometimes I bruise myself so that I can look more like a god. At night, you can see his skin  if you look up.             This is what I decided. 
Even when the women feast their eyes on your tiny waist and start to chew on your weight –   Dem not feeding you in foreign?  Since when you and fowl keep malice?  –  with the rolls in their bellies full of laughs and their ears starved for your response, you cannot back-talk your elders. You cannot cry into your plate and hope to become a stitch in your granny’s tablecloth or shrink to a grain of rice so they forget you’re there. Just pretend your mouth is full. And do not leave any meat on the bones. Meat is a commodity, they’ll say,  You lucky you can afford it. 
I say grief is universal, say, so all the dead dads walk into a bar— but that’s a bad joke. It’ll choke me. Mouth open, I listen for someone else talking about all the things I can’t or won’t or can’t or won’t. I only know small violences: 1) my mother shot on a U. City sidewalk in a drive-by paintballing, the lid hung over her blue eye like a fat purple fig; 2) the neighborhood boys outlined in sun, their faces black balloons, and me on my back in the grass, locked up by their semi-automatic Super Soakers. All I know of injustice is luxury— everything we did we did to each other we did to ourselves. My father injected liquid for air until he leaked. Because he decided he deserved it. Because he decided he deserved it. 
Eyes been on the gun,  on the dying,  the shit neighborhood.  They watch the paper,  watch the hood boy militia  trapped in the middle of the sun.  Lips with a lotta murder talk.  They probably scared of all the  dark dark down here. Our nation,  dry eyes, paranoia and a lotta dying,  been pouring fireworks in the summer.  I hear everybody’s god  a little scared too. 
They let me keep the gun he used  and isn’t that something? Daughters  snakebit and swollen, while a boy  gums his daddy’s barrel. Baby,  no one wants to see it coming.  Sisters hiding in the sawgrass,  the kitchen light left on all night,  and there will be no heroes here.  You must understand, they come  for whoever sleeps by the door.  There’s no guilt in doing God’s work.  We let the cat eat sick birds  and this is holy. We play dead  till we teethe, and this is holy.  We let others sleep by the door,  and this is holy. Remember,  for all those they stuck, they never  got us, and isn’t that something? 
They've written hardly any hymns  to life after. They recall bloodsport:  all those boys you fed paint thinner,  fields of rolled Cadillacs, birdshot  in every man's daughter. Sweetheart,  this is how they will remember me  and why not? I was touched, made  right with good men and a padlock,  and I never saved a single girl they  followed into bathrooms. Sweetheart,  this was all solely for your memory:  We were driving and the dawn across  the hood. You caught cold and the gin  inside your juice. It was raining and we  were barefoot as a family. It was dying  and being sure this house would hold. 
It's important we remember  as a family. There was no  shine before our daughter. Instead  this world was water; without weight,  without rot. Our girl has a father  who never skinned yearlings.  Sweetheart, there is no tragedy in this.  The sad part died in the creek  with each of our sisters. It died  in the beds where our uncles  undressed us. It died on the porch  where our mothers shot bleach. Sweetheart,  there is nothing left for mercy.  What you might call mine is just  a little girl claiming angels  sewed her dress. The truth has always  been two-fold: Night terrors and  visions. All the girls we watched  gag, and our daughter laughing. 
I was seeing my father in my dreams over and over and we were both crying. Last night, his chin crumpled. Mine did too. My throat was parched, and I rested my head on his shoulder, the linen of his tunic smooth under my cheek. We could hear each other without moving our lips. I thought, why did I steal this time from us, living on the perimeter of your existence, out of the shadow of things your hands have touched, I must pull you back like you reigned in those strings of disappointment after losing kites in battles in the sky – is it ever too late? And he thought, mybabymybabymybabymybaby. I thought, please don ’ t die, look after yourself, let us heal ourselves, let me have some time now, it ’ s all I ever wanted all those years ago – a few good hours, you, present, you, listening, you, talking, you, there. Why did you let me walk away? And he thought, mybabymybabymybabymybaby. I thought, could we start again from now, let ’ s go to the Old City, I will sit on the bonnet of the car, we will have Baba ’ s Street Kebabs, talk about misrepresentations of love over steaming skewers and cool rings of salted onion. And he thought, mybabymybabymybabymybaby. Teach me another life lesson, something pragmatic, not just a quote for an audience. Mybabymybabymybabymybaby. No. Listen. Stay. Listen. Please. Mybabymybabymybabymybaby. Do you see me? Do you see how far I am now? Meet me back where we diverged, where I broke free. Mybabymybabymybabymybaby. Listen. Listen. Wait. Mybabymybabymybabymybaby. Just answer me this. Do you forgive me? Are you proud of me? Mybabymybabymybabymybaby. 
We’re in my bedroom & you have a pack of cards.  You show me a king with diamonds bruised black & I remember. Later, I’ll be told this was how I said yes.   The windows were shucked out clean & the moon gave nothing but drizzling teeth. My hands were smudged, mouth   of a minnow but you don’t say anything. The forest is dripping thunder & we are in my bedroom. Downstairs, nothing plays.    A clawing at the door, a clawing at the mirror frame. The king wrenches the red off his face & later, I’ll be told this was a grape   half-dried, a bloodless cherry sucked from its stem. Later, wasp blood smeared on my thighs, chewed teeth until the doors close.   I’m not waiting for the ax anymore. Now, thrummed fingers, velvet tongue, hips of an elegy, knees the color of a hive smashed open.   At tea, our fathers crack almonds, look at our faces, but not our eyes. 
i. the pavement smell of black boys. write and wrap black boys. bang blue against those black boys. black boys are sin. write them sin boys. listen to sin boys. them sin boys whine like you  used to. they church like you use to. denied jesus like you did. front row pew boys. momma waits for you. momma say jesus will save you black boy. listen to that jesus boy. write about them jesus boys. nail yourself against that je sus boy. stomach first. then nail. then palm. ii. fracture the jaw. unhinge the cheekbone. turn teeth into fire. let the blood nest on the lips: a puddle o f b ones. dead bones. dead boned boy. ‘cause black boys are left dead boy. be balled up  boys. be left boned and bone. and brown and brown and brown and black boys.  pavement smelling boys. left wanting nothing left of black boy. black boy dead boy. full of bones boy. dead boned boy. wanting to be touched by men boy. tear off the skin cause it reeks of too touchy men boy. then remove the eyes. follow with mouth. and tongue. finger. and palm boy. remember how he felt you up with his palm boy.  iii. boy. iv. you need love boy. cause boys like you are starting to look the same. boys like you are beginning to look too much like tombstones than boys. like chalk outlines than body. bodied boy. niggas in bodies boy. nigga’s body boy. you nigga’s boy. you every brown boy come before you boy. v. black boy burn bring black boy back breathe black boy breathe boy. burn black boy burn breathe bright blaze boy black black black brown boy bound boy bottom boys be bones be bagged boy black boys bring boy bright boy being black boy no bright boy be brown boy but brown boy burn boy            ‘bolished boy. black boy break.                                boy. brown  boy. no brown boys 
I.  Let’s start  with  the  body. The  body’s been  burned. The  body  was  dragged, mutilated—the eyes gouged, faced  pressed  into  the  curb.  The  body’s been  beaten, with  vigor,  as  though  the  killer  were beating  something  out  of  himself—  the  body  a  proxy.  The  body  was  dumped, days  later  next  to  a  levee.  The  body  was  found  near  the  Mississippi  river, sprawled—  a  kind  of  baptism.  II. The devil  is  running rampantly  seeking whom  he  may  devour.  The  devil’s  made  his  home  here in  Mississippi,  the  delta  river  basin  his  mouth—  wide,  waiting,  wanting  to  swallow anyone  who  gets  too  close.  That  boy  done  fell  in. Love the  sinner,  hate  the  sin.  Sin:  without; an  innate lack;  a  fundamental emptiness. (into  nothingness) That  boy  done  fell  in.  III.  He  wasn’t the  only  one.  Another  boy  was  deprived  of  his  tongue his  torso his  pelvis his  lung  and  the  skull  read  “gay  nigger  #1”  But  what  does  it  mean  to  do  violence  to  what  is  nothing?  “gay  nigger”  as  metaphor. “gay  nigger”  as  absence.  “gay  nigger”  as  modernity’s shadow.  “gay  nigger  number…”  But  what  does  it  mean  to  do  violence  to  what  is  nothing? 
When I fantasize about gagging the English teacher I do not imagine coiled rope filling her familiar mouth, how plush lips leave their bright marks on my body. To be released from the peculiar bondage of one who knows too well the pleasures of the tongue, how each symbol spoken knots with its shadow— is to be released from the heart’s pornography, its failure to make love from our graceless funk. The knotted rope does not mute but permits a muffled language—an animal muse confounded by grammar, by the soft palate’s sudden distance, by the prospect of speech as anything except obscene. ​Smoke tails of fireworks trail and the little boy next to me muses on the origin of everything.  He wonders aloud if the fire booms live in the river they're shot from or in the clouds they light up.  And that, I think, is the best question I've ever heard. Origin is cumulous. Origin is Hudson River murky.  The boy’s father gives everything to god and god gives back. He says to his son, God is raining  glitter from his palms. He says Jesus is a jellyfish that flies; he lights up like your new shoes.  And, really, what is faith if not imaginative? Religion if not vibrant?  This Father, this Son, this Holy Ghost of fire working through the sky, they compel me.  So when the boy asks me what I am, I understand the question and answer,  glitter glue, pipe cleaner, red white and blue rocket pop, a jellyfish under blacklight.  The boy looks into me. He gives me to God.  ​ 
At a museum that spiral staircases into the sky, my first lover’s hand sweats inside of mine. This is where we belong, in the art. Christmas lights are wrapped around a woman who has been dead for years. Japanese men film themselves skating, harnessed and pulleyed, along canvases the size of sizable rooftops. Gutai, they call it.  Closer to the sky, there is a bathroom that’s been turned into an electrical tape installation. I peel some from the walls and line her pockets. I slip into her and feel my fingers burn from the heat. Our hands sweat because they are all wrapped up.  We find a bed, in a backroom, and it’s all chain-linked razor blades. My lover tugs my hand, like she does in Macy’s or JcPenney’s before we tumble onto a bed that’s been made just for show, because we figure, why have a bed if it’s not for lying.  The museum is dark, because in our minds, it is the middle of a new moon night. She leans me back toward the sharp bed, and the pain of being cut to pieces is lovely. I am nothing but myself sinking to the ground—a pile of blood and skin that’s still in love. She joins me beneath, makes a joke in what used to be my ear, whispers we are the boogeywomen.  When the blood of two women mixes it becomes deep purple séance, maenad sacrifice, raw meat, abalone conch shell you can hear the ocean in. It looks royal from far away. When lovers have no bones, things grow complicated. ​
the hair mounding between my legs makes me dwell on my lycanthropy  i black out and remember nothing of what the neighbor boys leave  tangled there :: candy wrappers fool’s gold the silver head of a cotton mouth  their blood and mine sperm that isn’t yet sperm and so it’s un-listable  i imagine myself in this black lapse (all wolf) falsely lustful and gnashing  i want to eat them wholly and wake up as what I eat  ​ 
​It didn’t happen like Remember the Titans  or Rocky and Apollo hugging while the ocean  tickled their perfect chocolate and vanilla thighs—  every rope and hood and shackle washed clean by the light  of a black smile aping a white smile.  If they met, they had to be more like Wesley  and Woody in White Men Can’t Jump . At the camp fire, Paul shouting about the fundamentals  of being a folk hero and John giving him shit  about the wack songs he whistles, making one too many jokes  about fried ox tails. They had to grab at each other’s tools,  argue over the best way for a man to swing, if a better man cuts every shadow from the world  or cracks the earth like a big brown egg. Spittle hanging from their lips  and the echoes of their boasts hanging on every wind from Coosa to Dakota.  They’d only grow quiet when their camp was invaded by the godly low hum  of an oncoming engine. They’d break camp and hold  hands a second longer than legends should before they walked their separate ways. 
(x) 2       The first time with those molten syllables at a skating rink spun around me I didn't know but my body Ugly as two white boys they curved a little girl felt How I told the teacher But what about with the red in her ears? ​you are branded  ​by Tiana Clark    doctype html     + (y) 2       ​I red hot as searing lassos they silking what was blackened marked taunted me the loop of crying my selves did I know and she the little girl hot g sounds                            You never forget with iron—         =(r) 2       was called a nigger g sounds, around my neck like white spiders a carousel of hate. the word meant      ​ wrong with heat. a radius of shameful skin on roller skates, my circumference. I was in the center of a circle— begin to double. I was different? put them in timeout. rolling away, struck ringing fire songs the first time ​seared raw, permanent.           "You can't write poems about the trees when the woods are full of policemen." —Bertolt Brecht A video looping like a dirge on repeat, my soul—a psalm of bullets in my back. I see you running, then drop, heavy hunted like prey with eight shots in the back.  Again, in my Facebook feed another black man dead, another fist in my throat. You: prostrate on the green grass, handcuffed with your hands tied to your back.  Praises for the video, to the witness & his recording thumb, praises to YouTube for taking the blindfold off Lady Justice, dipping her scales down with old weight  of strange fruit, to American eyeballs blinking & chewing the 24-hour news cycle: another black body , another white cop . But let us go back to the broken tail light,  let’s find a man behind on his child support, let’s become his children, let’s call him Papa . Let us chant Papa don’t run! Stay, stay back!  Stay here with us . But Tiana--  you have got to stop watching this video. Walter is gone & he is not your daddy, another story will come to your feed, stay back. But whisper-- stay, once more,  with the denied breath of his absent CPR, praise his mother strumming Santana with tiny hallelujahs up & down the harp of his back. Praise his mother hugging  the man who made her son a viral hit, a rerun to watch him die ad infintum , again we go back, click replay at any moment. A video looping like a dirge on repeat-- 
First, breathe on the mirror—if you had drowned, you wouldn’t see your wet face (but you keep trying to write poems), the light pooling in your cheeks the way it does in sand pockets next to the ocean, their topography always altering. Because you’re not the same girl as Easters ago when your mother plaited your hair, when she pinned lace embroideries in dolor’s colors on her hair. Confide in me. Where does this drowning come from? Or the honeyed poem that springs from a parakeet bathing in your father’s hands. A man can be gentle, so you still look for a way to pronounce love in its abandoned egg. But one day, if another man holds you down, confine me , if your mother opens her mouth in a dream, saying, down my throat is the River Styx, you could pay off the boat woman to skiff you out of the world: and your dirt-filled skull would open its extra eye to what is ​ in the living’s orbit, under the side yard where the man held you down, where he unloosened his belt, where he pressed the side of your light- pooling face, to the grass that smelled like sorrow. The body is reducible to many things—how, here, your sacrum cracks for the first time. Later, it will fissure more when you birth your first child. And how the windows open above your head when this man pushes into your chest, the darkening-canopy-sky a coda to what happens outside the neighbor’s house. Except you kick him hard, your ribs wallop up into his, as he says, you want this , your pelvis rocks back into his bone. The body is reducible to tendon. Or snarl. Or want. Or you, making an angel and spreading snow. To remove the body covering yours as a shadow. So when you feel your throat filling with water, you can swallow it—the wounds sutured, the sutra stuttering germination, where flowers grow in shadow, the archangel’s petals turn up to catch twilight, that last remaining edge of day where you have crawled into, O, bedface , so defaced, effaced. ​​We drove to the hospital and got his ashes from a woman who talked to us in a conference room, the box of him by her elbow. We were forced to listen to her spiel—moth-eaten words about loss she had no business saying. The woman sat too close. She smelled like talcum in an old cupboard. When it was over, the brown box got pushed to our side of the table. For weeks, I wondered obsessively what the grief woman wanted back when she offered us the gift of his ashes. If I ever find her asleep, I will cut off her head and stuff it full of garlic. ​ 
​They make your panties smell like dirty bike chains. We were sitting on her mother’s plastic coated floral couch, one of us in a swimsuit, the other sworn to layers. The water was her selling point and I was terrified of tampons or rather terrified of the undiscovered crater, the muscle that holds and pulls and keeps and sheds. She said, I ’ ll do it for you and yes, we had seen each other naked many times, we had showered together and compared nipples, wished to trade the smalls and bigs of our respective bodies. So it wasn’t unnatural, really, when I squatted on the toilet seat and she laid down on the floor like a mechanic investigating the underbelly of a car. With plastic syringe in hand, she wedged the packed cotton into me, this was what I saw last before blacking out and collapsing onto the tile— Jordan, Blood Scholar, in a turquoise bikini saying, Now you are ready to swim.  ​
​​the boys and i are playing quarters with double shots of vodka and i am winning. by winning i mean i am not one of the boys but i am the next best thing. by the next best thing i mean i am a girl and i am drunk. every time i miss a shot, johnny gets to flick a quarter against my knuckles and now my knuckles are bleeding onto my thighs but every time i make a shot i get to knock back a throat full of liquor. i slam down the glass until it cracks up the side and now the game is about who will still drink from it, who will risk shards in the belly, who will cut up their insides for a pack of newports and it’s not that i even want the cigarettes, it’s just that i am not afraid of blood which is also part of being a girl. but being the only girl means making yourself lose when you’ve won too much so i bounce the coin off the rim of the shot glass and let johnny slice me open. in thirty minutes, johnny is dragging me out of the bathroom by my wrists and i can hear him saying something about blood on the carpet, about a drunk girl in the house who is staining everything and i think that means i must be the champion of quarters. johnny is the kind of guy who sleeps with a gun, not women. but johnny is always the one inviting me over for a game of quarters and sometimes i wonder if this is how johnny fucks. like maybe he is the kind of man who only screams when he is underwater or lets me feel how strong his fingers are without actually touching me. maybe that’s why we’re all here, even the boys, to let johnny hold us like a barred window. i work a double one day a week and on this day, don’t answer johnny’s call. by one day a week i mean two men break in and shoot johnny in the temple for two-thousand pills and i am scraping pasta from a business man’s plate into the trash. at some point i’ll tell you why i didn’t go to the wake. i guess i never really knew johnny like that. by that i mean sober or in a church. when i say i didn ’ t go to the wake i mean i drove by his house everyday for two years and the for sale sign never got taken down like the house would always be johnny’s, like maybe the whole town knew what happened there. like maybe no one could get rid of the blood. 
For most of my life I've been wrong about water: twice-a-day dipping my head under a river or, after I'd given up on rivers, a shower-head, until all I could hear was pressure smacking bone. And the spray of what's left. And sunlight hardening on the current. Let's forget about water for a moment. There's a difference between what we smash and what smashes us. Years ago, barreling across Montana, I gave up one town, then another, then another and for a moment thought I'd stolen back the splendid isolation of salmon nosing upstream. It's ridiculous. For sixty years a man walks to the same stretch of dirt and fishes for hours. I think of him there, sometimes, digging the hook out of his third fish of the day, starting up his truck as the last bands of light break over the far cut bank.  ​ 
about the time he said everything about you was easy. how nothing required any extra work. he raped you & even that was simple for him. so ordinary to woman you at sixteen. you wrote love poems to him for a year after. you did not have a word for what happened to you. shaved your head. again. filled an entire journal with different versions of the same sentence about an empty city. the pain was its own kingdom. you proverbed into a child. couldn’t go a week without your mother. you could not forgive her. could not forget what your many mothers could not tell you. cursed your ruin for not being obvious enough. renounced language for not allowing you to document such remarkable sadness. you taught your blood to speculate & then: a good, sturdy love. you are in love with a man & his desperate need to be loved. you are a desperate love. a relentless heart. your love is lightning that way — needs a body through which it can meet the earth. lick the soil. hurt on its way in. yes. this is the whole truth. so help you god. 
ancient parts of you will be summoned by some freaky nasty beat sometimes ​  ​god said hips & there we were. skinny jeans no trae nada. our asses were built for these songs. puro barefeet & dirty floor. que somos puras piernas. puro back sweat y smeared eyeliner. this is your only bible. this is the only prayer. demos gracias a cuerpo y canción. demos gracias a mujer y hueso. que the beat le bendiga. today is for shaking the dirt back into your skin. resurrect in sweat & tongue between the teeth. return your body to its first, buried home. summon the dust. did you know that we were once rivers? that first our arms were waters. reach. beginning cities carved with rain to shoulder blade. we were nobody’s wives. nothing anyone could own. we were water. nothing to obey but our own moving.             before i was born, my mother  ​          hacked off her feet                  it is how she kept the floors clean                   even when we slid across glitter giggling  our socks wet & black                 it is the reason she could stand for so long                 for weeks she wandered  to work for judios in brooklyn          lost in a city the color of mopwater                   misremembering blocks  the shapes of letters                       on the signs the colloquy             kind strangers translate            cutting their tongues  on blunt knives           each consonant scuffs         her soft eyes like sand             she left no footsteps crossing the desert  a land of discarded shoes                   dusty water bottles hairless toothbrushes                 swallowing heel and sole easy as bones         easy as we spit our souls              into the concrete & its endless stare               case of babels & babies  asleep inside strollers           drooling babbling                 another thumbless language                 one day i imagine  i will find her                 feet buried in a garden          toes poking out of the soil               red & swollen as earthworms  when i try to capture them          they split into twin horizons           slipping under fences           hissing over cacti  clouds purple the sky                    vultures circle patient as mothers                    rattle snakes kiss the wind as they pass when i chase her i char                  blister like barbs                        my feet become sand ​  
​Nestled between his dusty baseball glove and Darth Vader mask, I find the cast Riley saved from his broken arm.  I remember how, running to tell me something, he had fallen on the floor, his left limb caught oddly underneath his torso like a snapped tree branch— ​his first and only break.  I couldn’t stand even a part of him damaged, but he wore his cast like a medal,  hoisted his arm skyward to show his friends.  When the doctor removed the cast, the speeding, circular blade so close to his skin— I had to look away.  That was the year before he died.  Now, I sit in the playroom and remember him placing the cast on the shelf. Its neon orange body split in two  like a part of himself he would no longer need.  I put the pieces together to make it whole again, an orange shell, bent, frayed at the wrist.  I can almost remember what it was like when he had an arm.  
​Dust motes linger in a splinter of sun.  A mud-brown mug waits for the boy who painted it to return.  All the Black-eyed Gerber daisies slump in milky water.  A wisp of streamer from his sixth birthday clings to the blade of the fan.  One day, it too, will fall, like the last leaf of an oak.  A white moon appears out the window.  Fingernail of a child, cradled now in the womb of the sky. ​ 
​​I once tried to read the palm of a man I did not know. His fingers were long and could not stay face up; he reached for my breast instead. I felt no warmth in his hand, in my chest. All we left was an indentation on the couch, its loose cover twisting like a woman’s white veil.  *  I was taught to never look a man in the mouth; rather, I have learned to demand his family secrets. I am old enough to know what these mean, that I can use them to build a shrine. His father’s mistress had long black curls. No words exist for his mother’s lovers.   *  Black underwear makes a constellation around my ankles. Capricornus, perhaps. Backlit by the television, he tells me I resemble a woman. He resembles something else. I run my tongue over the flattest parts of his teeth.  I can feel where he’s begun to grow antlers.   *  We watch one another as if the moon does not exist, as if there is body of water between us. I see a man at the bottom of this lake. He sees a doe instead.   *  He preferred bruised fruit to anything.   *  I want to catch my ankle in the spokes of his bicycle. My mother has a scar there too; its silver shines like a polished bone. She told me how it felt to fall forward, her talus flashing in the sun. I find this romantic. I would reach for his hand and kneel and lick the blood from my own leg.   *  We played by laying coins on each other’s eyes. I liked him best that way, smelling of stale metal, eyelids ringed in gray. We played by hunting in the dark. He taught me to identify prints, to gut, to dress. He only smiled with his hands deep inside a warm red cut.   ​*  In the dream, he is a feral child who does not speak. When I wake, he is a shadow moving across the door. When I wake, I have no mouth to open. 
I want to begin with the bang its infinite starts There were three families of us All pinned under glass, rubbing powdery wings before they No dawn was like Zeus but purple like Pluto Bruised Rejected & foreign But how does a simile measure the current between here & there? I want to walk through mythology but first I have to walk through my ghettoized childhood Put on the Reebok, the Sailor Moon watch The yellow council block, the balcony piled with Aldi bags, Jamal’s swampy eyes A wise man once said The warm thigh of Johnny     I am entropy: I am Warmth is a contiguity of friction Where does it hurt? Where are you from— What is your home? Who I am trying to return to I’ve never been    Stop saying shellfire— Often we drowned pigeons in the canal by which I mean mostly we dreamt of bombs Why is your hand like this When did it Every moth in my mouth tastes of years without music    Madar’s knees, Mazar-e-Sharif, the sun on my cheek, yes, it was soft-scented traffic… & then they Now I have done it again I let the line walk away from me Like a childhood song not You see, you see This is how it is about place Each one a genesis       I mean bombs I mean bangs        Their little sparks— Their  His eyes Something about all those wings under glass This is how it is about us You flee into metaphor but you return with another moth flapping inside your throat It curls itself from the black in your mouth whispering I’m sorry about these ghosts knocking against your bones ​ 
​Last week the world started destroying itself again. Images of a girl without eyes, flat on a trampoline, the air around her more gasoline than snow. God if god give us snow. A pewter we can blow dust off, hold like pencils in the twitch of our fingers and write new languages for freedom and distance. We await mercy as if it’s lost luggage. We draw the faces of tropical fish against airplane windows. God if god send rain. Endless pellets of bluegrass and I’m sorry so sorry never again. A boy like a yellow kite stuck in an apple tree, limbs vining into branches. We cannot stand another flood. Will we forever be witness? We interest the dark by standing long enough, orange tip of a cigarette dying, glowing until the sun sucks up the throat of the sky. We will not go inside. Most dogs never grow back their missing legs. Some swans are never painted in pigments of want. We try to give a name to everything. In the middle of Montana, with backs broken by beauty, all we know is cadaver, spleen, amethyst, smoke screen, grenade pins, Christ’s skin crinkling, newspaper ink, children laughing under floorboards, deer stink, night sweats, beverages birthing forgive forgot forever until we meet again. God if god if got if good for nothing.  ​ 
If in maple we better understand age, the rings between sweet & thick, that circus of curious resting on the wood of a bird’s nose, let’s drown ourselves now. The amount of northern Montana melting in our bones cannot be siphoned. Tundra grows off the mountains in our backs, deciduous and drawling. Soon the days will drip into hours. We’ll breathe fire without torch, gasoline crawling along any braid of air. We must go back. If in rust we become those junkyard kids dipping hangers into coals and marking each others’ shoulders, let’s bovine without twitching. Glow like embers hissing through one ear of the night never to return. Let’s tempt loss with how much we’re willing to unload. When we are older the caves will fill with bears who never wake up. We’ll chew on rifles like toothpicks and wait for the moon to close its only eye, wait for good to go to sleep. The stars break out in hysteria, neon knees bleeding on sky carpet. No one hears their choke. We shove gag towels in their mouths, slow gunpowder down their hourglass throats. When we are older is now.
​Go down & drink with crawdads & catfish in the river bottom gorged on garbage & rain in the diminished West where a drive without gas stations feels commonplace. Let erasure establish its kingdom of heat, sweat, & sinners endless as the wildflowers outside church each Sunday. You cannot petition the fawn’s scattered remains or the peacock’s echo. & forget about trying to teach the coyotes to eat from your hand or the snakes to twitch lovingly at seeing you after you step on them. Doubt led me to death’s edge, & I blindly followed as the moths do light’s blueing arc through this darkness, splitting open where feeling emerges from flesh as bone can from knuckle—naked as the witness of the newly converted man in the tent who does not say at the faith revival, Without a miracle to need, I became a singing . . . though he has often overhead himself speaking a cryptic & rootless language that before conversion he felt sure was secret—his own —not the Spirit’s. I love his Pentecostal tongue reaching into the syllabic ether of naming each time it praises. I love his human need for expression of phenomena well beyond explanation. He sees a star & concludes it’s God’s eye. He hears the rain & imagines Christ’s body evaporating on Golgotha’s hill. Lord, how I want to praise him. Though I cannot believe what he believes, I see beauty in him that is so substantial it makes even my skeptic’s rib ache with passion. Here we blur together, faces inter- secting in the river’s vision, which is our reflections’ sudden de-creation back to Adam’s voice box like the bridge’s music as cars pass between us & our singing rises through the dark of naming . Highway, sky,  steel truss, the light on each steel truss, the bolts  on the bridge’s cross beams : all of these are sacred. Praise this structure’s creators, its silent welders who are unknowable. Praise the penitent soul & the unbeliever’s despite disagreeing about metaphysics. Praise a six-pack knowing what our language cannot. Praise the gesture that saves even when faith cannot. May we meet as two equals on this bridge again to drink Bud Light & be the blood brothers we were before revelation.take me by the elbow can you see the bones left in my ear our messiahs are blowing us kisses from heaven they speak in the continental longhand the doubt between us hangs like a moon there is no such thing as certainty the spell cast in the night was just a hard wind your cup is still full of poison whose blood is this on the bedsheets ​not that cross I’m thankful for your beaded carapace I am a grown man excuse the buttery light haloing my head I lack money can you help me with any of this you have swallowed so much already the fire under my bed is quiet as a fossil I trust completely whatever’s in your body ​visit me at home where ghosts will watch us from the closet    take me by force can you see the boy’s name cut in my bark our messiahs are hopeless and modern they speak only in our sleep the doubt between us stickies up our tongues ​there is no such thing as sorcery the spell cast on your cup was just a heap of words your cup was never there at all whose blood is this on the cross not any cross you know I’m thankful for your yellow pills I am growing into my science excuse the rabbit skull crunching in my teeth I lack sexual preference can you help me shrink back to a dainty mouth you have swallowed even my bouquet of corn and straw the fire under my bed is simple as a bed I trust completely whatever’s in your pockets visit me at home and pin your money to my skin    ​          
I have made the decision to become more tolerable, to squeeze the corset around myself and the world that made me. I draft emails to my mother, subject line re: whiskey on a pacifier , subject line The Ineffable Sadness . In every note, I sound less panicked than I mean. O God, I am heartily sorry for offending thee! My sins were effortless, I detest them all, except the carnal ones— the long nights of Johnny Hodges and Kalamata olives, of bitten tongues and insincere pet names. ​I will pay any price to keep those, O Lord. I will spend eternity cubing your melons, changing your holy bandages, and I will smile the whole time like a great thief approaching the gallows, tiny sliver of gold still sewn into my pocket.
I went to the grocery store in search of a moon jar. Even the nameless streets of Seoul have their reasons. My machinery, if I stayed in Korea, would be owed to the government. My brother was the only baby who rented our mother’s motel room, hung throat inside an umbilical cord, he will never know the donor who made him. Ruler is [chibaeja]. Blood is [p’i]. Homesick is [hyangsuppyong-ui]. I don’t know which one of us feels more alien, which one more deftly enjoys slow-roasting meat in light, drippings from another man’s fat, dented moon.
Malik, bright orange, with the wolfish jaw ​understood the savagery of staying alive—until he didn’t. So what if he could sing under torture? It’s all gone now but the image of a broad back, departing. Not tall, but with a gait that suggested an inward height. & what for? A few bags, maybe. When they shot him in his ferocious heart, the school announced it on the intercom. New jargon: Time to heal. Grief management. My first thoughts weren’t with his daughter in whose mind he goes on dying. I thought of his unfinished rap album, how his booming voice would be buried in a bruise of earth, & wondered who would go on singing— Rimbaud? 
I call to the one I love / who answers / I call / to the one I love / wind rattles the windowpane / Desnos says the death of god is just the death of a sound wave / a vacuum my own voice fills / calling out / not to god / but to night / ebony night / he thinks / poor fool / I’m going to make it / a beautiful drowned woman / life / a trick of radiance and trembling / you know the story / how they loaded him / with others / onto trucks / to be shot / and then / from the crowd / a hand / open palm / appeared / and and then another / yet another / fortune pouring all over the world / Desnos shouting “long life” to the guards / and their guns / the local women / the condemned / now / laughing / as the Nazis loaded up the trucks / returned the prisoners to the barracks / those gaunt bodies finally stripped of all their moonlight / their sleep narcotic / each voice no more of a god / than god was / or Desnos / edge of a death camp / though they had heard the gearbox grind / driveshaft / throttle / as if a nightingale / some rare bird / had bored out / its throat / for them / in mirroring daybreak 
I pray don’t fade through the day, through the sun's movement across sky, don’t fade until you're home again—don’t When your alarm broke open your dream, I put my finger on the button, to, for a moment, make time stop, make moment you peel sheets from your sticky, naked body come later. I remember how you once said deer smell like horses, only more wild— more wild—the only way I can describe you-inside—more wild more warmth, more swamp, more musk * Later I ask google what does pussy smell like , and 6,900,000 responses     Words like maggot, like dog's ass covered in horse shit, like boiled potatoes, raw meat, ewww, fish, words like if it smells like chicken keep on lickin, if it smells like trout get the hell out but no google answer describes smell-of-you, still on my fingers— more wild than any place I've ever been, any animal eyes I've ever seen the soul inside, more unbroken, more whole, more I-am-here more and more I want to slow-bird, head south where you're wet and warm inside your nest, where my tongue always finds you, uncovered I go over and over, circle you like prey like you are my prayer, I make you call out to God, I'm discerning how alive you are, how alive over and over you are circles until you see God's light I don’t wash my hands a germaphobe risking the in-season flu is how much I keep you when you're gone and I'm home writing about your smell on my face, on my fingers They say a dog comes to look like its owner, spouses begin to look like each other, bleed with each other and I wonder about our pussies— pressed into each other's, how they might change over years—become softer     Will twin lips open farther as if to say to each other's, see me , see I am pain's place no longer , no longer gated my gates always open to let you in and out and in again as I please your welcoming words so wet so I know how welcoming you are, so all day on my fingers, I have something to remember you by, some smell more wild on my face than I could ever describe 
When you're a woman and you're off your rocker like a turtle who lost the shell it never knew existed until it was gone and bald like a woman shaves her head in February which is a hard word to say like a Germanic sound comes from the back of the throat where you feel sound itching its way out of the mouth which created it like the angels your brain created convinced you your soon-to-be-wife was sex-trading children and keeping them in the secret basement you could never find like a sense of peace like the shelter dogs who never know love and safety like a woman who is afraid of being touched wants to wear a bag on her head like children at Halloween are ghosts like the ancestors are now begging to be remembered like the last elephant on the planet without a mate like the woman used to be those snowed-in years trapped talking to an empty kitchen where she could feel angels hover to hear every word like winged shadows she could never get rid of like a turtle who can never get rid of its shell tries to anyway      tries to run away from itself so it can finally be alone 
on the town like a coat / i curl up in his cured hide / i hear pelts & think of shit not skin / confusing it for pellets / my man is more shit than skin / he defecates often he is so thin / i wear my man’s shit / in between my legs / you think this is vile / you think i am obsessed / with smearing shit up & down my legs / i’m just saying i desire any coat / he can give / have you noticed how we shrink / in tandem occupying a collective void / i mean honey / i shrunk my lover it is dire / i mean my man performs / two hundred fifty push-ups / after swallowing an ice cream cone / before fucking we apologize / for gaining weight & fucking other women / in our different homes / we occupy a collective toilet bowl / our fuck develops peach fuzz / i won’t pretend to be a wolf / for the sake of this poem / i refuse to nourish / anyone in this poem / this poem is an expulsion / pulling you / around my waist gagging / at how sweet how cold 
Don’t everybody like the smell of gasoline? Well burn muthafucka, burn American dreams. —Outkast When they left that rotten boy to turn sweet in the heat, did they ask ​for gasoline? Making crackling from skin is familiar work, ‘round here. Light him. Let him bleed black & quench into the tarmac’s smooth skin quicker than he deserved, that dirty little— —dirty little American dream that died on this block, in that park, in that gas station lot, in this gated community & in that other park, under the snow-glazed gazebo and how that forever ruined sweet pink ink for an entire neighborhood and maybe that’s the path to justice— we point out that they’ve ruined snow cones. /* & */ Often, I wonder what song to give to a forest of boys felled in the street. There’s a bass humming in me. Grandma would holler Quit rattling that noise before you wake up the dead. It’s just a figure of speech, I think.  Let’s try it anyway. 
They bring you four loaves and a tin of fish, then expect you to respond like a god. You fail to remember the lyrics to the miracle. Look at them strung out on hot desire, mauled with the chase of new heavens. You marvel how humans this beautiful can believe they are this battered, and you wish to scream out their names, name by name, tell them they were knit in their dead mothers’ wombs, tell them they were astonishingly made. But who are you to say they are worth more than the cold-blooded vertebrates stinking up that tin?     
​We eat green apples and tortillas with peanut butter sitting on the rocks at Cape Final, a kind of peace offering between us after the last fight, an hour ago, when I stalked off with the only bottle of water to walk the two miles through pinewoods alone. You stand at the edge of the cliffs, spread your arms wide, and yawp into the blue expanse, startling a flock of birds from beneath you. Some things you do make me so nervous, but you’re doing it to make me laugh, and it works, and I love you for it. We walk together back to the Jeep parked at the trailhead, and you keep saying how much the woods look like someplace from Game of Thrones , like you say whenever there’s tall trees on all sides. On the way out of the park we stop at a Lincoln-log country store. While I pump gas, you buy a refrigerated egg sandwich that makes me gag when you open the packaging, and Fire-Chili Doritos. “Did you know Doritos have bat shit in them?” “Of course, everybody knows that. You ask me that every time I get Doritos.” You make me pull over every few miles so you can take pictures: bison in a field; shattered and blackened pine trunks where wildfire swept through; towers of rock you insist look like faces, though I don’t see them. The South Rim is only ten miles through empty space from where we sat and ate tortillas, but to get to the visible mountains beyond you have to drive two hundred miles around, down from pines through dusty gullied landscapes, red rock and sage. After driving an hour down the wrong highway while the day begins to fade, we eat burgers at Sonic before turning back. The food poisoning will hit me exactly eighteen hours later like the big rigs you careen into the wrong lane to pass, but right now I’m laughing at your joke about the name of this bum-fuck town. Later that night, you think I’m flirting with the check-in girl at the Motel 6 in Flagstaff. We fight, again. I spend a long time in the shower, crying and wondering if it ever ends. It doesn’t, and it won’t, but somehow we fall asleep while Arizona moonlight pours through slatted blinds, and when I wake whimpering from some nameless nightmare, you’re there, you’re right there, and you’re real.             I wanted you to have something to remember, something unbroken, but truth was always what mattered most to you, so I have tried to leave nothing out       ​ ​ ​while not actually used in Doritos, guano, or bat dung, is highly sought after by organic farmers for its fertilizing properties. But some species of bats will starve to death when regularly disturbed, put into a panic state during their resting period ​  ​     due to the volcanically formed  mountains in which Flagstaff  is located, the city is 2,000 feet  higher than the surrounding  desert. The youngest volcano  is less than 1,000 years old, and  so there is a high likelihood  ​that volcanic activity will occur  ​in the near future. It is  impossible to predict when and  ​where this eruption will occur.               the Japanese art form of Kintsugi consists of repairing broken pottery with a lacquer ​mixed with powdered gold. No attempt is made to hide the breakage, and the fault-lines are literally illuminated. Thus, an object is made more beautiful by having been broken ​          
& so what if they think they’ve found language befitting my inexplicable, my can’t-be-pinned, my hair so black it defies synonym? tongues move to the roofs of mouths to push against teeth every day without realizing what’s been said. or maybe i’m too focused on the name, the way they’re too focused on the length of my toes, my fingernails, whether that’s dirt or blood crusted underneath. maybe this is a fancy kurti adorned with small circular mirrors that i get to put on, like how it was being a wife, or a mother—just a different way to look at the same old face. men have never understood that about us—now, they’ll think by “us” i mean daayans, but you know i mean “us” : women : mistaken for all kinds of foliage : grasping root, wilting petal, gentle weed. maybe i mean to say i am tired of being called anything. maybe i mean to say i am no plant, no witch, but the hard surface of a cold rock, & i wish to be very far away from here. i’m fine falling in to some old cliché about the moon & my blood & when it decides to follow the oceans. i’m fine without gravity or roots. let me float / away. *"Daayan" is the Hindi term for "witch." In some of India's rural regions, witch hunting practices continue, and are directed mostly at women. 
Like my father // he does not have a knife at this time //  I am the male Hispanic with a moustache // male Hispanic mental capacity is //  I am drunk on mezcal and // forty-four seventeen suspect sighting //  this blood moon has me // fifty-four eleven threatening suicide //  hissing and panicking // shots heard neighbor residence //  like Quetzalcoatl in a squad car // ten thirty-nine possibly afraid of the police //  unlike my father // stand by for further //  who remains  silent // zero seven nine shots fired //  like obsidian // five shots were heard //  Last night I had a dream I don’t remember // brown or grey last seen //  we were running across the freeway // hoodie possibly six foot //  during the eclipse  // eighteen suspect does not //  the two of us dodging cars // code two male Hispanic //  when we saw  // female Hispanic all black clothing //  La Llorona  // grey shirt black pants male Hispanic all black clothing //  spreading her rebozo // suspect threatening to //  like eagle wings  // eight four three zero toward rear alley //  so we crossed the center divider  // brown shirt grey pants male Hispanic with a moustache //  waded into traffic  // pedestrian incident //  our naked arms // four four nine one possible shots fired in the area possibly suspect //  above our heads  // incident four four nine four male Hispanic medium build possibly with a gun //              First the eyes yes // I remember // teeth so eerily white against the // nose was more // missing // and those ears // I remember // unusually familiar // yes the dark // unusually // lips // and the hair was // pierced yes I remember // maybe // no facial hair // cheek tattoo of // left eyebrow yes slits in the // right cheek below the // shaved head // maybe // yes I remember // hair was dark // the lips were large // familiar // yes the dark // unusually familiar // I’ll never forget // those large ears // missing yes // the nose // and the teeth so eerily // yes I’ll never forget the // eyes // covered. Eyes covered. Yes. I can see him. I can see him if I cover my eyes. I’ll never forget. There he is. That’s him. That’s him. 
Eyes dark nose flat lip piercing cleft chin teeth missing pronounced brow square jaw high cheeks large ears. Pronounced ears nose piercing dark brow cleft jaw missing lip square teeth large eyes flat cheeks high brow. Square nose large cheeks dark chin pronounced eyes high lip ears piercing cleft brow flat teeth missing jaw. Piercing eyes large chin dark teeth high jaw square cheeks cleft lip pronounced nose flat brow missing ears. Cleft nose ears square flat chin high eyes missing brow piercing cheeks pronounced teeth dark jaw large lip. Large brow cleft cheeks square chin high nose dark lip pronounced jaw flat ears piercing teeth missing eyes. 
I recall his memory of his father shining brown boots in the dark. Father, seated on edge of bed, shining left boot brown. Son, cross-legged on floor. Father hands son right boot. One boot each, one rag each. Brown polish, brown boots, white slick rags, slow swirls, all dark. As I recall it, the room brightens slow with each slow swirl. Light spreads from swirl of rags, light swirling outward. Outlines of bodies and furniture grow clear. Light spreads, shadows sharpen. Until at last: all visible. The bedspread and pillows are brown, a lighter shade than the boots. The nightstand has a lamp and photographs of children. The carpet needs vacuuming. Outside the bedroom window, night has fallen. Yes, all is visible now. I recall as he remembers. More swirls of polish. His father smiles and nods approval. One hand in the boot, the other polishing in slow swirls. His father gives advice about the importance of taking care of your things. He says, These boots are very old, but you wouldn’t know it because of how I take care of them . I recall his remembering. As I recall it, the room darkens slow with each slow swirl. Father and son slowly dim. Outlines blur, contours dampen. Shadows spread. Now, father’s hand becomes white rag swirling brown polish onto left boot, there is no left boot. Now, son’s forearm inside right boot vanishes. Son draws hand out of boot-hole, no hand to draw out, no boot-hole. I recall: a slick white rag swirls brown polish onto nothing in the dark. Two possible faces, both remembered both male both Hispanic possibly. One suspect, possibly. Two possible male Hispanics, face to face, father to son, one suspect possibly. Face to face, two possible male Hispanics, brows touching, eyes closed. Brow to brow, faces grimace, one darker, one lighter, possibly Hispanic, both remembered. Eyes shut, teeth clenched, two possibly Hispanic faces brow to brow. Faces straining, possibly Hispanic, as if in anger or pain. Necks tight, teeth clenched, eyes shut, brow to brow, two faces as if remembering anger or pain. As if straining to remember, two possibly Hispanic faces, brow to brow, clench teeth in anger or pain or both. Both possible faces straining, both brown, one darker, one lighter. Straining to remember, possibly. Father and son, brow to brow, as if remembering, as if straining to remember, as if in pain or anger or both, as if remembering pain or anger or both, are brown to brown. Eyes wide, mouths agape: sudden cry. Brown forgets brown, face forgets face. Sudden brown burst of two possible faces. Brows melt, browns meld. Eyes, teeth, noses: all meld, all sudden. One suspect, possibly. One male Hispanic, possibly. One brown swirl of forgotten face. 
1. I’ve hesitated beside the jewelweed, deep in the sevenbark, told them I will not, not again — What sovereign lies? What queen in her epistolary cage? An ochre shotglass empties, a lantern, unlit, heedlessly shines. In vain I have opened mirrors & edges of mirrors.  ​2. A blanket ripped during sleep, a dream turns cold & the body knows something is wrong. Wake up. Wake up! Traveling flatland, winter branches praising a slate of sky I have passed a shotgunned doe & known, bloodred, the dying in me would fight back, hunter try her might.  3. The church nearby, the snow is piled high. Something brightens in the distance. I tread carefully.  4. Once, I fell into a river but wouldn’t drown. If limbs are made of splintered oars & hearts of apple blossoms, this world’s for me. 
For how long and why I cannot say, but in the wake of its falling—the great spruce—everything, the axe, its weight in my chapped hands, the skirt of golden trunk shavings, the tree like an overturned ship, is so altered by light, so foreign, I can’t believe this was what I was after, if I was after anything. Was it the fall? Would I have even wanted that, or believed I would survive it? It can’t be, though as so often is the case, it is—the column of light breaking through the black woods only a reminder of what once resisted it. I’m beginning to think that resistance is everything, how it kept what is now trees leading to a clearing, a forest. Snow committing its slow occupancy, filling the column like words, the light saying in so few of them, like all terrible truths, something here did not survive.
The whole trip we had them— small white pills in our pockets. We knew we were female, we knew how long the trip would take, and we knew the stories of La Bestia: a metal freight, who claims the limbs of men at her feet. We, unsure of the hands pulling us onto the boxcar, prayed for her blessing, to keep our own hands as other limbs lay fallen by the tracks, flies suckling on rotting flesh. We wished to be like La Bestia, but we had them in our bags while los coyotes broke into the dust, etching us through the space between Saltillo and Tejas—one hundred and ninety-five miles. Their boots familiar with every rock, every burr gathering on our cuffs. Each day, we checked to make sure we had them while our guides hovered over us—half shepherd, but full coyote in the evening’s sun. Eight days of travel and they began to pant, sniffing heat. Exhaustion would turn into steam fading from their last warm meal. Searching for the next, their pants become hunger as they’d pick us with their eyes: an arm attached to a shoulder, shoulder becoming a breast. One night a thigh, a hard-on, another night of waiting—for a mother to ask them to slow down waiting—for the moment to offer help in exchange for her daughter. Other nights, there’d be no offerings as they’d take a fourteen year-old girl. Her body ten feet away flailing in the night’s dirt, her sister pinned by other paws. Each night, we checked to make sure we had them: small white pills. For the morning after.
You wake up and the woman is gone. You wake up and the woman is on her hands and knees, keening Do you know where my eyes are? I can’t find them. You look and look. The expanse above her nose naked, fig-purple. You wake up and take your hands off one by one. Every time you have hurt someone you imagined hurting yourself, first. You called it praying. You wake up screaming for your mother. She unhinges your bedroom door, lifts it with a single hand, takes it, leaves. You wake up in the canned food aisle of a Safeway and all the cashiers get on their hands and knees, say look at me, I’m in love with you, I want to look at you forever. Their faces ballooning blacker and blacker. You wake up and the woman is in your bed with no sheets. She does not speak. You cannot touch her. You cannot wake up. Your insides sleeping like pulp. This, the quietest violence. You open your mouth as wide as it will go. You open it like you will never die. 
Say you’re the first woman in the world. Say you tell no one. Say it’s July, the sky a chapped lip. Say there’s a storm warning every day. Every day a blushfire so you strip away your shirt, your chest shivering alive with little vowels. Imagine yourself in mismatched halves like a broken clock. Say there’s another woman, now. Say she’s turning away from you. Say you want to see her face. Say this and close your eyes. Imagine yourself wrinkle-soft, melting. Say you’re naked and still you don’t know how to tell the truth, say you try to tell her anyway. Say her palm is spit-sharp and sudden over your mouth, the night snagged like nylon. Don’t , she says— say you don’t bite down. No one’s around to hear you crash together like hours, after all. I won't , * you say. Rain whimpering on cinderblock— ​I won’t, I won’t, I won’t. * after " Do-rag " by Phillip B. Williams 
I step into the mirror & kiss myself full on the mouth. When I open my eyes we are kestrels with talons buried in each other’s chests. How beautifully we rend each other rib from rib. Beak sharpens beak. We stop for whiskey & tattoo ourselves on the torsos of sleeping men. When they wake, they itch & scratch against instruction, but as kestrels blood is our birthright. We are both John, & blood is our birthright. What weapon can I use against myself but my father’s silence sown in my flesh? Burs & beet seed. I am a garden of wrath. How beautiful I am, roots roiling red from the earth. Kestrels & snakes. Plumed men beak to beak. I close my eyes & shatter. 
I need you to call me so this sun can finally make sense, my truck’s automatic headlights cutting off, the morning traffic clotting, and, somewhere, you are sleeping. I still remember my desk, students fanning the flies that bred beneath classroom floors. I said there was nothing we could do, fly control requires access to the source, a ruptured sewage line, a dead raccoon rotting in the crawlspace. The sun splits these buildings as I sit in this traffic and, this morning, the newspaper described the death of my former student, his body broken and abandoned in an alley. I know where you are, I was at your side, asleep, five hours ago, but still I want to hear you say nothing has changed. Litter and fallen leaves and what do I remember except that he was lazy, that he bought his final paper? Sometimes, it's like I'm falling in this stilled traffic, the way the few clouds seem wasted without rain, four more hours of work, wondering if you're awake yet. It's possible to pinpoint the exact time of death based on the insect feeding on the body. Blowflies are the first to arrive. I remember his nosebleed in class, I remember him holding the door for a student in a wheelchair, I remember enough to still remember his voice. Some days, I feel like a fly so say no amount of punctuation would have saved him. Say you miss me too, say the ruffled blanket isn’t enough without me. Lonely breakfasts and books I’ll be too tired to talk about when I get home. Public radio news and a few dirty roach jobs you’re too bored to hear. How I want to remember your face as it wakes. Did we shred his papers before the last move? I know I’ve asked so many times but say it again, that light longs for something to touch. Tell me that when we fall we’ll fall like the rain, our rhythm too quiet to show what's left in our wake. 
Already the animal is softening. When I say my road is alive, I mean mouths open up everywhere, spitting rocks, spitting bone until one gives me a skull. I carry it up the path, ​set it on the kitchen table. The canines are missing and the lower jaw. But the eye-holes are so unmistakably round, we say house cat , give it a name—this, our season for naming loss — how it sifts off our skin, collects in soft mounds by the door. How it follows us everywhere, even into bed where it sloughs the space between us, grimed hollow parting our bodies in darkness warm enough for a single, yellow blade of grass to grow.     We were supposed to be reading. This was at school in the third grade in the early nineties, when an hour a day was still required and cursive was taught alongside mathematics and geography, weeks spent memorizing the fifty states and the foreign capitals we mispronounced, unknowingly preparing our puckered lips for the test of a kiss, in French: BOIse, Des MOInes, Baton ROUge… the rounded vowels like sour candies in our mouths, like the yellow Warheads we dared each other to suck on until the sweetness came, or until the five-minute bell rang. We spit out the candies along with the cooties: recess, as we knew it, was over. We sat inside reading, the click of a stand fan oscillating back and forth, cooling our ruddy skin. Brandon slid a fuzzy picture over the polychromatic pages of Huckleberry Finn, whispering that if I looked long enough, pressing my nose up against it then slowly moving it away, like this, a 3-D image would appear, in this case, a rhinoceros. Other times a palace, a plane, a floating human brain. It was called an autostereogram and it became a sort of game, a competition to see who could see it first, decipher the message unconsciously by staring, meditating on the art of sin, letting our monkish minds imagine. Half the time we saw boobs, or wanted to. Randy said Ricky saw dicks and everybody laughed. Except Ricky. Ricky stopped playing, telling us to grow up, homos, and pretty soon we all did, more or less. Brandon became a manager at the Jack in the Box on Third, Ricky a professional chauffeur. No one knew what happened to Randy aside that he moved to Washington and a rich kid named Preston, as his name might suggest, became a curator at the Getty. I guess he lives in Pasadena making big bucks, probably spending all his dough collecting Pollock’s. I can see him now, stroking a chin with his arms crossed, trying to distill a meaning from what appears to be absolutely nothing. It’s pubic hair, his director friend with a fetish for snuff concludes, just kidding but not really: you see whatever you want to see, whatever you’re bound to see doing what it is you’re doing out there. When Manson was a kid he saw murder in the sky, blood leaking through the woolen sheets of the clouds like acid rain-- through the coat of his neighbor’s Bichon Frisé Yappy he admitted to the cops to torturing, holding a butter knife, he said, up against its lamb-like throat and sawing, ripping off the head as from a stuffed animal: dead. But it doesn’t have to be so extreme. Brandon saw a burger and Ricky saw a car. Preston saw a quarter and Jackson, little Jackson from Wyoming who used to like to ride ponies, saw a bar. Woke up years later in a pool of his own vomit like paint, got an idea. Monkey see, monkey do. And what did I see? What am I going to do?  Today I went and sat on the edge of a sandstone bluff overlooking the blue-lined pattern toward the horizon. I put a hand to my eyes to cut the midday glare and saw, somewhat to my surprise, an island off the coast of the mainland. I’ve come here for years and had never seen it before. So I looked again, and saw a boat. So I looked again, and saw a whale. So I looked again, and saw the sea, a surface so smooth you could write on it. 
We wanted arrival to be instant  because we didn’t want to be separate  from what we loved.  —Dana Levin My imagination is generous, but my resolution is not I wanted to say. Become an unknown number, a crank call before this fragment diminished in the cis-binary of phallic ones, vaginal zeros. All bodies are anachronisms, always dragging the club feet of their conceptions into future after future after future immured in now . I wish we could say we are making ourselves eternal by making ourselves forwardable, an afterlife in the cloud, how like the Assunta the Singularity, which always seemed like some Oedipal paraphilia. But you have made your tongue into the letter p , your eyes into a colon. I have always wanted to name a cock “ Pun,” a word derived from the Italians’ raunchy-noised punctilio (its fuck-sound in the compound consonant entering a slippery el ), but all it means: a fine or petty point of conduct or procedure. We will never forgive one another for being human, which is a part of what makes us human. I opened the image in the sun so bright I had to shade the screen from what reductions of me instinct makes. My nude, my spam, my beloved, Titian was called “The Sun Amidst Small Stars.” But how does one love what’s made of light and so far away? Winter was not like the dream I’d had. No women’s clothes. No moonlet rain.  When I wanted to get under your blue and gold bedsheets, I didn’t. Your father was awake.  I pretended not to hear him pacing the hall like he always did, or the morning news blurring  from one state to another. We dressed, grabbed sleds and went to the hill.  The valley breathed under snow. The horses were spread like ink on a page. One,  fenced in, kicked up his head and stomped, disturbing the stillness that kept him.  When we live with silence, a little violence inhabits us. I laughed as you pushed me down. 
I.  Mi maestra, I am too stupid for a wife, he says.  Then, as if to explain, rolls a single pant leg  to unearth a traveling song of scars. One night, all the men  on my side of Guatemala told me not to run, and I ran.   II.  There are days when I feel better at scrubbing sunchokes  than teaching the sacrifice of Iphigenia to seventh grade  prep school kids just up the road, how brave it was she knew her place.  Days I clock in at the restaurant so tired Celso assumes I’ve been up  all night fucking. Squeaky-squeaky, he says, mock-humping the CO2 tank  in dry storage like we both don’t sleep on mattresses that lie flat against a floor.  He goes back to shaving four hundred garlic cloves against  the blade of a mandolin having tied the superhero mask of restaurant-grade  plastic wrap around his head to protect the eyes. I go back to scrawling  today’s date in Sharpie across the wide chests of quart containers.  We laugh a laugh that sets just enough rules on fire to fulfill  the sweet tooth of resentment, which can make a mockery of almost anything.   III.  The first year I asked how he came to this country  Celso said, I travel by bus you stupid slut.  Vos ramera torpe. The fourth year I asked  he said, We walked. We passed skeletons lying  facedown still wearing their backpacks. All the things inside  were gone: apples and water, all of their shy-mouthed sisters. 
The slopes of the mountain may not always be proud of their peak. – Saddam Hussein  The idea is good but this time is not right. Nowadays the rabid dogs are knocking at the doors of Kurdistan.  I worry the country. I worry the people. This crazy bunch disturbs  the atmosphere. My answer is you wait. Yes, I want to be close. I am happy you write. Nothing for you here.  Remember there is a culture. Remember it needs respect. Remember the Islamic nuts.  Who wants to take us back to the year 500? Back to the time of ignorance. And of desert traditions.  Also they are very cruel. I am sure you are aware of it. I am sure. The wild grapes  are growing. They are growing from the rocky ground. Soon we’ll harvest them.  We’ll stomp them into juice. Soon, there will be wine.
It so happened that the King fell in love with Raisin. –Saddam Hussein  I can’t tell you how I found  war to be sexy – you would  only understand the shrapnel  in your knee – and I can only  think about my body turning  crude when my grandfather called –  how every body was an ear  and windows eyes – how I  got off because of where  we were – have you considered  tracer bullets to resemble shooting  stars – did you feel a melting  when you snuck between  two hotel rooms like I did – did  you think about stones  and flesh meeting – can I tell you  what honor tastes like inside  out and wrapped in plastic –  how brown appears blond  against a bed of oil – Kirkuk  was hot because the flames licked  at the earth eternally – no wonder  you look like you do in profile –  I should have known  why your picture is a thistle,  plant so emblematic of neglect –  and I, the earnest gardener  of every thirsty weed, willing  to sit by the river of oil and trace  the lines the thorns made when  I pulled them from my flesh. 
​lyk yr friendly neighborehud Spider"   " / the "   " moth nervously begins 2 scale the faces -- flippant, fair     frantic enuf 2 break me critical race queries. an abundance of sense is dangerous 4 the dream’s gloryhole / any possibility of desire //  church say amen bc yu’ve known an entire night itself, hard w the specifics of desire. how Spidey’d surely have ya w a wink-- or the "   "moth's wrong way full w terrible speed .  4 an awakening up the subject stoned / signified / masturbated the self w evidence was 2002’s Tobey Maguire was a lat 2 keep dreamin’ bak.  but, most importantly, perhaps, the hottest hero! o! so Herculean [1] ! so form! such natural! many nature! b easy w my breezy willingness to b ya covered girl o’ da week.  but also  [come on // desire is anything but simple]  those who read Butler are  rearranged  & hadn’t evr considered  what it means  2 b a prob .  Lizmom nvr read Butler & she sit w us. she give us good "  "moth but oh man. oh men. she still luv us even if we end outside the frame.         poor, too, Spidey, hu enjoys 6+ queerer in frame, but ends lighted in shame.       fucc yu, 2002, 4 casting my lithe boy, primarily as a boy, but also all aggrostr8. o woah damn do i miss Whitman’s wide wrld of blackface and mult men folx.  after all-- the "   "moth is so sad goth. the queer light shimmer which mean he might have me; might snap meh up in wings.  the moon looks rather different small hole round clean opening.  ii.  what it means 2 break blood 4 hi pleasure  we, out w friends left the / ahem / artificial tunnels  & wonder if they kno what it takes --what we’ve done?  iii.  2 get read in the rushing brain’s DMs we mustn't consider the globally literate and monetized constructions of Spidey’s shady nayborehood [defend or condemn?]. just            praise all heavy Spidey’s spandy shadow dragging like a photographer’s cloth behind him.  limit critique & luk 4 luv in this bitch. 2 easy otherwise. i need no information of whiteness, yo, but do require a socio-cultural rebreather or trap covers of Miley or that feeling where yu've reached the unreachable, & yu weren't ready 4 it or a global willingness 2 reckon w the kinda history willing 2 leave a"   "moth luvless, which, instead opts into men.  so 4 now we watch our wonder. we curl and question how the fucc could one swim cross avenues wout the occasional moose knuckle lol.  [1] a word i’d rather resist--i see yu whiteness and structural dependence upon western mythology-- but won’t / don’t but will the bitch into my twerking of the tongue and syntax anyway lmao     
​When I pour espresso in my cup, the sugar dissolves into something else.  To clean the moka , Simon tells me, don’t use soap . I like the way his collar  cups his neck, how his body reminds me of Jesus’s without abs. When I cry  in bathroom mirror, face smeared with Nutella, that’s all I want.  Who’s calling me at this hour? The moonlight peeking through my venetian is my friend.  I want it gone. I want the ocean outside my window gone. Maybe if I had Simon’s shoes, the way  his body fits in a sweater, I could remain, but a cold breeze’s vibrato calls me.  Maybe the crab sleeping on the jetty isn’t lonely. Perhaps it wants to trade bodies with a pigeon.  Perhaps the pigeon wants to be a worm. The worm, dirt. Dirt, sky. Sky, air. Air, the sun.  As Pliny the Younger watched the sun blacken and ash he, too, felt a sort of urgency to flee,  felt delirious despite the crowd. Eventually the boats beneath Vesuvius did get away,  one way or another, and the sky split in two by light. If only my body were a door. 
Though the gods have been carried off / like slivers of ash / I still strike up my word / In this prayer, the piece of coal / can’t decide whether to burn / or be burned or / if tomorrow the verb will matter / In this prayer, you are next to me / and we stare at the tree’s bodies / made to make smoke / In this prayer / I pray nothing else transforms / because if you see smoke / something made it through / fire without breaking ​                                                                                                                              In this prayer, it’s okay / that what heals / hardens the skin like slag  / In this prayer, I don’t ask you to touch me / but I do ask you to string my name / from your teeth / In this prayer, you ask / a question. Isn’t it strange? / but then you fade into the dark / so this prayer is maybe  like the others / In  this prayer, the wind shifts direction / and I repeat myself / because repetition is as close / as memory comes / to its cremation / In this prayer, though gunfire / In this prayer, though whip lash / In this prayer, though red iron / my language won’t cauterize / In this prayer, there are ways other / than first nothing, then pain / to measure the body / and the woods / watch lightless / as a closed hand.
Eche’neis : the Remora, or Sucking-fish, which has on the crown of its head an oblong flat disk, or sucker, by means of which it can adhere to foreign bodies . ​ from Greek: ( to hold + ship)  I.  He asks if I’m a good swimmer. I know enough to keep my head above water. In the dark, movement matters more than form.  He swims under and I disperse the surface. When we meet the sailboat (him ahead) I reach for a railing until my joints drop loose and down. How simply the lake welcomes me, until I can’t tell the difference between failure and return.  The boat rotates on her tether. Blood flows gently as orchids from my arms, and I am dark with the asking: how long can we carry our own bodies, this heavy, private weight.    II.  Slick with the imagining of a body that knows how to keep.  Little slack jawed remora hidden in the eddies, looking for something to adhere to in the slippage of seaweed.  A ship swallows itself at the horizon.     III.  to hold, to hold the ship delay, darling, delay. I’m consuming time and you, always pushing onward, so swift and intent, and me, a hand always drawing you back. The ship never meant to not know time or movement, so immersed that they drip from her sides, yet here kept apart by the latch of a slat mouth. I have no arms to throw against your hull, but find me at the rudder sucking marrow. Blame me not for your defeat, Antony. Caligula passed only with my attention on that long journey. Leave me in the brine to lash against sediment. Half-hearted cartilage, we’re young. Before you cross on to the shore, delay. The dry voice of sand grinding down to its final cause. Clamp and hold. Now only yielding eddies. Only favored winds.    IV.  I let go. You go on. I let go. You go on in a green boat. I let go. You go on in a green boat toward a green shore. I let go. You go on in a green boat toward a green shore and when you turned I let go. You go on in a green boat toward a green shore and when you turned it was to make sure you’d left none of the parts I let go. You go on in a green boat toward a green shore and when you turned it was to make sure you’d left none of the parts of yourself, not even an outline of what I let go. You go on in a green boat toward a green shore and when you turned it was to make sure you’d left none of the parts of yourself, not even an outline of what hovers over the glass waves, the watery threshold holding, holding, held, a hand I let go.    V.  The remora is lazy, unbelonging to the motion in which it takes part, unspooling from its mouth a secret chain to wrap around the beloved.  To unfasten, it must catch the motion, surpass the object.  Ghost flesh carved from scale, a glint of bitten shadow.  To strengthen its grip, the remora slides into the past.    VI.  In the sailboat cabin, we raid the kitchen, filling our hands with paper towels, hammers, handles, until we’ve run out of objects. I set aside the bottle of kerosene. We are looking for wine. We are looking for a way to run out of things to hold.  The boat empties for us and still we search. We remove the roof, the slats, the little hinged counter. Platter and cup. Everything—touched.  I grow tired of acceptance and the stars’ fabricated gloss through shallow waters. I accept this as fact, that every reflection adds a little weight. You seem peaceful, he says, as an ax floats up his tongue. 
​Late September in the art bathroom I pee on it and wait.  I still think about the desert, how one day, name changed, telling no one, I might go where nights there’s nothing between me and the stars, they’ll drool all over my unhooded head, and maybe  it’s how this month I’ve been coming up with names, but I’m worried there’s a reason for that old get-out urge beating in me—isn’t it a sign  I’m like every woman-bodied thing with a secret room a universe can start inside on accident, a chamber with a Tesla coil, big bang simulation hall, and I can’t help what sets it going? Across the way  I hear every charcoal in the life drawing class whisper a body to the sketch board, I hear one woman lean closer to get the shadow of the neck right, and the sweet red growl of the nude’s stomach; I hear her thinking about the apple she left with her clothes,  and then it comes— one blue line, two— three blocks away, in my apartment I left a pot on the stove—the egg cracks, smoking—here in the brown paper quiet the code  signals I’m no mother. My hands shake with something I can’t name under hot water. 
the four-year-old                  gives her              first protest of the   morning                whether intentional or the default position of her mother's resolve her fist is balled in              the way a boy would          grip her  hair  in a   kindergarten class or                at any age that    boys put                         their        names  on things she says, hey I   like       that song and Beyoncé has         already finished  saying I'm gonna fuck me up a bitch so I turn the             volume back up                to five seconds                 ago before a father                 once told a Black woman she was                too loud to fill        his daughter's lungs      before the        tabernacle of mist filled the               car until all we   knew to               breathe  was gunsmoke        and the ire of   men  interrupting  the choir     of crows  that               ain't meant for                  their ears             and I        know it doesn't                             take much          to get this little                  girl's blood ​into      a spell  because it was once                       her              grandmother's blood                    which    means                                  there will             be a                   day when            someone             some man              tries to pull      it out of   her       and      she becomes a wound                  where the curses             her  father hid         from  her come                 tumbling  out of                  the ​            same ​tomb    where   she once buried a         woman with a too        quiet    face 
boy on his knees thighs apart his calf muscled and hanging from the block his foot dangles the black cock’s limp in dirty moss and like moss grown on the northern side of the bark it is telling on this man who otherwise might have passed he looks upwards as if at a lover or perhaps to plead with his master  O master are you pleased with this body with its deep african delights is it not divine how the light makes heaven of my torso — why deny me I know how you are drawn—come slide your tongue down the veins of my throat come step out from behind the canvas come out you have permission yes come kiss my lips these plump caterpillars entering ​ the chrysalis 
Post - concussion syndrome , or PCS, is a medical problem that persists for a period of time after a head injury has occurred. This period of time can range from weeks to months — William Blaud, MD (2015)   Doors & doors & doors close on summer  heat, hot on the street, bruised sky hovering over orchids, lavender  hyacinths thrumming with light in swamps behind the house. Behind  each door, a face he won’t remember well. How much of history is owed  to memory? & what happens to a husband who succumbs to the rot in all things?  Will a closing door hide my name from his mouth? A man can only be hit  so many times before he forgets the sound a body makes when it hits hard  ground. That another name for wife is shepherdess. I’m still in my skin.  This still night. He reaches for me & repeats the name for wind & I am a blade  of grass in his hands. I am the sound of leaving, shaking the sills. I am every door,  closing. I am a name he thinks he hears, still surfacing in the river of a mouth. 
They said, “Here are the maps”; we burned the cities. It was not dying—no, not ever dying; But the night I died I dreamed that I was dead, And the cities said to me: “Why are you dying? We are satisfied, if you are; but why did I die?”  - From “Losses” by Randall Jarrell          1. The burning is hidden to you but it’s happening right in front of you. He looks fine, you think, peaceful, you think. People scream when they are being burned; he is not screaming, only laying there taking a few big breaths and then releasing. Release, that word feels right to you. Release. He is being released. Dying, yes, it is dying, but, really, it is not dying, won’t ever be dying. It is more like release. It is release.  Release release release release release. You repeat it in your mind until you forget how to say it.  2. Before, you read about his time in Iraq during the Gulf War. You read about the munitions depot in Khamisiyah, about how they blew it up, about how it burned, about how he watched it burn, about how he looked up at the mushroom cloud filling the sky.  You don’t know what he was thinking, but you imagine he was confused and maybe scared. You don’t know why you feel the right to imagine this, but you do because it makes you feel better. You’re not sure.  3. You watch his mouth open and move without saying anything. You watch his eyes float upward and close. His voice startles you when he starts to sing Jesus keep me near the cross; there a precious fountain, free to all, a healing stream. You forgot he has a voice. You wonder why he doesn’t scream if he’s burning and can scream. Then, you remember, he can’t.  4. You try not to think about the gas that poisoned him. You try not to think about the chemicals, about how brains work, about what it means to forget, about the damage, about dreams of burning cities, about scars and silent wounds. You try not to think about places that you can never know.  But, you do. You think about all this as you watch him on the gurney, burning and not screaming. You close your eyes and repeat: release release release release release release release until you forget where you are.  5. Later, you read his final handwritten statement: I do think I understand, maybe, why it is you seek to end my life. You wonder if he’s talking to you; he’s talking to you. You respond, Why are you dying. W e are satisfied, if you are . He screams out, but why did I die? But he’s not screaming. 
​1. In 2006, a judge in California ruled that no more executions could take place at San Quentin Prison until a new execution chamber was built. The reasons: the old chamber was too cramped, witnesses complained of sharing air and sweaty shoulders rubbing against grieving faces. The old chamber was too dimly lit, staff had to squint to find veins and still tubes were misplaced, missing the mark, collapsing the veins. Witnesses complained that the death was too dark, the relief too grim. Fluorescent lighting was mandated. The old chamber had poor sight-lines, defeating the purpose of witness, forcing everyone to balance on tiptoes to get a good look at the slumped body on the gurney. The staff’s confirmation of death was rendered a guess. Guessing was permitted. Visual evidence was not required, but suggested.  2. The new execution chamber had a blueprint. The lines designating the rooms were crisp, cleanly slicing the space into its varied purposes. There would be more space to breathe, for most. The views would be much improved, a direct line from eyes to gurney. Everyone would be able to see better because the light would be bright but not blinding.  3. From 2007 to 2010, the new execution chamber was built by prisoners. For free. It met or exceeded expectations, I’m told.  4. The new execution chamber has a hole in the wall. The hole is circular and cased with a dull gray rubber. It looks like a peephole, an enticement to peer into. But it’s too large. There’s no glass to distort the image on the other side. It is not a peephole, I’m told. There can be no glass due to the purpose of the hole: injection, not observation. Hands slip tubes through to other hands that receive tubes to slip into veins on the arms of the body on the gurney. The more hands, the better, I’m told. Responsibility spread is responsibility diminished. The hole is directly above the head rest of the gurney. The gurney is mint green like the dresses that waitresses at diners wore in the 1950s and like surgical gloves—a relic marking the progress of precision. The slumped body in the gurney endures the appearance or the perfection of painless death. It is not known which. But, I’m told, it’s scientifically verified. The hole in the wall is? I ask. No, lethal injection is scientifically verified. I thought we were talking about the hole in the wall.  5. Above the hole in the wall is a square of glass. It is a window and a mirror, I’m told. I don’t get it. A window and a mirror? I ask. Like in crime shows, you know, I’m told, when cops interrogate bad guys while other cops watch from the other side. But who’s being interrogated? I ask. No, lethal injection, I’m told, we’re talking about lethal injection.  6. Eyes behind the mirror, looking out the window at me, watching the slumped body in the gurney, or, me watching myself witness. I can’t see hands doing the injecting. I can’t see eyes, not watching me, but scrutinizing the slumped body on the gurney, waiting for the moment the chest ceases movement, I’m told. Then, marking down the time.  7. Above the square of glass is a clock. The clock has read 12:01 since 2010, when the new execution chamber was completed. It is not stuck, I’m told. They are waiting, I’m told, for a body to slump on the gurney. The clock only marks time between the white fluorescent walls. Refuses to mark the years dribbling out of the dirty spigots next door. Refuses to mark indistinguishable days confined next door. Refuses to mark wasted time, I’m told. So, no one’s been killed in this room, yet? I ask. Lethally injected, I’m told. So, no one’s been killed in this room, yet? I ask. Lethally injected, I’m told. No, I’m told, not yet.     ​
Another dying doe: no A fist: sometimes Every tooth in the china cabinet: yes   Open on a kitchen like handcuffs: yes Fridge full of food: yes                                           All you hear  is      knives  True.  Avocado: no   A stick of softened butter: yes  The mother: maybe The instinct: never The crime scene: every time  Thumb pressed to butter: yes Like flowers dying: no Like the drains and the diapers: no  This is how we fingerprint.  The infant’s sock. Pause. Blood, unwashed. Pause. Keep the bedroom door closed: yes. But, no. But have to: yes. Don’t think of blue daisies: no ​  I don’t.  The closed bedroom door: okay. The therapist, Do you blame yourself? S ometimes: yes.  I can’t drive                tonight.  Do not say: headlights Never ask: deer. And please god: don’t talk about her age  A lonely dinner table: no The                 only                 thing   to eat: yes The how was your day : sometimes. The steering wheel breakdowns: often  Breakdown and break in: just stage directions: yes.  And we can talk about tiny coffins: don’t We can talk of eulogies  The outloud of: this No. Not yet, maybe. I should.                                                                                                                                       No.  The fork scraping on china is not teeth or rose  But the sound we make To try to keep from the words circling The room: yes  The ocean of open doors: yes I am a swallow: yes Please keep it shut: yes Keep it  quiet : please  You think          you know          about   this:                     no.  September, a little death: yes Every year: yes.  On the kitchen wall the measured marks: yes                            stopped at 3 feet 5 inches  like a frozen pond: yes  Me: thin ice: yes  You think we should try again? : no And never. And I hate this conversation: yes  Let quiet keep its rest: please A dying anything has too much hands: yes  I have                   cut off                               each                        finger: yes I have  burned down                the house  The door is still closed: yes.  I’m only a storm pipe in someone else’s neighborhood: yes  My smile a kicked in flowerpot: yes My mouth, this ugly shovel: yes I can never dig out: no.  And the whispers circulate: shh. And the bus stop                         moves.  Street corner eyes: make The front lawn of ghost story.  The smallest thing missing: a tooth, a tombstone, a section of fence. 
​for christmas my sister gave my uncle a shotgun-shaped plunger – the kind of gag gift that only populates back corners and aisle end caps of idaho hunting stores under the moniker redneck plunger – its purposes scrawled across fecal-colored packaging like If you’re down in the dumps… you need a redneck plunger reminding you the poo is through… with the redneck plunger but most often it proclaims in large puss-yellow lettering If it’s brown, it’s down! ... with the redneck plunger – firearm anatomy complete with action bar for cocking the realistic shotgun-sounds ready to fire out of the double-barrel bloomed rubber-plunger instead of open-fire – a cartoonish shit-killer –  the weapon of choice for all toilets in need – a thing that can only be conceived by white men who wear camo like second skin and boast safes full of functioning musket-to-revolvers – an altar to the second amendment in their bedrooms – my cousin – a 7-year-old rural white boy / rural like already knows the sway of arrow strung on a bow – his small yet-to-be-calloused fingertips the only safety / white like he already knows how to oil his mouth to dazzle and conduct any gaze away from his blame-less skin / boy like he already knows the power in the snap of his fingers / takes up arms in novelty toy plunger-shotgun – chants his favorite slogan a hunting rally cry If it’s brown, it’s down! butts the stock to his shoulder blasts away an empty cardboard box / everyone laughs / If it’s brown, it’s down! he stalks each target like it might run – swinging the plunger-barrel onto its mark / the stairway rail / settles into each shot like he isn’t afraid of kickback / the kitchen table / doesn’t yet know what real bullet holes live like / the entertainment center / it’s not long before he centers my father in his sights – the only brown alive in the room – his skin bringing out the pale in mine – foiling everyone else in the entire house – the only person who might be mistaken for a deer in the brush if the wrong white person is on the other end of the scope – and my rural-white-boy cousin centers on my father and with the deliberation of a hunter holding still his hands for the kill says you’re brown  everyone laughs 
I am a behavioral analyst: I walk into a room & can tell who’s done what to whom. I walk into a room & it is always the same room. I walk into a room & there is always a man with a gun in his hand, there is always a mouth made larger, there is always a hate that has ruined so many, such beautiful teeth. In the room it is easy to see blood loves blood, loves the story of how they came to be. In the room the blood has hung family photos all along the wall. What my team calls spatter , what the wife-and-mother calls proof , what I call father resembles the pool that forms underneath the body. Each time I put his body in a bag, his body fits inside the bag, each time I hang his body bag in the closet, the other body bags make room for him to fit. 
He died inside his encyclopedic knowledge, in what he knew of what the mouth does, what the mouth is for, teeth , tongue palate , oral cavity , he died unable to pronounce the words daughter , family , heart attack though he could wrap his teeth around them. I take his body, I try to read him like braille. I have trouble with the words gravestone , father , suicide . I find in him the photograph of a wolf, I feel its howl, I feel its need. I find in him the line drawing of a small plane, I feel its propeller, its wings. I take his skin and fold it into a book. I do not know what to do with his body. I consider a pack of wolves with their many mouths and rows of teeth, I consider throwing him from a many mile height, feeding him into fastly whirring blades. Instead I take his skin-book and put it in a drawer. I leave his insides to be buried where I will never find them. Other women don't tell you about the hair, how it falls out, webs between your fingers and streams in the shower and clumps on your pillow and on the floor and in the hands of one who still loves you. They say it'll grow back. Thicker even. But you don't believe them. They've lied before. And they don't tell you about the split, how you can fit a fist between your left and right sides. You can work to make it narrower, they say, build back the muscles in your abdomen and pelvic floor. It just takes time. You can get it all back, they say, but you know that is not the point. And you knew you'd be tired, that the body can only keep up for so long. They warned you days would be long but years would fly and again, they were wrong, because everything is flying and the rain is coming down the way July had never known it. And you think, my body was an ark once. And you ask, would it still float? And in days, your son will have breathed air as long as water. And maybe Noah was a woman too. They never told you this. But the rain is coming and you are holding a wad of your own hair in one hand as your son's head rests along the other. And you think, they never told you any of this. How your hands would never keep up.
​The world’s worst sin is shame,  ​and the punishment for it is women. God didn’t tell Eve to hate her body—  He gave her air baths in Eden, a figure that undulates like a river. I know girls are trying to recreate me;  I’ve seen them in the magazines, backlit by men’s craving.  I know the ways they thinned to bone, like all good girls  must. The punishment for shame is us: we torment men as our hour glass curves expire.  They need us so they want to see us bound and gagged. They love us so much they have to kill us.  I know  the click of a camera is the same language of the fist, the rhythm as it strips and hones,  the skin’s petals  unfurl obediently beneath its heat. Young Betties, turn your wrists to the lens, reveal the map  of your blue veins, stun with your arterial thumping, defy the shame that wants you tamed.  Now that I’m near death, I can tell you how the six men pinned me to the concrete, and I knew  enough to say harder. I can tell you that my daddy’s name is a sore in my mouth that I can’t stop  biting. Once, there was a boy who loved to see me gagged so much that he died from it.  On my wedding night, my husband wrapped his hands around my neck and said he’d finish me for good,  but God intervened. And then God and the Devil never let me rest, fighting over the damned in my earshot—  even a mythical man is still a man. Don’t listen to the lessons for the good girls: have no shame, ignore  the silly salad forks, the spotless silver, the curtsies, the crossed ankles. Learn the body’s openings, how  to make steam rise from your eyes, that even the foot’s high arch is a flirt, and that love is impossible  with the heart of a girl next door— it’s false, like a child’s tooth, its root will weaken and it falls away.  My body vanished and will soon vanish again. The good girl is always a ghost,  ​the body is always a wound.I want to write a poem about horses, too. I have already written poems that feature horses. Sometimes prominently.  I want to write a poem about horses in tercets, so I am writing a poem about horses in tercets. I tell my students  it is important to engage the grammar of each line of poetry by jarring expectation about what the line can do, its dimensional  limits. In this case, grammar is a gunky blood, gels to whatever electable unit of time. I walk straight up to a horse. Its nostrils blare the weather  of stones. My poem about horses should be a poem about failure, too. Like most nouns, I love horses from a theoretical distance. Up close, they terrify me.  My thoughts turn fleshy. My friend’s horse ripped her hair from her scalp as a girl, thinking it hay. Like a wheel crushing a foot, who could blame  the horse for having no depth of metaphor, only an automatic sense of knowing what it wants. My friend wore her bald spot all over her face.  The horse was shot in the same corral by a father years later. She was mendacious, unruly. So far, I don’t enjoy the tone of my horse poem.  This morning on my run, I followed tree roots along the sidewalk cracks. Such raised lines wanted to teach me about circumstantial damage:  A horse bends over to feed, chomps down on yellow, tastes mint shampoo, if it tastes at all. A root lifts the sidewalk like a tuft pulled up  from the skull. Either way, something collapses as the highway spells nearby distance. A great cross is mounted over a mound. The surface eases. 
Call me Mercutio, you say, white-robed body Leading me toward the garden. July and I Bare-skinned, shivering. Inside every boy Is a flower, and yours is night-blooming. On my knees in the tomatoes' yellow Blossoms, I hear the old wooden windchimes From the blue house my family is losing Come loose over us—all this blue, blue night  Blue wind blue mountains watching as you Push me down, my back a stripe of moonlight Clouded by your mouth. My face in the loam As grassy tops of carrots grow into My hands—as you quicken, as you cry out, I tighten my fists around everything green and pull. 
Not the morning light     that makes me        whole,  the three of us in your twin bed  Still, at the root of me, I feel it a phantom forgetting what isn’t mine  Still the same girl,              yes,  but for the first time, all        my empty gone fake, escape false flesh feral throbless tethered  Last night I saw your back     arch, your face hidden in the long Sunday of your hair I became something else something that understood how to bare my teeth and like a man drive forgiveness from you where there is nothing to forgive I understood how to bend you double, the aluminum taste of control thick in my lung–        sweet girl,  what does it mean–  to be me anymore?     I was a single  match flint,      I was the music of wolves, I was the same as you  Now, I watch your breathing and wonder who else has spent a dark morning holding your hips to their own,  a robin at the window but I want you all to myself,  hate everything that could make you quill, there is a new want born in me and I have forgotten myself, obsessing in the mineminemine of being more man than I was before 
for the sake of argument I fly home. I go to sleep. I wake up and walk out my back door and keep walking until I find a sizeable enough tobacco field. I walk to the middle of the field and sit down. I take off my shoes. I take off my socks. I wriggle my toes in the dirt for hours until the red clay is a thin paste. I take off my shirt and wait years for it to become tattered. I die. I plunge my not black index finger into the not red clay and with it I write the word agency across my bare chest. what does it matter. there’s a body at the bottom of the ocean with my name on it but I’m still in love. don’t nobody in my family know how to pronounce our name but we all still cute. all make a mean cornbread. ha ha. forget it. it’s a bad joke. e.j. and big matt ’nem say it’s not that deep. you dump enough shit into the ocean it’ll come back and getchya. you blow enough smoke in the sky’s face it’ll rain down on you. grandmama never said that but she might as well have. besides. you don’t know ella mae you don’t know shit about resistance. you don’t know ella mae you can’t even talk. you ever seen a whole family burn down? you ever seen a collards pot like an armored tank? you ever tasted her neckbones? I said forget it. the only difference between a body and a life is how long you look at it. the only difference between a body and a fire escape is how long it takes to get to the other side. what’s the point of a word anyway. what does your talk matter. what’s one big white guess against a hot comb umbilical chord. it’s simple. y’all think jesus died for us too or not.     
​you should’ve done this a long time ago. you always let the hair grow so long, didn’t i teach you anything? shhh, basta. there are worst things to cry about after all depression is an american thing/americans need a name for everything & I changed/mine before they could butcher it/your eyebrows they look like trees, meleesa/your mustache, you look like your father/ay/ay/ay/ay/  let me tell you about sadness  the time your abuelita put a belt over the door & she said your father isn’t here but that is let me tell you about e-starving. about no college no high e-school. Melissa. you’re so selfish for your sadness. you don’t know pain. don’t talk to me about pain. he doesn’t leave here anymore. live. i didn’t raise you to live like this. let me tell you about seeing your grandfather drinking everything away. he could’ve been something too, he built streets in Guatemala, just ask your Abuelita, ask her about the streets, the one he died on, the last time I saw him he was asking for money in front of my school. My aunts said you look just like a boy .  my brothers said josefa you’ll never come back . no one here could say my name & now no one calls me. & i fell asleep on the couch last night. it is like you don’t even care. sadness is all/in your head & your hair is on top of it/sadness is what happens when you forget the hanging/belt over the door/sometimes children with empty stomachs is/nothing like coming home & feeling/like a fridge with nothing inside of it & remember what is inside of you: everything i fought for  remember your body/the body - a land of feelings we’ve been told to cut down/we rip the things we hate/about ourselves out & hope/they grow back weaker/but hair is the only thing that grows/The way things grow in the homeland/which is why we get goosebumps when we hear spanish at the supermarket or when a dead friend’s sweater hugs us in a dream or when a kiss is planted on the back of the neck. ​ the hair follicles click back to life. the buds shake themselves awake. they rise from the grave we insist on digging. ​ the hairs stand up. a million ancestors       rooting for the home team 
skinny white girl with a sugar skull tattoo says: no offense melissa??  but i know when you’ve been around ??   because your hair gets all over everything??   & no offense but it kind of grosses me out??    if you come into my apartment can you just please be aware of that?? imagine being as gross as u fear?? imagine the things that shed from you turning into something that survives the apocalypse?? the scientists trapping it in a plastic container ?? putting a bunch of nuclear science waves on it?? it surviving but coming out with two more heads?? or I don’t know, is that how it works??  imagine your hairs as daddy long legs crawling up the shower curtain?? ​ daddy’s long legs??daddy’s dark legs??daddy’s hairy dark legs??  imagine you are what makes the white girls in a brooklyn apartment scream?? except deep down??you want to be a white girl in a brooklyn apartment??screaming??following her dreams??  ​ there is not a white part inside of you or maybe there is?? if so what do you do with it??  do you spray it with windex??  trap it under a paper cup??  ​find the right shoe??  find the right man??  & then what does he do??? ​  with the body?? 
katharine is getting her monthly brazilian wax $$ she isn’t seeing anyone $$ so this isn’t for anyone $$ you shouldn’t do anything unless it’s for yourself $$ katharine is a self-made kind of woman $$ mami is too $$ katharine comes to the house & mami waxes her in the living room $$ she makes me set up the dining room table into a waxing bed $$ the same one we eat our twisted thanksgiving on $$ arroz con gandules even tho we aren’t puerto rican $$ sweet potato casserole recipe mami got from one of her clients $$ katharine comes on time $$ she has no tolerance for people being late $$ i am reading in the kitchen but eavesdropping $$ immigrant kids know how to listen $$ it is how we get ahead $$ we are good little spies $$ katharine says have you heard about this george zimmerman thing? $$ mami says no, what is about? $$ katharine says well everyone wants to make it a race thing but it isn’t a race thing because george zimmerman is latino  $$ mami says okay lift up your legs $$ mami says to be honest, i don’t really get it $$ katharine says i just don’t know why people have to be politically correct about it $$ later, katharine will play devil’s advocate with morals on facebook, later still, she will say we are all immigrants, aren’t we $$ now she says i mean you came here & worked so hard i just really admire that $$ mami calls my name $$ meleesa please heat up de wax $$ oh, katharine says, your daughter, i haven’t seen her in ages $$ is she still reading? she is so well-behaved $$ you did such a good job with them $$ you always do such a good job 
there are too many insects in the garden some animal has stolen the leaves off my pea plant  the basil is riddled with mite-sized holes & the tomato vine has taken over  the fruit hanging low refusing to blush  all the while my fourteen-year-old sister stands in a mirror-lined bathroom  bleaching the down of her pubic hair taking the burn as punishment  she slips into a Lilly Pulitzer dress worth three months of her allowance  a dress of Florida neons, sweet tea sweating palm trees  just last week, looking out at the garden she tells me the white boy she loves thinks she’s special  not like those other “cotton pickers” she air quotes, glancing at me for approval  i thought maybe if i got my hands dirty here if i went back to the ground & blessed my skin  with its grubs, earthworms, & yarrow it would teach me how to seedling again  that it would give me a way to mourn all these endings, to believe in our survival  to re-learn the smell of blood in the rain as amniotic fluid, urgent arrival  but every day i stomp outside to see what has bloomed, ripened  every day another tomato, green as the vine dropped & rotted in its small carcass  every day another lynched headline from the TV or the lips of a loved one  how can i teach her she is healing root ginger, sweet potato, black cumin  all her muscle & gold, hidden that he will never see her as i do  when even here in the garden little deaths mock our safety  what are we allowed to grow with our black girl magic?  i am still trying to untangle this  the weeds have taken over & they are strong
Because I can’t say I’m sorry , I tell you We should play chess, only I do not say it. When I was young, my sister learned chess from a blind man who held all the spaces of a chessboard in his mind as clearly as chapters from his own life. She tried to teach me, but I kept imagining the board as the checkered floor in a supermarket, kept imagining the queen worrying over the price of meat. At school, the custodian who’d find me sleeping in the hallways late, late at night, would nudge me awake, bring out his travel-sized chessboard. Always, he would speak gently as he led me through checkmating him. If ever there was kindness in my life, it was this. Now when I do not understand the dark sea in your head, the way it pulls me in and under, I ask the tarot: What is this man? , but I am shown only the moon of my own face: fear, a shadow. When I ask the I Ching, you are shown to me as a mountain there is no moving. We have no language between us. We have only ghosts between us. Their shapes uneasy as the eve of a millennium; their chatter, like mine, false and helium light. The I Ching says misfortune. The tarot shows a heart pierced with swords and suspended in air. There is nothing for it. In chess, I am always beginning, but see how quickly I leave you with nearly nothing but your limping king, until the thing in me that cries out mercy! cries out mercy! See how for us, there is equal loss. 
Sometimes you touch me and it is neither of us touching. It is a rock and a throat, a feather and an anvil. Sometimes it sounds like I am singing  but that is just my voice smoothing fear into shape. All the time I want the deaths inside us to touch, but sometimes I cannot see  who you are through the scrim of pleasure and I only want to touch your end, your promise to eternity which you carry lightly so as not to  break its delicate stems. My love, I am far away from you right now, and on the fridge of this rented house is one of those cheap sepia-toned cards  with indolent witticisms written on them: three women staring out of a jail cell captioned The Trouble with Trouble is it starts out as Fun. And outside,  a red flag day on the lake with two people wading out of the waves. So far they are surviving. From here  it sounds like they are laughing but I know I mistake the sound of crashing for happy, the shatter of glass for ecstasy  though whenever you fit my name onto the blindness enveloping the two of us there’s a seam inside me welded  that only you have the strength to break. 
please (i want a bigger bed) please (& a new dining room  table) please (i want carnations for the table) please please (&  a man to give them to me) please (this man)  please (i want his hands) please (i want him to use his hands  to lift away loose eyelashes) please (to touch cats & rabbits)  please please (&) please (i want him too) please (to touch me) please please  (like a cat) please (like a rabbit) please please (like a chicken that needs  its neck wrung) please please please (i want him to be) please  (that soft thing my body falls against) please please (i want him)  please (to be the hard one) please please (i want my body to crest  against his shoulder’s sharp ridge) please please (i want  to break there) please please please (i want to die) 
when asked what do you actually do  I pray for my maids their gods have more debt than my god my god has more favor more sex appeal do not misunderstand I take time for myself burning my silk sheets one thread at a time I call the President & ask money corrupts absolutely I chew TV noise & eat expensive corpses there’s a particular way in which men are hypnotized click me press your hard thumb to my lips or décolletage & you think you’ve burned a cross into my forehead you think my various holograms are possessed fucking the camera’s brains loose but honestly my spare time is spent focusing my energies on not disappearing: I count the pixels of my breasts I tolerate my reflection I sweat the calories from my heart I buy my corset & coffin wholesale I give shit away I let my husband serenade my vagina I sing lullabies to my children long after they’ve faded I edit the martyrdom I remove the cameras from my home I invite cameras back inside I leak to the lenses drown. 
All you need is a milk crate. All you need is a screen that plays the same video over and over again, the one where the tornado evicts the woman from her body, says Congratulations, my small perfumed heart, you are mine now . And the day the wind boxed you into city hall, the same day the couples stormed the town in search of a diamond ring hidden by Jared’s or the Galleria. All you need is that sort of myth. All you need is to pretend the river is our mother, to unlock your body from the water until you feel like something loves you. If you sleep anywhere let it be the palms of my hands in California, the day I held them below an ice cream cone to catch its spillage. Like all sweet things you belong there. Brother, I am ill because I want to give you everything: the sand dollars I unhooked from the ocean with my toes: furred into white, mouths open in a bottle of bleach. The snake that slept for an hour on my left foot and the way I felt like boyhood was stuck in a beautiful green box with no lock but so many keys. The thousands of thimbles our grandmother lines up in her kitchen like small metal dresses that will be worn once. And the sweet cold water and the jar that pours. Brother, there is a language to this kind of living that we learn the way people in a building learn it is being demolished. Brother, I used to dream about a forest where disease was a flower that opens once a year for an hour. And last night, for the first time, you did not press it to your lips or swallow its bright bloom. Brother, I will let the stars do whatever they want to me. 
“Men put them on trains and under them. Violence makes them celestial.” -Leslie Jamison  A zodiac wheel of scars. Telescope to the moonscape of bruised thighs. Read the bloodied toilet bowl like tea leaves. And that wasn’t even  one of the cruel boys. City life dims the stars of reminder, grants me a blank face. Beauty of a ravaged universe. Extravagant proof of his power. Oh, the things he could’ve done to you if he’d gotten there first.  The mars rover sings itself happy birthday. Find the farthest reaches of our sympathy. Poor, lonely machine, let us lay our soil under you, here, take this dust of us home. No, the galaxy says nothing. Just expands, explodes, swallows what is too heavy. 
​A better son would be able to name these men. I have named each violence for whatever it does  with its hands: half wave; shaking; holding a gun; peace sign; a man in the arms  of a man, carried like a husband might carry his husband. & my father is there. Laughing  at this impossible wedding. When I came out to him, he thought I was joking. Disbelief  can be a crown of dust. The photographs look like objects worth devoting myself to:  covered in dust, pious as light or a desert turned kingdom by the nameless  men. A crown, when divorced from the head, is a circle of dusty light. Laughter, uncomplicated  from the subject, can become the absence of – my head, full of desire, could be the subject  of queens. The photographs, a desert of fathers, country blindfolded  with hands. A crown, uncomplicated from its kingdom, can look     like anything  you want.        My father can call a war         a war, a queen  a queen,           the photographs nothing                     more than  the dead light laughing hourglass becomes desert, kingdom hands               queen violence              the subject the crown         object this devotion  Oh, today I am impossible & headless.
​From the darkening window, I can see that the world is filled with terrible things:  dark chapels, an odd number of knees tongued bloody, fathers in their fatigues,  telescopes dotting the horizon like universes. When you look through these collapsible eyes,  you turn inside out, into a planet, unkempt with wild irises. I think the body is a purpling ode  to astronomy. Dear God, what do you see when you see inside of me? My desires  have quickened like two boys biking down a hill to play their nightly game of soft miracles:  bruisewater, spit-soaked flower, irises between the lips & tucked behind the ears –  there is an obsession here, yes, with obsession. Once, in a sycamore, I was beautiful.  There was no one to see me. I like to imagine that I understand the world as what it is not.  A garden overgrown with filthy weeds. Small universe emptied like a cup of water, or an eye.  No. Forgive me, I was wrong. The body is not an ode, it is a planet to be seen,  not touched, from the wrong end of a telescope.  My eyes are the space around my eyes: at once open & opening, forever, faultlessly. 
“Men put them on trains and under them. Violence makes them celestial.” -Leslie Jamison  A zodiac wheel of scars. Telescope to the moonscape of bruised thighs. Read the bloodied toilet bowl like tea leaves. And that wasn’t even  one of the cruel boys. City life dims the stars of reminder, grants me a blank face. Beauty of a ravaged universe. Extravagant proof of his power. Oh, the things he could’ve done to you if he’d gotten there first.  The mars rover sings itself happy birthday. Find the farthest reaches of our sympathy. Poor, lonely machine, let us lay our soil under you, here, take this dust of us home. No, the galaxy says nothing. Just expands, explodes, swallows what is too heavy. 
her face blotching red so I tried the elephant  the giraffe the caterpillar  her finger  my finger I opened the car window  & gripped her sweaty hand  & after the seventh song I tried ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXY&Z Now I know my ABCS Next time won’t you sing with me? she stopped crying & stared at me & stayed that way so I kept singing for 40 minutes  I was afraid to stop  her eyes on my eyes       singing & looking  rocks grinding my throat              jaw coming loose  ​I sang & sang & sang                  until her eyes shut          her hand loosened as if she was falling into the arms of a kind water where I couldn’t find her but she would be safe & the red left her  how was your day? someone asked  ​ & last night I bounced on the edge of a hotel bed holding her in my arm’s crook & under my breath I whispered  What the fuck What the fuck  please sleep please sleep please sleep why why why why why why why  & my friend was pouring a bourbon for herself in her kitchen & the face in the window across the street turned off the light & the child in the boat cried for its mother & a man came and took my child and said he would bounce her for me & I said yes please help my child go to  sleep & my eyes burned & I couldn’t find her & I slept 
Wind whips the umbrella on the porch like a ship’s sail I watch it twist         and lean over the counter eating   numb-eyed  The baby rolls in the monitor’s blue fuzz  and I calculate how long until he needs to eat again  I’ve been going for months        If I stop, I will be ordinary All I want to do is feed myself bread and milk   I cut the baby out of the poem I put the baby back in  The geese are migrating somewhere One lags behind      veering  unsatisfied by its pocket in the V the group’s squawking mind to move  maybe hating those beating bodies ahead I need the baby to take a nap               I need the baby to not need me  I never meant to be so needed I dream about drifting            alone  I can’t quiet my ambition It bats at my knees and I toss it scraps  hoping it will reward me for wrenching off each finger each thick arm    my teeming head  dropping them      one by one      into the black well of its jaws 
The shortest sentence in the Bible was two words : Jesus wept : The dead have their language and we have ours :  Last year a neighbor soaked a Christmas tree in gasoline for one week : I don't ask why  a friend dreams of leaving his baby in a rail car heading to Topeka, of jumping into a pool of piranha  with his whole damn family, trying his luck in hell : Yesterday, I tried to count the names of the innocent dead but lost track  at the part where the mama bear dismembers thirteen unruly angels, where beautiful becomes a mouth  with our names on its teeth : Later I watched Heaven’s Gate members talk about leaving the earth, and why  they were so happy : Maybe we never learn to be suspicious of happiness : A man in Berlin told me there are ways to snort the moon  when it explodes and space is snowing : I guess if we can turn the moon into powder sure as anything we can make the Lord god cry :  You know the joke where you hold up a naked hand with something awful in it and say look  what I almost stepped in : I guess Life is a very long sentence in a very pointless book : Shadow in the dark of some wizard’s  dream : Dead language in the ground of mass grave : Life is a Fiddler on the Roof man churning the field of a lifeless Anatevka, singing  TRADITION, coming home every night to augur stories in the dust of a bird bath until it is no longer  a question where the light comes from : Or it’s the older brother’s arm of a previous century  pushing us into a lonely line dance at a loud country bar where one by one our friends leave through different  windows, fire exits, key holes : You know the joke : Just give me your biggest coffin : I’ll find friends  to fill it : No head is so big that it cannot be crowned : Tonight I am writing you from above  Houston, I think : I can see its bright living population : From here, maybe it’s obvious  that any god would cry : The way my father did when fire took the hill behind our house, and we  had to choose what to save and what to leave to flame : When, later, we took the dog  for one last hoo-rah in the pickup : Like god, we loved him so much we gave him to fire :  Houston, you must know this already but I’m telling you now : The dead have their city  and we have ours : When astronauts dream they dream of floating ants, weightless hammers :  Today’s ash is a better day’s splendor  
I want to talk about white women.  I want to talk about fifth grade & dominic jackson garcia, the afrolatino boy whose holy mouth chose the white girl instead.  black boys          shared hot cheetos with me,  held hands with them, more concerned  with aspen & kaedee than my glossy neck.  wanted to swallow a white  girl’s smile, fold it in their pockets  to keep them warm.  I, frozen on the black- top, red-handed, embarrassment.  I’m ready to talk about white women. how the lyft driver, black man,          blames his black girlfriend for his inability to pay rent. how he                                  breaks open his saliva to drown my body, says,                        “I’m just gonna get me a white woman.  no offense.”  I want to talk about white women. the ones               who step in front of me in line, who follow me in stores,  who grab my hair                                 shoulders                        arm   “what-a-great-tattoo-I’ve-always-wanted-a-dreamcatcher”  “I-love-your-hair-how-did-you-get-it-like-that”  “I’m-touching-you-to-prove-I’m-not-uncomfortable”   I want to talk about white supremacy.   supreme , meaning:  ​superior to all others .  as in: diana ross and the supremes .  ​as in: moonwalk so supreme make yours look earthly.                               I’m extraterrestrial. got two moons for feet & heaven say my name a galaxy.  is this what you meant                                     when you said I’m too angry ? too sure about the limits of this world, that                                                                              I spoke about pain like a thousand sharecropping grandmothers, that                                                                              I exaggerated, that                                                                              I wasn’t                          nice  the way white women make you feel?   supreme , meaning:  ​strongest, most important, or most powerful .  so I flash my teeth, catch  light in my mouth, grow  my hair thick as a plague. don’t speak when I’m speaking.   white men apologize to me now. men of color                                  call me difficult . I roll my eyes, hold my heart like the gift it is, hold the hearts of my sisters.   ​ supreme , meaning:  involving death .  ​as in: supreme sacrifice. black women everywhere you thought we weren’t - germany: holocaust  ​              mexico: conquest slavery global economy - the worldwide girlchildren of empire.  they                    ain’t got numbers bold enough to count the ones we’ve lost.   ​ supreme , last definition:  ​ a rich cream sauce .  ​ my mother buys  ​ sauce packets for 17 cents at the grocery.  ​ says, they’re                            no good  ​ for you. says, they’re                            all salt. they’re                            all lot & his wife, city on fire:   ​ rosewood: burning  ​ because of a white woman’s expression.  the hair like woven silk, skin shining like fresh milk, crosses my path like an ancient warning.  in what version of the story do black women win?     
​the funny thing about medical transition is how i’m expected to grow and expand into all the parts of me i wasn’t gifted. in other words, i can only be woman by sticking my ass with a needle. after all, woman is pinprick, a spot of blood reminding me what i cannot bear in my belly. i’ve got girlfriends going through their second puberty sprouting tits. they got curves in all the canyons women bury their silence in. but me? my skin carries all the evidence that i too have grown, just not in the most ideal ways. i am no red sequoyah scraping the horizon for its fruit. i am left to dry out. i am sap crusting around the mold, a bitter tongue after a tree’s canopy is cut for firewood. my girlfriends assume i’m already on mones. i’m so fish, i’m drowning on land. i’m so fish, people don’t even know which way i’m swimming. someone asked me what it’s like for me to become a boy when all that fat remains on my chest. but they’re not breasts. i know. i’ve tried molding them. i’ve imagined building a dairy farm from my lungs so i could one day nourish the children i can’t have. but more than anything, i am stuffing myself with everything the kitchen owns. i light the stove top with my hair. i rip the cabinets off with my teeth. i crush cinnamon between my thighs and get high off the fumes. i’m searing red hot. my ovaries are a self-cleaning oven. i tip the refrigerator over and funnel its insides into my own. i eat and everything grows. i swallow four knives and birth children whose tongues come out already sharpened. i eat and nothing dies. i eat and nurse my excess skin back to life. i coax the tigers from my stretch marks. i ring all the alarms. hibernation season is over. i grow and grow and grow and grow and eat with my hands and get full. i feel my not breasts and remember how i can still crave the taste of my own skin.             ​1  & a tomato is a tomato is a tomato is my pussy —I forget they are fruit.  2  Wolf peach . The scientific name for tomato means wolf peach , lycopersicum , after a rumor that witches used deadly nightshade to turn themselves into werewolves (when what a witch really does is:  apply flying ointment & masturbate with her broomstick).  3  I canned hot salsa until I entombed myself in row upon row  of superheated glass.  4  o flavr savr       o ripening        o goodbye  5  This is the fuzz of me, the soft, dark worm of me. I am mining this fruit & tunneling this Tunnel of My Exact Dimensions, until silver moth silver moth silver moth  & not long for this. 
X Is Yellowing Down by ​losing his softness.   He  threatens to take all the air   with him when he goes. I've  never   been much good at igniting   tenderness, I often fight sad with worse sad, and using the bone of one whale to harpoon another isn't beautiful.    Sensual—certainly not. Now  hot-wristed,  he claims  glass-bottomed bridges  last so     long     because   courage   is    a dwindling human trait. I used to believe that     if I was slapped hard enough   my eyes would pop out. Believed    too   that   a      calculated hair tug   could rear them back into their rightful sockets.  X drags his latches  toward me—a test    to see if I will   unfasten.  His bags are heavy with our garden's brightest stones because, he says,  even the crows should    be     left   with        nothing. 
When Saint Francis materialized in the corner of my studio apartment, I figured I was in for a quick  message from the Almighty — Thou shalt lose weight, or Thou shalt not lie with thine physics professor . I thought  it would take an hour—two hours tops. On the first day, he didn't speak, just held a steady rhythm of five sighs  per minute. On the second day, he moved, began undoing his robe, and I imagined red squirrels perched upon  high snag ribs, and swallows—those mouthy little things—skimming the fields of fabric around his ankles.  In him, I expected to find where the river quirks, to learn how many feet a millipede can live without. I  wanted to see my prayers tangled in his chest hairs. Or maybe I wanted no hair—for his body to be  bare as tonsured scalp, but now it's day thirty and his hands are still unfolding layers upon layers of brown wool.  Sometimes, I look past him to watch infomercials where hollow-cheeked women shove apples into self- cleaning juicers. I invite men over, and they spend the night asking questions he won't answer, like why  leaves in shadow appear light blue, why bees prefer beer cans to daisies, or why their wives forgive them  when they come home smelling of me. I often dream of him speaking, of his final unravel revealing a silk dress —  A present from my father, he says, and as he raises his thumb to touch my forehead I ask, Which father ?  
how our bodies domesticate disaster: by swallowing  another country’s rains.  By reining my jaw to the sea, my bones  lurched into boats.  My breasts bitten into apples.  My mother says  women who sleep with women are redundant: the body symmetrical  to its crime.  Between your knees, I mistake need for belief  in a father figure: once, we renamed our fathers by burning them  out of our bodies, smoking the sky into meat.  I have my father’s  name: 张, meaning archer. I consider coming clean  through your body like an arrow.  I consider the way we shape in bed, like the sea  has revised its shoreline & we must move accordingly.  According  to my mother, it is best for a woman to be thin, to eat without  waist.  It is best to pickle the tongue in pepper,  water & salt, to feed on silence. When I kiss you, I remember  every silence begins inside a mouth.  Everything edible  begins as a bird.  At night, birds peck eyeholes into the dark,  the way I have always watched women: in the distance  between a girl & herself is an entire body  of arrows, flesh pocketing its holes.  A girl castling  her voice into a throat of stone.  It is natural,  kissing you.  It is natural, tasting salt afterwards, tracing  where light through a window veins your body, its wanting  to reroute your blood someplace safe.     
i confess, i had grown tired of earth. or rather, of the empires on it. i had once ran through every room ​pelt. i saw the earth carvers adorn themselves with the feathers of dead birds, while the birds lay, ​ i built a rocket from fistfuls of scrap metal. i took a helmet & called myself cosmonaut. i maneuvered in a direction ​​ between saturn & its moons. i choose an eternity that opens itself again & again, like a sky permitting a hundred points    ​inside a mansion insisting i & the people i loved were not foreign or less than an animal’s ​ stomachs full of plastic. with each passing year i watched a lush hillside shrink until it could fit inside a bowl. ​ ​i felt mattered, though the direction wasn’t important. forever was on every side. i measured devotion in the distance ​ of light to pierce its shadow  every ​               single night. ​
​You are still youthful, the women in my life remind me after my divorce.  Rejuvenation is not only a word for skincare products. There is still time to renovate. You’ve had enough of suffocation, enough of walls, of pillars and monoliths. He never spoke about anything, old aluminum rattled in his mouth. The voice of that ancient creature within us, when I picture it, is curved like an amplifier. Listen with me, as the soft mew builds into a bellow.  Blow out the walls to let the outside world trespass. Let lizards glide in the living room, lady bugs loiter on terracotta lips. Let the roof be removed by the banner-laden palomas. Let the sheep discard their fleeces, follow the foxes to a moonlight feast. Let the house become a hotel. Eve, the proprietress. Adam, a hole burnt in photos.  Still, the neighbors will call you a cat-lady, only a woman is never given nine lives. Only one. Goethe might have said — the individual has to be ruined again , but he was talking of men. Men were always talking of men. 
I had my own family once. Now, I practice forgetting them. A ritual of forgetting: perfuming my wrists, lip-sticking my lips. At first I grabbed at men’s hands as if I was in a state of endless falling. They were as slippery with sweat as my own body which kept opening and closing like a cactus flower in a long exposure photograph. I was not ready to witness my stigma unfolding. These days, I find myself looking into other people’s windows. I can’t imagine having a house again, though if I did, there would be a child in it. Good , the teacher says, now draw the child .  But when I draw the child she has three heads, a tail, a mirror instead of a heart.  The self is a house that can only be abandoned once. Though the stairwell un-spiraled, and the claw-foot tub walked off with the body of a drowned girl, and the windows shattered with the aftershocks of loss. All that’s left of the shutters and doors are golden hinges gleaming in sunlight. The sink too gleams with the glass, and gears, and hands of every watch and clock dismantled. Their batteries buried too close to the water source. This happens all in the background, in the foreground one Venus devours the head of the other Venus. It’s a kind of ritual, a type of coupling.  
My husband taught me to use sandbags to protect our house against flooding. Before I married, I thought I was the ocean, an endless ecosystem. A young man I loved said I was only a shallow lake. He hated me for marrying a man twice my age instead of him. Even shallow lakes can flood a house under severe weather conditions.  My husband took the sand and buried me, poured it into my lungs every time I tried to speak. He taught me, love was a dangerous word to use. Say it and someone might claim you, possess you so completely that you must raise your old self from the dead just to survive.  It’s true, in time you come to love your captor. Until the word is only a rope linking you, one, that like an umbilical cord can get wrapped around the neck. 
for semilore california’s first rain in months & two black girls biking down the wet earth semilore carries knuck if you buck on her tongue the whole ride, says black people like rap so much because it is release , sometimes the beat falls from our black mouths like a howl, the pink of our tongues blooming in a dark room, where no one thought it would & how we open a wound and make garden out of it, how we part the sea with our teeth where an ancestor might have jumped from a ship into, how we do it with language & the ocean’s salt stains our words white. ghost me this way:  with our music keeping us closer than the way they packed us on ships with my mouth perpetually open like a wet rose, songing a scream with my hair plaited & greased down by grandma’s hands with the magnolia always in bloom like grandma’s hands as she plucked cotton from the root in her youth, or mended a shirt a wound on my leg, as she turned the steering wheel and drove aimlessly for hours for all the time women like her were refused mobility. Grandma presses a foot to the gas & a slave girl comes alive inside of her, trying to move, wanting to be so close to us & semilore’s voice is somewhere in that in between, the lyric cutting itself in half to cut across time like a wet blade & california turning two black girls into water, our shirts sticking to our backs so close to us we want to be so close to us 
​It hasn’t been a good year, but it’s almost over now, the me who lived it almost dead, tossing and turning under white sheets. I’m packing up the house. I’m taking everything: all the jewelry, all the knives, even a child I found, just born, black around the neck. I’ll raise her as my own. Nurse her with the tap water I’ve drunk all my life. If she cries, I’ll put her to bed, light a cigarette, crawl in with her, cradle her. And if the old me drops by, childless, knife-handed, and demands her fair share, I’ll swear I never knew her. Maybe she’ll weep. And I’ll weep with her, my new life curled between us. I’ll invite all the other mes: crawl in, cry . We all deserve an apology. We all deserve death. Somehow ​we get by with neither. Time passes. Everyone forgets. 
​A black & mild alone is my daddy leaving. The bud of plastic recedes when it’s still burning. The nub is ash. Ashiness means I lack coconut oil: virgin only — contend with the politics of that. Now complicate: my father thinks he’s my father. I’m saying ownership. I’m saying my last name is leash-like. Now complicate: I wanted the boy to leash me. A bitch . & here I call him my first father daddy . I don’t answer the phone for either. Call me a sickness. Me & ___________, old enough to father me, fuck in a federal building. I know how to desecrate. I’m scared. Complicate used language: up in flames goes a building full of my fathers. 
I was born on a sideways twilight w/ cars passing the interstate the nurse telling mama don’t breathe like that honey you’ll wear yourself out but mama spilled salt crossed her legs when I crowned the blue of laid down carpet blooming freesia her packed suitcase beneath a window the apology pinned to my chest she tried to be forgiven by baking pound cake heavy & rich cast in a sugar- speckled block cut into thick slabs insects butting against glass—it was lilacs not freesia spilling from windows—how could I forget mama I slid from you wings closed an almost glittering bird 
even dead Aunt Blanche at the dining table séance predicted I’d get killed by a bus only mama said it wasn’t so her flannel robes flapping open in summer you’re fine she said fine as a goose-down pillow I cashed a check for my first stilettos on S. Salina at the discount store traipsing kitchen hip-swing and tossed-back hair sprayed mint on my tongue and soaked orange peels overnight on the sill — none of them thought I’d turn out right  
What I didn’t know was that while I was being born, I got stuck inside of my mother. The doctor had to use a cone and a tube to vacuum me into the world. The pressure from the tool squeezed my soft head into the shape of a triangle.  In the weeks following my birth, my father would hold my naked body in the shower and gently massage the rough corners of my skull, almost managing to right the disfigurement. He tells me this story  in a letter he writes twenty-two years after my mother and her baby fled his home. And now I understand that the odd head I’ve lived with isn’t the result of genetics. It’s a wound. How little I knew of all my father’s hands could do.
“I'm nearly up on the moon and didn't need a rocket.” –Patsy Cline  Imagine a man     a sailor on a black boat  throwing an anchor into the night  and Marilyn Monroe twisting in the sky     pushing  her white dress down as I  take off my clothes walk into the great  lake and die 
To walk with him into the city and watch the sweat come off of him in rivulets like how she imagines God would reveal himself  as saltwater on a forearm, as saltwater on the brow  and, even if it wasn’t God, Laura would still place her palm on the small of his back to feel the dampness there   *  Before Franky left town for good, he picked her up and they drove to the Kingfisher. They sat at the bar. Laura remembers. She ate the green and salty olives off the wooden pick. She drank until she ​was a body. The mood she wanted was called “river.” Once, when Laura was small, she sat in a canoe with a boy. His mom owned all the Wendy’s in town.  He pierced a worm on the hook and threw the line into the brown water. Laura asked him if he worried about the fish,  how it would feel when the hook caught its throat. No, the boy said, he didn’t worry about that. What he wanted was to feel  the tug, to take the live, wet thing and show it to her.  *  In one picture of Laura, she wears a man’s coat. It’s red, with fur lining. Too big. Her left breast is exposed. Whose coat is that? She is standing in front of a laurel tree. It’s dusk. Or it’s dawn and she’s been up all night. Laura is gazing at something outside the frame.  *  In her dream, Franky’s the stag. and she’s the hunter. Don’t listen to the people who say  he was the one who hunted her. The day Laura was born she started looking. ​​We have a house in the suburbs & it is quiet enough here to hear when flowers burst. When buds open their mouths to speak. It is spring. We have two kids & I stopped painting my nails. We have two prescription bottles of anti-depressants & your loneliness swallows them all one night. We have a roof that doesn’t leak & a Saturn Vue of mercury with squeaky brake pads. Every time we slow down it sounds like the car is warning. What small nag. Want. We speed up & our backs press flat against the seats. We speed up & want is the hum of the engine, the street lamps blurring past. We can’t move. We bought a vehicle of want. Our hearts rot oppressively in the trunk.   You tattoo an arc of I am, I am, I am .  Want under your left breast. You dye your hair  pink. You have your mother’s smile  & your father’s sense of humor. When he yells,  your lips flare & sun-scorch the walls,  radiating an attractive array of want.   I am not a good Chinese boy.  Your grandmother cries over dinner  but you say you are very, very happy.   I am eight & the boy I love lives in the attic.  I am eight & covet my sister’s flower dress.   No one tells me I can’t have the boy & the dress.  My want lives in marigold fingertips.   My want is the god of touch. My want petals  ​in spring & blooms all summer. 
​​I paint my nails in Blue Heaven ’s soft colors the way a beast might saw its claws  ​to dust the doorstep of spring.  shed teeth, shorn beak laid down  like an old blade begging  for flowers, instead.   call it burial  if it means I am becoming soil.   if I am more killable this way,  more human, too.   this prey in cropped cloth.  this prey with no sharp.   this way to the cat call.  this way to the plucking.  thick paws around the birdneck  squeeze, squawk, squeeze.  this way to the meat.  ​this way to the beasts who do not ask  ​permission or forgiveness.   I begged forgiveness in my beakless way:  lain out in a bed of snow  ​spread eagle wide as surrender.  
Baby Phat coat a feather-stuffed fist around my shoulders, I shuffle onto the playground ready to fight. I’ve clawed months of mornings out of my mother’s calendar to reach today: my official tryout for the Cool Black Girls of 4th grade. Legend has it their gossip turns to gloss on they lips. Legend has it they can suspend you with a look. The glitter-clique has a simple audition: memorize Missy and Ciara’s slick anthem for us and spit it like I got beef with the devil himself. My first lesson in what ferocity means to girls with our sunset skin. I wouldn’t call it courage, what nudges my hand-me-down Nikes anxious across the blacktop. Instead, I name it what we name the wolf’s instinct to bind to its pack. This beat is automatic . Who can call us prey when we fang like this? Side-eyes so box-cutter sharp no white boy has talked to Saniyah in months. Supersonic, hypnotic Everybody at recess know she lying about having a knife. But there are some truths you don’t let off the leash. Like how our mothers send us to school without popping the bubblegum dream that any of this will protect us. That there isn’t a world of things that want us dead that we can’t even pronounce yet. But I’m here, in the midst of this black girl blood recital, hoping to make the cut for safety. Deja don’t think I got what it takes. Asks why I don’t have the mandatory crush on Usher. And all I can think of is the way her eyes catch the light. Here I was thinking this club, this little swingset secret, was for black girls that love black girls for life. That wanted to hold a hand just as soft as theirs and know every good shade of forever. I tell Deja I would follow her lip gloss anywhere if she’d let me. But there are certain truths you don’t let off the leash. Deja suck her teeth. Tells me her mom said princesses don't marry each other and I become the swingset beneath her. Hold her every afternoon until she decides she’s outgrown that kind of freedom. It don't take long for my chances of friendship to rust in the rain between us. When I tell this story, I always say I pushed her off the swings. ​
​Everyone has a version of without. Here is mine—where someone has carved joan of arc is a lesbian into drywall like the subject of an online forum. Everywhere is the back of a school bus. Now is only getting to theater-kiss the thought of her. How do you know you like it if you haven’t tried? This here is a silk gag. A fuzzy pair of cuffs. I want to load my plate with caviar as though ​I eat it every day. I delete everything gay from my search history . French braid desire, tie it off with blue ribbon. Everywhere, cupping ​ our faces like unblessed water. ​
You cannot make a cabinet out of sadness.  You cannot make a show of it: sadness as gazing ball (i.e., garden globe, lawn orb.)  I had sadness by the short hairs, loved the proverbial much-older man, in image and idea.  The image: the tin roof, the heat. The idea: the cat.  In other words, there’s the cowboy, there’s the sadness of the land,  and then there’s the cow — ​
​When he said he hung—like flower wilt heavy on granite headstone—when he said he hanging—flags dangle from windowsills on war anniversaries—when he hooked—his arms grab my stomach as if it were a present. It’s Thanksgiving, I am eighteen and the first I spend away from home, heaped snow against frosted panes. The mountain road closed to all access. What’s the word for the space between a caress and a sore, that’s where I shored myself into his arms like a reef. He didn’t wear a shirt, but gave me a bathrobe the whole weekend (I wake up and he on top of me) we eat frozen pizzas together (I’m very forceful he says) I call my mom later that night (I don’t sleep) Yes, things are going well             I’ve made so many friends               I miss you too I’m not changing too much, don’t worry ​ 
​The night was like a planet turning on its axis tides shifting in some seamless, unnoticeable way.  I figured as long as I have to go on with this existing I might as well be irresistible, and so  buzzing, I took him like a small cactus fruit into my mouth.  I can be this whole tequila bar. I can be that blonde over there in a cropped t-shirt shooting stardust through the gap  in her teeth. Look—there she is kissing the raven-haired lady on the lips. And there in the crowd, a man is leaning in  and saying something no one will ever remember.  But listen close, somewhere in the mob  we can hear my Will To Live saying very carefully: really, I had a great time but this party’s almost over. 
We’re masters at performing; we’ve been conditioned… we wear masks, while passing and posing to our conditions that surround us. We are in the constant state of double consciousness. –Mickalene Thomas.  Jesus Christ was a superstar and his spotlight was under a zebra print lamp shade. I picked you roses and lilies.  All clouds are afros. You look like me, you look like you keep too much storm inside you. Makes you heavy. You look like your head is heavy. You must not hear the walls, playing all these records at once, for you. You must have forgotten how to be both earth and sky. You must not feel me loving you.  You once wanted to be a bouquet. Vibrant and flourishing.  You feel like the Earth itself. You feel like someone keeps trying to put you there. You feel like me. You must not like flowers. I named a throw pillow after you, on our couch.  There is irony in a cheetah-print throw. It is much like us. It is much like when decoration is made of the powerful. We are and we aren’t the lions we step on. 
​​The night will happen on my parents’ bed, after a forced family dinner of bread and cheese, after my panties flood  to mush. I’m trying to turn my stomach into a wedding. So I’ll call the neighbor. So I’ll take off my jean shorts,  one brown leg at a time, an angel falling from my pelvis. Then I’ll try to teach him blame, what dream-speak can do to a virgin. I’ll  show him the wall, the rim of the drain, the sound of water from the sink. I’ll show him how to clean what’s left of my body,  a silent pussy with no friends. And he’ll speak to it better than all the boys who have grabbed me and made videos  of me on a mattress. He’ll say: Let’s almost fuck in my van. Let’s tilt your anus. And it will throb, the space  between the first and second time— Repeat after me: I am the ocean. I am a liver. I am the bracelet on my wrist. 
Steak is abundant. He feeds the leftover mignon to the dog.  You try to negotiate the past.  When your grandmother dies, you let him touch you, no invitation, no fight. A part  of him wants sunshine, another part wants snow.  You learn to perform a window.  This is how memory happens— Here is another letter from the courthouse: Do you need protection  or a father? When you stick your fingers in the darkest hole, you feel almost feminine.  You tell the unborn to stay put. 
I will always answer to that story scripted for the insurance company:  the horse fell and broke his leg in the rain.  But the truth lies  deep in that burned-blonde blue grass of mid-November—  a Kentucky anesthetized  in miles of shank high weeds, horse’s jawbone hung from a tree with fishing line. The truth is  I share the taste of blood with this night, here,  where the ninth key unlocks the gate, red mist spins like a summoning across the frozen grass, in a truck’s brightly lit passing—  a stallion’s eye fans open.  The year of my birth, the year of no escape  the place of the stallion stalled, and the horse killer’s calm as he enters. He kisses the silver  doorplate carved for Alydar like it will bring him luck.  He smooths down the hair on the inside of the horse’s cannon bone as he binds a rope bound to that pickup truck’s axle to it.  Alydar and I are locked together by that  rune of frantic wait— losing our minds not on the smell of blood but on knowing its coming can’t be stopped. No matter  the slide step to flee fall rise, fall and still  the truck engine fires.  I’m in his mind as the ground jolts from under him and spiral shatters heel to hock.  Our twin moons of bone twist apart in the same place—  I am marked by that  spell cast,  lone kitchen match,  the horse torched for the insurance  because when I say the name Alydar I say I couldn’t save you,  I can’t save myself. I can’t stop your story from repeating itself. What happened to you happens to me.  My boyfriend breaks my wrist.  I cannot explain how I walk through a human midnight and still have nothing to say.  I say  “It was a mistake, promise me never again. Tell me accident, tell me the truth and I will believe it.”  I change— become desperate, reckless, clawing at the needles of bone turning to crows under my skin.  Is there a place where this transformation doesn’t happen? Because each time I repeat  that story of empty, rainslick parking lot, how my boyfriend how this love of my life said  “ Look at me, bitch. Get back in the car—”  he breaks it again. And I never leave this parking lot, this sky colored raw, a state populated by ghosts.  The dead master us first, doorkeepers, those who wrench back the deadbolt—  Kentucky, roll open  under my feet your one hundred years of horses collapsing against bolt pistols, before grandstands, stripped of roses, in your slaughter  house of bone and the hush of tomorrow never comes.  I wish that silence held some passage to forgetting or loosening the knot of time,  wish that silence could spare both Alydar and I from a past that is not past.  Tonight it is still 1990.  Blood eyed Beelzebub is playing horseshoes at the cemetery gates, foxes unbutton themselves from night’s skin, arrive to chew our bones’ broken flesh savory with hormones of panic,  and once more I’ve begun my rush toward story’s end—   tell it to me again.  When I speak Alydar, I call him from grave’s opening, drag him through his tomb of frozen grass back to all of this—  and I know better than to wake the dead when I can’t sleep myself but I can’t be alone  when the crows call and sunrise curls the silver plate on his door to powder, boils the water in his bucket,  breaks again the bone night swore it could heal—  another ritual to shrug and turn from—  but how else to know if I will live? How else to know when the grass will inherit me?  I need some answer other than ghosts other than the living  horse blacked, crippled, stumbling fractures to compound half believing he will rise—  but he’ll join the dead by morning’s shunt  blaze of bone or glare of ice,  by moon fade, by graveyard lights. ​   ​
​​I do not wish for pink blossoms or bare ankles.  I want the winter back, the grey slush of snow, the bodies wrapped in scarves, the surprise of a  pink cheek through the static.  There are no flowers, only worms floating in ice cold puddles,  making their way up the driveway, splayed out upon the carpet.  They seem panicked, searching for their dark wet of earth.  The other animals walk in pairs, their hands knotted together as they wait for the city to fill.  It has rained for days but Noah is nowhere to be seen.  I built the boat with my bare hands while he slept, dreaming of rain.  You can talk about floods all day long, I said, but someone’s got to do the building. 
​​In my republic what remains is soil, but on all the roads in Buenos Aires I am invisible. Borges sends me a note I read it and hide it in my pocket. On my way to the train station, the university empties behind me.  Every Latin American story should end in crucifixion. How much courage would it take for a foreigner to die in the pampas? I have nothing left to abandon.  Words are wealthy, I think to myself as my wife breaks pan de agua over the table. She has been speaking in short sentences since our argument on Quincey— we don’t fear life but it also arrives suddenly.  My commute carries my grief through a city that eludes me. I have resided in these ruins disguising my own skeleton. But these ruins crumbled here from another continent.  My bag sits by the door digesting many languages. The Caribbean boy, the faculty calls me, insinuating an archipelago of savages. Knowledge is not insular. I correct them. In desperate prose they change what lies beyond the Patagonia.  On the margins of a story about God’s tongue, I scribble about Montezuma, stoned by his own people: how foreign those rocks— at least that’s how books tell it.  I have written an ode to El Rio de la Plata but I do not mention how it drowns me daily, how I feed it manuscripts and passive prepositions.  Borges wants me to help him convey the mind of immortality. I suspect he wants to resist forgetfulness. The way he writes in Greek about what he has not seen, makes me wonder about what he writes in other languages.  I walk down a gravel road that leads me noisily— a reply in three brief sentences. Rushing across the platform as the train departs I stumble tired into a mute journey. My hat rests there on the floor as everyone notices me dying. The last thing I think about is Hermes, if he ever sailed across the middle passage, if he would ever deliver Borges a message from me, in Spanish. 
​​I was his weekend    his midnight his five    calls at five a.m. for five hours I was no       lover I was his    later his     ladder I was pared & parted I was his she’s creeping a round the wallpaper down the hall with the darkness sitting  on his chest his three a.m. I was highway his road beer I was waiting on the other    line while he waited at the liquor store    gas station    grocery six pack   hidden at the bottom of the bag did I think   she’d like his roses    did I think she’d live his lilies did I    know anything    to do about all of these graces these grooves into which suffering    settled like a swan songed over &   into an outing in every dream a field   greened I wanted liquor   lapped up like a cat  stealing your babies’ breath I was the woman who flew who broomed him I was the man who fished in his fly    I was the one    who didn’t want to    say    because his far body couldn’t    find a way to enter    mine because I didn’t want to keep    wanting I was a low    rung on his ladder but he held my head    down anyway   forced his man his hood his  words into my mouth every   pill & every needle every night stripped   down to its singular   & acute angles of    alone every moment I sang    & sweat & suffered in     the caving shelter of this bed-self was & is     only my own absolute fault    my sweet cyanide a capsule bed &   a bad radio    a voice made of wind & France shuttered in its grace    did I know this    pleasure was its own gun    all of my evenings heaved    & helloed loved into lust & clutch    climbed into bed & a body    I have a hunger an open throating       through midnight      for mercy         o lord        let me be          my own peace ​
I keep waking up in different beds and in this same body. I have to say this right away so you know it didn't start with limbs slackened, hair oily, a cruelty towards the sun. It started in the backseat of Jessica's Pepto-dismal truck. She tied my hair back with rubber bands when the freeway passed clean through us. Jessica says I can feel like a cherry blossom tree wobbling under lightning. Jessica has a forehead scar from the deep end of a pool. I ask Jessica what drowning feels like and she says not everything feels like something else. That night we lose the 7/11 lottery but I draw my lucky number, no quarters so we scratch our tickets with fingernails. Jessica says that's the sanctity of ritual— a ceaselessness in how I look at every drop of rain before it touches ground, the way Jessica mouths my name in her sleep eating each syllable like a minor god. I'm coming out as someone who loves things unevenly, my theologies strewn out in the dark, this iPhone an almost oracle. Jessica forces me to watch every sunset even when I am full. She puts her fingers in my mouth and says open your eyes. Open them. You see the small-town girls on big billboards? One day that's us. 
I remember the nuns / arrived in an oxcart / wheels splattered brown / with mud I wanted to scrape / off with my fingernails / after being rubbed raw / in a ceramic basin of hot water / There was something I liked about leaning out the window / levitating over the field of onion bulbs / and the nuns swooshing / over manicured grass and volcanic ash / in habits I wanted to hide beneath / Sister Carmen scrubbed the blue hexagonal tiles / in the operating room / I only entered once / when that boy cried every night / and once I opened the door / I could only see his feet / sticking out from beneath a beige sheet / I wanted to fold / over myself with him / Sister Concepción loved everyone and no one / repeating that Christ conquered / death and now walked among us / Sister Engracia eyed me like a bare-shanked screech owl in the rafters / when I strung that boy’s arm / over my shoulders / dragged him down the stairs / for air / Sister Mercedes braided my hair / un- raveling in the wind / when that boy with a face / waxy like a cheese rind / quarantined himself from those / he loved most / An orb of a face in the upstairs window / A face I haven’t seen since / And a few days after we buried Sister Mercedes / at the bottom of the hill / I  smelled the rosemary on her hands / and knew she was stuck / in the quicksand of our corridors / gliding among us ​
Here is where pilgrims / were robbed in the Middle Ages / if there’s anything / you can rob from a pilgrim / that isn’t faith / and here is where we finger / a jar of olives curbside / like we’re only kids / gulping through whatever we’re given / Pull-tab cans of black beans / Makeshift quesadillas on a clothing iron / Ridged avocados we never let rot / because even then / we counted quarters / slices of bread for our next feast / hours of sleep / that even now we lack / from one Galician hamlet to the next / And I hesitate to say that last night / bunk rocking when I moved / unhinged / my fever dreams / about you echoed louder / each time we awoke / to wind smacking the albergue doors / to a trail of bumps / from neck to chin / some unidentified itch / In this one we’re Goya’s witches / in silk robes / no garlanded goat between us / but something we crave instead / because I know our walk won’t last forever / and our Colombian boys / trips to high altitudes / Alaskan sun warming the tips of our fingers / are excuses to keep each other longer / And those other witches groping the crows that glide / in the shape of a crescent moon / are those we’ll resurrect / from the procession of withered roses / crusted bugs and glass bottles on our windowsill / since there’s nothing more we can offer up / And here is where the pilgrims came / on the verge between this cliff / and the end and / you know I’ve never been any good / at keeping something alive / so we sit for now in this feral / silence and count each blackberry and broom / something we can devote / a life to 
​I need not choose a playlist tonight:
as one song is borne away with the traffic, another’s 
dispensed from a neighbour’s cracked window. And I’m grateful 
for things like that, the great invisible 
 
baroque work of kinship everywhere. 
It helps it’s a good song—reminds me that I, too,
am touchable. (And aren’t there those who are so tender
with me?) Even dark comes on gently 
 
this time of year, when the summer air is a palimpsest
of such competing musics, wingspans, garden parties. 
Often I’m stunned to find it’s dropped 
like a portcullis, enclosing me.
 
Speaking of enclosures, the psych ward, 
if nothing else, is an education. 
Observe, here: the thinning of membranes, 
meanings, a family’s patience. 
 
I tell my hands piano, pianissimo
when night hardens into something I can use.
Really I want no mouldable piece of it, want night 
to soften, never to wield it again,
 
and I want my life, I do,
though there’s nothing I haven’t angled 
against the body, and though my mind is torn 
and burned, and though it’s true
 
that I swell and diminish, and God, might as well be 
battened to moonlight—I swear 
there are rooms in me pure-filled with music. 
There are gentler darknesses.
 
Some days it’s as if I’d never been broken,
muzzled, left in the rain. A woman 
on the ward with me has beckoned me into her room 
(which is not allowed, but what do we 
 
madwomen care for permission?) 
to show me the tree that she insists has sprung up 
overnight, by her own magic—crooked thing,
and I don’t dispute it. How could I 
 
debase her now, deny that she is powerful,
consolable? In this, of all places. 
Besides, what have I made of my portion of night, or my
arboreal tangle of thoughts? Nothing 
 
as grand as a life. But I do, on occasion,
look up from the poem; laugh 
to be startled by dusk again: in which leaf-shadows 
mingle with tossed blossom beneath,
 
and above, birds serrate
the pink edge of the sky, and think,
now, which is the part of the heart 
that contracts around beauty? 
 
Yes, I can admit the world is beautiful,
even if it’s difficult to live, like slicing your thumb 
on a toothed jewel. Hell,
I’ll notice even now
 
a yellow field, concealing 
crickets and their brittle canticles 
as the coin of the sun
slots into earth 
 
and I mean it, I’d give anything to stay.
Just for that—and sudden trees 
and common music and the dark and gentle 
fact of being touchable. Because
 
the world is beautiful, and contains 
the people I love, and who 
would be tenderer with them?
My scales, fresh buffed opal. Sun
scented, a sequin dress, and fuckable.
                                                                       
I love my men, and when I don’t
I love the feel of them
                                                                       
powdered— dust of teeth and kneecaps.
Their ash beneath mint green acrylics.
                                                                       
I hex a boy and seethe,
you’re gunna love me.
                                                                       
When his eyes are empty
I demand he sing back:
                                                                       
not living without you.
                                                                       
It’s nice to hear. We slow
dance. I believe.
                                                                       
When he leaves, I hold him
to it.
 
God, when did I get so needy?
                                                                       
I own this realm! Two rivers, a continent.
Could split a sea and cat walk the middle.
                                                                       
Tear down the mountain.
An army of boys, like ants,
                                                                       
drown themselves to reach me.
What kind of diva gets lonely?
                                                                       
I’ve got the gladiola as
company.
                                                                       
I draw love
runes in the sand
and serenade what's left
of these stupid boys.
​what do I know about being black
but my mother's hand and mine

but my sister's back in her white white wedding dress
(her newly widowed face under new white hair)

but my brother’s black boy feet running running
against the NES power pad

(didn't know what was chasing him)
I knew it meant dad
 
would visit and the boys would be boys
the finger's narrow escape from fire-
 
crackers mommy in the night with fire-
flies I caught

my black meant country club
kids got out of the pool and I didn't notice until years later

but what do I know
may as well be white
 
except my grandmother washed white
women's floors and was common poor

except shawty what yo name is? and you talk white, you stuck up bitch
what do I know about black
 
but my obese african american woman fibroids
or the policeman’s gun to my face
 
the black policewoman, saying
but what you really gon’ be college girl?
 
or a white man who loves me and is
noticing my blackness a lot less lately
 
or another black woman trying to check me
on any given day in my grown ass life
 
Girl don’t
you say: oh, she’s basically white
 
and I know you’re worried
we can’t both exist
 
in some rooms, you know,
even the fact of the conversation is treason
 
2.
[well bottom][a shadow][anansi] [hottentot berry baker jackson] [nostrils] [hearted] [coal] [lips]
[2 million American prisoners] [Baldwin Lorde hooks Morrison][lung][lives matter][enuf for ya?]
The moon is no longer the thing in the sky ​that weeps. it isn’t creeping, making night fresh. it isn’t bright. the moon isn’t white. it isn’t half angel, half ice cream. isn’t the patron saint of ponds or no-longer-growing flowers or kissing. isn’t my cousin getting married today. it isn’t consonance or assonance or a bad habit, glare, or good praxis. not love or eternal loneliness or mac and cheese or watermelon or a lover’s heel. not coming or going. the moon isn’t an animal pinned in its sky, isn’t a flat eye roaring through its dusted lip. the moon isn’t syntax or the ambassador of our hatred. it isn’t the bleached nectarine we thought it was. it isn’t eating curried crab with krishan at new kingston. it isn’t zero shot, zero killed in chicago and isn’t as beautiful as illinois. it’s not rabelais or larry levis or jesus, jeffrey williams, or jo malone. it isn’t what keeps getting lost each time this happens. it isn’t subuxone or lunesta or the applause from the well-jeweled fingers at the park avenue armory. not a state of the soul nor a white ox pulling at its plow, falling to its knees. the moon is not a prison and not a floating hill of eggshells crying. it’s not a creation myth, where the sky is the corpse of an ancient giant, whose blood became the mountains and whose eyebrows nourished the grasses and whose black, empty mouth holds a single crescent tooth, the moon is not that either. it isn’t for our sins in taqueria lupita, it isn’t the geese or whatever the geese wait for or the white-tailed deer. the moon isn’t something you call by its first name, like a son. isn’t coming nearer if you call it, like a summer, which, when it comes, barely hurts.
Hollow wing of sex you whistle inside me at night
I hiss beneath warmth and I whistle at night
We touch and we touch
We velvet thunder, we a rabbit’s panicked life
There’s a smoke alarm in my heart that whimpers awake
Awaken warmth your hush of roses smolder in me
I waken and fold to parentheses you whisper I whistle my wing
                                   turned to tinder
Whistling to my dear winter cinders build a nest in the rubble
You divine breath from splintering ice
 
We touch and we chill
I whistle velvet I’m whistling still
Smoke alarms in my heart that jolt you awake
Awake in the warmth and awake in the night I rabbit I rise
You rose, my thunder, there’s smoke in my heart
 
I whistle and hiss in the night
We make a rose from the thunder at night
A hollow wing a divining of breath my lunatic drum
Drum of throat hunted drum of tongue                                  
Body a tundra a rabbit too white in the blushing spring
Run quicker you panic you doomed velvet hum
 
You drum on my throat and you drum on my tongue
Love is a rabbit you whisper I whistle you splinter my ice
Alarms waking roses the warmth of the night
We touch and we touch and I fear
 
Hollow wing of sex
Rare mammal of flight
We whisper to warmth and we hiss in the night
​The first lesbians I ever met
               lived above us in the duplex
where we failed to escape our father
               that midas, how everything
he touched turned to crack & his fingers a fuse
               & I never saw them but once
playing with a dog happy
               not to run or chase or hunt
my street all shadow, heart a firecracker.
               She asked if I wanted
to feed the dog a treat
               & I couldn’t say the breed
or size, happy enough
               to pet a dog at all
& hear someone say
               that I was a good girl
feeling not so good
               the year Michael Jackson         
sat in trial & everyone said
               it’s obvious he’s gay
gay meaning guilty
               me a guilty girl
talking to strangers
               and petting strange dogs
then time was a breath kicked
               out of my belly and I
became myself
               a lesbian living
in the second story of a duplex
               this second story without a garden or a dog
just a staircase to sweep
               on the sunny weekends, plants to water,
soup to brew,  
               ​someone to love and recycling to sort.
Scavengers find the doe before us, but we find
             what is left— bloated stomach pulled so tight
the skin split beneath their beaks
             ​like the seam of a leather canteen. Intestines,
still spotted pink in the dark rotten, slip
into snow. The stink of old blood and mold
rising into the chill. Viscera stitched together with lace-
webbed sinew—   
             I barely recognize the heart,
a muscle like any other.
I can’t look away. The doe’s mouth: unhinged
steel trap. The neck bone snapped and curved
back like a ceramic bowl. He and I stand still over the body. Afraid
             it means never being able to leave him,
 
I do not tell him that I’m pregnant.
I know the next time I make him angry,
 
             he will kill the baby.
             ​I want him to.
​would have worn
his bruises like
badges, like a good girl
scout, filled kelly
green sashes
with little white scars.
would have cut out
my tongue and braised
it with port wine,
served it to him
in an ivory bowl
carved from the back
of my skull.
would have melted
down every family
heirloom to fill
the cracks
in my bones
with gold and platinum,
cradled
his childhood
like armfuls of gray
maggots, sang lullabies
to his blood-
crusted knuckles,
would have bowed
in prayer to the oak
roots that bulged above
the dirt
when they reminded me
of the angry
veins in his forearms.
would have kept living
that way forever,
offered my teeth
like handfuls of opals, stayed
hungry for blood
in my mouth, kept
my skin pale and shaved
thin, let him
kill the baby
just to convince myself
he’d kill me too
and he wanted to
and if I loved him
then I’d let him
and what kind
of woman am I
if I loved him
and I did.
​Overnight, the cobwebs latticing my rafters
reform with a new word torn
 
into their margins. Dragonflies, mid-
mating, gather as my mother’s silhouette
 
at my doorstep, then disperse into
heat-warped ribbons of air. Revelator,
 
what use are these auspices now?
I sleep with a bundle of peonies in hand &
 
wake clasping a widow’s unbodied
fingers. A radiovoice drones about
 
Christ lecturing the Samaritan woman
on the economics of pleasure, & I know
 
a syringe was the last thing to thumb the divot
of my partner’s elbow. Please, let me go
 
unblessed. Let me dart into whatever mouth
swallowed her & mistake its warmth
 
for hers. When I at last tear these tarps
from the window, let light gnaw into
 
my eyes, the way nightcrawlers burrow
through a dead doe’s sockets to find
 
brain, gutstring, heart—that cherished
slurry of softs & salts & reds.
​wa the rivers in my house burn
 alive      they wave their  hands  salam
then goodbye    barra al beit  al bahr   is
dead again wa  hungry                        
tonight it is earth’s turn
to wrap around itself    sweetwater
 ebbs   wa does   little to nothing    else 
tonight the tide is infinitely                 
 aware of me too
only   i  can tell the water  when it’s time
to go home   tonight  i  become mother-like
 wa  warm                           habeebati
tell me   have you ever had anything
as delicious      as sleep
​​Two crumbs of it fall from my center and plead
              for offspring, or inventory. It’s Sunday,
 
and I am close to the wind and wordy, flipping
              my pancakes for God. Don’t mistake me
 
for the static inside a fence. I’ve been known
              to reach over and feed my heart a berry.
 
I’ve been known to spin in my watermelon dress,
              seeds flying as I jump the rails, ready
 
to root and face the sun. I first heard
              God’s laughter on this very lawn, noticed
 
how my teeth roll off the cusp
              of his every breath. I cheer for him now.
 
He missed two belt loops this morning.
              ​I want to tell him, but I am busy seeing.
 
Songsmith, booking agent: I have a contract with God.
              I am desperate to cultivate his waste places
 
and run a factory. The holy spirit is in my
              mouth. Like some yeast rising, I am defined
 
by my tension, or patience. I show up
              ​with my begging bowl and bread falls in. 
​I was told you’d use your hands./ I was told Reason, and thumbs/ were our great advances.
Now --/ after the borders/ of pink and white meet the telephone/ wire/ pylons -- you lace
your arms./ In sleep/ you use your hands./ In sleep we are/ naming/ our kin. Holding them, and/ raising them up/ above our shoulders./ In sleep/ lavender and grey are still/ distinguishable promises./ Today, horizon/ the color of/ mud/ and the earth, is/ mugged proving/ less/ crustaceous than before./ I want you to/ touch me (here). I want you/ to use/ your hands. I want/
to own/ everyone/ who’s ever held me./ I want the people/ who have held me/ to wish/ I were real./ I still need you/ to keep/ all my secrets. In/ the morning, your Hebrew/ name/ metastasizes/ throughout the diurnal,/ into pale windows on Third/ St., the honeydews at St. Paul’s, bike/ racks on Columbia, and the/ hollow restaurants of Kendall./ The memory/ games we’d play./ I could never/ keep them/ straight. Your hands,/ the light/ wakes me. I already know/ what’s going to kill me/ is terribly /deep/ inside me./ I still need you. In my sleep/ I am/ on my way/ to some
 
viable/ mutation.\\
​​Pink bleeds into evening. The final flecks of November, a soft blue. Goodbye
jacaranda leaves rustling, sprinklers in the buffalo grass,
a busted sidewalk beneath a bay fig’s shade.
I wanted you, but still I hid. On the rooftop,
beneath the sky-glow, shadowed palms swayed.
While you grew sad beneath me; the weight, a tender sore.
Brake lights pumped through Silver Lake, then disappeared into pepper trees.
In the foothills, tiny wildfires burned; over the Pacific,
planes rose and fell; the city, a jeweled motherboard.
Loneliness, its private wave. A flock of wild parrots
chattered in the neighbor’s Indian Laurel, descendants from a Bel-Air brush fire,
from Pasadena’s theme park. Where solitude built its current—  
trips to the chandelier tree, cribbage in the hotel, the trouble with joy.
Along the dry river bed, a methadone clinic—Skid Row now Hope Central;
I fired a revolver into a warehouse wall
on your birthday, sober. I remember angels' trumpets blooming
against that Melrose bungalow, soccer jugglers in Bellevue park,
Montana can graffiti in the freeway heavens.
I looked at rings. I returned from Austin. I entertained my mother.
It’s hard to remember every dragon snap, every peony,
every trip to the trash. For you, every hand drawn card and candle.
My box of personal items in the corner of a shut closet,
but outside the greasy window screen, we stood in awe of the rain.
Then, a cold snap spread, the way summer ends early. 
Both tethered and alone, the body cries.
Clear encasing, skeleton as sonic tongue.
 
We don’t just harbor rhythm, aporetically,
we dock the statutes of wobble and fat,
 
as an ocean of subterranean glint is cued.
Cop that sweat if you can and you can’t.
 
                     “We call it scalding the air.”
 
I dance and the world is vestigial.
I dance and the steadfast vulture loses speed.
 
Blessed wrench of the bump and hustle:
unlock the radiator, let us steam in love--
 
and talk a whole lot of shit as we do.
This, our sound registry, fastened to a stone.
​In each of my favorite scenes
the actress undoes
her jewelry. She is preparing
for sex: The rings
twisted off and discarded
beside a bowl of fruit.
The necklace drips from a finger
to the floor. Now we are in the sun
as she experiences it,
our vision consumed by grass
and raw dirt, blots
of peeled, radiant sky.
Her stomach is a white stone
like the ones that caught moonlight
among black stones
in the streets of Pompeii
exposing a path to chariots
as they swept through at night.

At the bar I see a man
with long hair. I’d like for his hair
and my hair to mingle
in such a way that it becomes
impossible to tell our hair apart.
The men in Pompeii
would point to a sex act
painted above a doorway
and walk through that door
and sometimes it is as simple
as that. On a hike I lay myself
down on a slab of rock
and say, I am to be sacrificed.
Something about the slab of rock—   
how unadorned it is,
how it receives the sun’s heat
without any reticence,
no matter which animal. 
​​You don’t know whether the current flows
along with the direction of the planet’s turning
or in opposition. I turn my camera vertical
to take in the far edge of the pink lake.
I’ve seen lakes flushed from bacteria,
rosy from algae, and salty as eyelids.
You said the opened body you saw into
shocked you with its rich pink.
More bubblegum than I would think,
more luminous, as if the white paint
had spilled into the red.
Where you expected death
to be ascetic, you found noise, glow,
insistent echo. Like my voice voyaging
toward you through stupor.
You kept your skin zipped up all the way
to California. Maybe your spirit
will find its next environment
more hospitable. I don’t know
whether love flows in agreement
with the cosmic machinery or in defiance
but this question is immaterial for you,
who cannot stand to watch a bloom open,
not even in California,
where there will be no refusing the sun.I catch a good-looking black man
by the finger

he laid on my shoulder to get my attention.
A mistake--

he says--Thought you were somebody else
by your ink.

I say--I know how this city's covered
in art,

but I don't have a drop of color
in me.

I grasp his finger, his hand, his arm
examining

the garden that flowers there, ripe
with grammar

I can't decipher though I follow its reds,
blacks & blues

into the obscurity of his shirt sleeve.
I think

to hoist myself into his arms, to peel
--slowly--

the clothing from his shoulders
and ask him

will he read to me each hieroglyphic
inch of skin

over and over until his colors
bleed into me.
With fingers dirty-and some
threshold-straddling feet-
I was picking for the census.

This quiet home, his paper,
split for me to three refined
columns to Rome within.

If it wasn't dinner time,
if I was 16 instead of poor,
I might have listed everything

I've ever been accused of.
Mistaken for. Lumped with.
And shown him the dotted lines

of the green card that came
with this brand of skin.
But I was hungry still,

so I let it be, for the sake
of this proceeding. Twilight,
which always leaves us empty.

Rush-hour on theAtrain. A blind man
 staggers forth, his cane tapping lightly
 down the aisle. He leans against the door,

raises a violin to chin, and says I'm sorry
 to bother you, folks. But please. Just listen.
 And it kills me, the word sorry. As if something like music

should be forgiven. He nuzzles into the wood like a lover,
 inhales, and at the first slow stroke, the crescendo
 seeps through our skin like warm water, we 

who have nothing but destinations, who dream of light
 but descend into the mouths of tunnels, searching.
 Beads of sweat fall from his brow, making dark roses

on the instrument. His head swooning to each chord
 exhaled through the hollow torso. The woman beside me
 has put down her book, closed her eyes, the baby

has stopped crying, the cop has sat down, and I know
 this train is too fast for dreaming, that these iron jaws
 will always open to swallow a smile already lost.

How insufficient the memory, to fail before death.
Who will hear these notes when the train slides
 into the yard, the lights turned out, and the song

lingers with breaths rising from empty seats?
 I know I am too human to praise what is fading.
 But for now, I just want to listen as the train fills

completely with warm water, and we are all
 swimming slowly toward the man with Mozart
 flowing from his hands. I want nothing

but to put my fingers inside his mouth,
 let that prayer hum through my veins.
 I want crawl into the hole in his violin.

I want to sleep there
until my flesh 
becomes music.
She fed him coins in his sleep. Every night for years.
Dimes.
A good Catholic, open mouth snorer. They slid easily down his tongue.

2.3 grams each. Collected at his feet. Cobbled his soles 
then grew from hills to silver mountains.

She did not think his chest a well.
Did not wish to cast him, to armor his organs.

No heart toll.
No love tax.

She was not a poet,
found no beauty in the way his hips 
jingled when they made love.

It was a necessity. The only way she knew to make a man stay.

Love. What worthless currency.

Unable to match the simple promise kept by the circumference of the esophagus 
and the weight of dimes.
cock feathers flirt 
early morning drip
and stutter. i mirror
cornfed thighs,
compare her
tinder. eyes like
a shih tzu's, weepy,
half-hidden
sturdy enough
to suggest she might
lick your leg upon arrival
or give you a good
fuck before dinner
for the hell of it and not
clamor at the thing
cold at her midnight back
and then again moving
toward mouth at 3am
where drool has pooled
since my childhood.

if she sees ghosts
and spits on sidewalks like
spittoon's chaw and kicks
panties to whereabouts
unknown like can-can
dancers throwback thigh
and ruffle. how i do. how do i?
gunmetal of my toe
like a sandal's sliver.
and if she wears a bra
and if you mind salt
and crumb. nipples peel
like an onion
areola black watermelon
seeds and i wonder if you might
want a summer's taste
and mumble seeds
in your mouth.
and if you eat the rind,

if she shaves
and buys elotes from
the greasy hand cart
i have learned to trust
how mangoes ripen
on his plastic shelf
and kiss slits of cucumber
outside the currency
exchange during cloudbursts
and folly.

and if she is a bad woman,
good girl or wild,
wolf i be.
if i should leave nappy
woolly or well enough alone
and have me stick 'tween
your teeth like corn,
your covetous mouth
like a guest who eats much,
then leaves.
My voice does not sing along with Billy Joel in the shower. It does 
not paint the bathroom ceiling in the delicious murder of high notes.
I do not repeatedly talk myself along city sidewalks as if words hold 
the ability to propel my body faster. I do not read unbelievable 
pieces of literature, each line 3 or 4 times, terrified everyone gets it 
but me. I do not then make reference to how the story captured me,
how it has forever influenced my further artistic movements. I am not 
the white boy of your loose tongue - the impersonal, all-encompassing, 
white boy - not me. I do not sing, never. I am not human. I do not watch 
a blue-jeaned hip twist to the beat of a stoplight on 17th street, do not feel 
the whistle and spit already bubble in my throat. I do not speak, but 
when I do, I am not afraid my eyes have shown too much. I have not 
wrapped myself completely around what you think of me. I have never 
been persuaded to love without condoms. I never called it love when it 
should have been called penis. Called it love when it should have been 
called lonely. Called it love when it should have been called trying-too-
hard. My outer layer does not mask my secrets well. I do not feel secrets 
pressing the walls of my throat. I have never allowed ugly words to 
crawl inside my cheeks, then splatter across walls. I will not sing. I will 
never be a singer. I never named this voice beautiful. Never imagined 
the sky was a goal we could accomplish. I never thought we were the 
sky. People will always people. We do not name ourselves potential. 
Our skin is only a collection of cells. I do not name myself solution. 
Accountable is not a line in this story. Gravity will always keep us stuck 
to this floor. These bones don't want out of this skin. I do not wish to 
unlock my ribcage, say, Look - I made this. I do not bleed. I am giving 
you the entire story. You have already leafed through my pages. You 
have seen the whole show. Your approval is not my concern. I am not 
afraid to speak like there is something at stake. I am not afraid to finish 
this poem. This poem is not about me. I do not want you to listen. I am 
not afraid. I am not afraid. I am not afraid. Afraid not I am. Afraid not 
am I. Not afraid I am. I do not bleed. I am not human. I am not here.
I ate a burrito for dinner tonight.
My family rearranged the entire
Jewish calendar for Passover
to fall on a weekend.
It was more convenient for us.

We treat our Jewish like a distant cousin
we invite to weddings and reunions
where it sits at a corner table,
finishes the potatoes while the rest of us 
electric slide into another cocktail.

I never thought to count, but if I had, 
I imagine I could say I have gone 94 days
without my Judaism being a factor.
Moses carried the Israelites 
through the Egyptian desert for 40 years.

When I recite from a Haggadah, the part 
that gets me is- the children of Israel
have read this document for more 
than two millennium. I am a Gemini. I am 
Vegetarian. I am a Poet. I am Jewish.

I have procured so many definitions
it's a wonder I fit in my apartment. I once asked 
a gentile who had been my girlfriend for seven months 
(over a Caesar salad) if she believed Jesus Christ 
died for her sins. I don't remember

if it was Sunday. But if it was, we had spent 
the entire morning wrapped around each others' limbs 
like rope. Ultimately, she said yes. Then we went 
to the movies, or a park bench, or we didn't go 
anywhere. We never thought to discuss it again.
This young man wants me
to entertain men and women
like I'm some young hot thing.

I like that. I ain't been young
since before the depression.
He offers me the chance

to be pressed onto black vinyl.
This club on Chicago's lake front
is gilt and I'm ready to beguile.

When I enter the Apollo
I bring in the sun
through thunderous applause.

Here these folks don't know me
yet. Hugh knows I got what it takes
to bring the house to its knees.

It's August 1961, Chicago is hot
I'm an old cool grandma
making Jim Crow look like the fool

he is. The bunnies serve drinks.
Mr. Hefner's place services desires.
I offer mirrors then smash

our images of ourselves. It's good 
to see that we can be something better 
than when we entered this house.

Men and women of high brows, long money
and reputations as big tippers. No one 
is allowed to touch a tail, thigh, just tip.

These folks laugh and I know the record
will sound good because nothing's sadder
than the sound of half laughs and no claps.

I know this is going to be a good night
when Hef has his own hand on his chest
his buttons pulsating with his own joy.
I want a man who can play a trumpet, 
a chet-baker-square-jaw-jazz-man, a man 
who understands embouchure, who knows 
what to do with his lips and tongue, who 
knows what to do-and what not to do- 
with his teeth. I want a man who knows 
how to breathe, a long slow exhale, past 
himself and through you, into you. I want 
a man who can make a brass horn sing, 
scream a little, scream loud sometimes, 
a melody, a harmony, a whispered prayer. 
I want a horn man, a brass man, a trumpet 
player, a man who knows how to blow, 
how to make his lips buzz, how to double 
tongue. I want a man who will make love 
to music he makes up himself, who'll make 
me want to respond, react, breathe back, 
sway my hips in bed. I want a man who 
will make me feel like I'm an integral part 
of an orchestra, or make me feel like an 
intimate part of a jazz ensemble, or make 
me feel like the mouth of a river, a tributary, 
the current that carried Moses, that made 
him a king, a hero, a savior, a man.
At nine years old
I was teased

for stealing the magazines
on the back of the toilet

my father, called me
a lesbian.

I cried, shoved
my fist

in my mouth, until
the corners of

my lips
bled. I waited eight years

then fell in love
with hard, pink nipples

made sure
the corners of her lips

never bled.
1.
Her voice is a black-lunged
miner gargling glass and gunpowder,
She uses the word "ignorant" incorrectly
without a trace of appreciation for the irony.
Her wedding dress was in camouflage.
The first day of buck season is a family holiday.

2.
In the back yard,
there's a pole with three flags.
Ole Glory,
the Stars & Bars,
and a Rainbow.
She added the third one
the day after her baby boy came home
from school with knuckledust
chiseled into his teeth,
and Rorschach tests bruised into his back
to re-brand him from football hero
to town faggot.

3.
Hovering just below the stink of petroleum,
a residue of bitterness in this town
bubbles like Drake's Folly earning its keep.
With no lynchin' tree to swing in town square,
some folks have a real hard time
figuring out who they should hate.
It's the only time they ever thank God
for the gays.

4.
The fiercest creature nature ever sees
is a mother bear in protector mode,
and Kathy, you
are full grown grizzly. The neighbors
with their double barreled buckshot mouths
don't scare you. The matchstick messages
sent to your front door can't make you run.
I'm glad you found your claws, though I
wish the cost was lower; no mother
should ever see what color her son bleeds.

5.
Kathy, please know that there are
such things as monsters. They
want you to live in fear; they say
a war is coming, and arm themselves
with picket signs and protests.
Fear and sickness have turned them mad
with hate. They claim the will of God
is that your son taste death, or at
least be sent to live in exile.
Etiquette would demand you let them
speak their peace. Maternal instinct drives
you to silence them with fists. Shake
it off. Their hatred and contempt are
only fragments of character, tiny imperfections
in the ore of human spirit. Stoke the fire in
your chest and raise your voice to a roar. With
enough heat and pressure, the flaws
of the human spirit can turn to gold.
1
she told me she'd distinguished the soul of a gator
by the taste of its spine, by how many taste buds
tore off upon it, ravenous. then she laughed
until a nymph spat out.
i married the swamp for nothin' but its mania.
she said it's the closest we can come to your mouth.
she begged me to one day bury her in the ozarks.

somewhere there's a licked-open cow gut, brandishing a voice
and face and hands, poeming: naw sugar, i just want to be loved.
somewhere a farmer is touching himself sober in the stalks.
somewhere a buzz of feathers and flies ensures nothing goes to waste.
somewhere, there you are, biting into barbecue sauce draped on a rib.
you tell me you know he loved you. listened. gave everything he's got.

2
sometimes you rattle into my mind and I want to pull the car over
and mold myself an ax. they say we're dust, right? we can cry ourselves
into mud, reshape our bodies, harden at noon. i was born a missing jewel,
natural as the swamp.

3
she was my favorite nurse. 1984. she wasn't scared by my body.
she didn't twist her mouth, proclaim my beauty through one eye.
when she spoke, her voice buzzing, i sunk into the bayou.
my blood cooled. my lips molten leather.

4
a beaten girl curls up under him, croons of a sweet jesus.
exhaled smoke unveils the exit lights.
the field misses her hands.
the scarecrows tell me they hang themselves.

5
i found a letter in the bayou, in the remains of a molded ax.
it was all in Arabic, the same as my name.
at the end, a voice:

find me.
The mulberry tree we found planted 
horizontal in my second-story 
window. Roots strangling the twin-
bed I had left for the safety
of the basement hours before.

The old farm wife who did not stop at the stop 
sign, instead buried her husband's 
truck into the crumbling earth of my father's
Oldsmobile, then blamed shotgun
holes in the stop sign and the height of the corn.

The height of the corn
when we had nothing 
to do with growing it.

Grandma pruning Grandpa's 
branches and moving into town. 
Leaving him, to tend her own
apple, lemon, and peach trees, 
a garden of rhubarb and spices.

Sugar's spilling
face, dangling red
and white fur clinging to 
her jaw. Dog whimpers. Coyotes
attacking in packs.

Siblings sniffling
in packs. Allergies
prowling our city
bodies like wild dogs.

The story I told at breakfast
to scare my siblings. The rat 
that clambered across the safety 
of my quilt the night before.

The same rat that mom caught 
before breakfast in a trap 
too small, its top half
still squirming, squealing, until 
her iron skillet found its skull.

Dad shaking, sobbing after 
burning the leaves and trash 
in the incinerator, and discovering 
our cat's first litter inside. 
This year-old-beard, the beers 
in my fridge, the sadness hibernating 
in my body like a family of bears 
will not survive the summer months.
I will chew off layers of my face
with dull scissors, and send the hair 
in green glass bottles to my closest 
friends. With these same friends, 
I will share the beer sweating 
through evenings singing in the sun- 
room. And the bears will leave 
the cave, to rollick and rampage, 
to seek out food for the winter 
cold, and will only return home
when their stomachs are filled 
and snow storms hunt the sky.
No voices, just the crump and thump of limbs
against the French door. I'm dozing on the floor

fighting off the drugs when a child busts
into the room and points out the smear

of omphalos blood and the green sneer
of the undead waving truculent at the glass.

I need a shotgun but what I have is a butter
knife. When the jamb breaks like a leg

I try to hit the bread in the throat but miss.
Behind me is my roaring teen with a shovel

who takes off its headShaun of the Dead-like.
I realize I'm dreaming and I laugh

but the suppurating bodies are livening
themselves now just for my entertainment

so I go to the closet and get the shotgun,
pull out the plug and load up with #4 shot.

The scene shifts. On my back I fight off
a woman who grips like a gorilla,

snaps at me with her long fangs.
I wake with my hand on my wife's throat. 
The second most popular time of year for the city zoo
is called Love Fest. Once a year, the city gets to watch
the animals mate. During the day, it's only the quick 
and quiet, sessions appropriate for a birds and bees talk, 
but not so graphic that a parent couldn't explain it away 
as, you know, two loudly moaning turtles just hugging. 
But at night, they let the real beasts go at it. Fundraisers 
for the zoo, businessmen & women drink champagne 
and in the safety of heated tram cars, they watch 
the tigers and lions fuck, classical music piped in.

The most popular time of year at the city zoo is called 
The Babies Are Here! It is the by-product of Love Fest. 
Oh, how everyone ooohs and aaahs over tiny tumbling cubs,
the tiny shiny lizards, and even shivering featherless birds. 
It's proof that the ugliest animals can push out cute kids,
which is something that citizens of this city are probably 
pretty aware of, as they push the ruddy-faced spawn
in giraffe-shaped zoo strollers, pleading with them to please
not cry, to instead look -- Look! -- at the baby animals, 
and aren't they cute? Did you know, the zookeepers ask, 
getting down on one knee, if you tried to get this close 
to baby animals in the wild, their parents would kill you? 
The parents nod to confirm this. The parents smile.
There are vegetables overflowing from every surface.
Growing from pots, saved from dumpsters, crooked
sculptures in bowls. The windows are open. Sampson
and Delilah are necking, frenzied black fur and growl.

Lemon Engine is learning the banjo. Cigarette perched
on bottom lip. Clumsy claw hammer. Occasionally,
she looks up to see if she is disturbing anyone. Even
the ceramic owls are tapping their feet. The ants two-
step along mean trails of cayenne. No one is going
anywhere.

The shower curtain keeps falling. The door is off its
hinges. This house is not used to such warm sirens.
Rising up smells like lavender oil and a pile of sweaty
girls. I fell off my bike yesterday; I've been admiring
the wound all morning.

Abundance is a handmade grail, filled with mulberry
mead. All these years, I had mistaken it for a clean
house and full bank account. When it came, I didn't
even notice the casual spill. How it stained the linens.
How it made every crevice glow so loud and sweet.
sack of pearls
bones rolling about
i am a marble maze
i rattle

my skin is the raw pink of a de-veined shrimp on a skewer
a steel spear to my uterus
i cooked
in a hospital bed for an eternity until i grew tough
tough enough to watch my limbs go bad without flinching

log leg
sever me timbers
"feet,
what do i need them for?"

i am anything but soft around the edges
i am no fleshy maiden with femurs like cat whiskers and holes
stretching open easy like balloons at the first push of a lip

this
is an apple pussy
stiff
as a wormhole
mealy meat and
no seeds
god dammit

never any seeds

he
has a mountain belly
hot cigar breath makes a canvas of my neck
a foggy window Haaah
and then a dragging of his fingers through his own mist

i am a wet car
all metal with rusty skin beneath this iron girdle
holding what's left of my organs in
a spear to my uterus

tell me this:
do the parts of me living feel him more intensely on behalf of the parts of me buried?
or
do my fallen limbs lie trembling like freshly shed lizards' tails
leaving this rotted wood carcass to feel everything in shallow reverberations. . .

he can never plant seeds.

we will never grow trees.

sever me timbers.

"feet?"

i am a vased flower tricking bees
smell sweet, no pollen treats
uprooted
but

he keeps coming back
smelling of other lilies
always
nose dusted with yellow soot
not mine,
but still coming
flushing me purple
crushing me into a feathered mattress
an avalanche to my chest
a burying and redigging up
a lolling in my pulp

after love,
inventory.
he shakes me
to see if I still live and
we listen for the rattle
You told him he was a good man,



his mouth is full of splinters.



His name is a clock you hang above the stove.

He wants to be your husband.

He wants to run.
You wait.


Babies reach for your breasts from passing
strollers. Your hips are an invitation.
Your face, a love letter. You wait.


He is beautiful in the morning-
nestles into your chest
as if you are something worth needing.
His eyes are a treason:


pairs of pearl-glossed lips,
chestnut braids. He feeds you his smile
like a string of candied gemstones.



His promises are gospel.
His skin,
flintspark.



The kitchen in your future is full of living.
Children and toy cars, rainbows crayoned
into counters. You wait.

His voice is the sound of gears
rotating in the hollow of a bell tower.
All you want is a pretty lovebird
to sing you to sleep.


Could not forgive yourself
if you ever had to walk out.



Proud. Lonely. Free.

When did your lips become echo?
Why couldn't you stop him?



Or did he just go?
Pack a satchel and run?
Where is he running?


Why are the dead the only ones you can love?


Don't you want to cut it out of you?
That incessant
thrumming?

This life is a hard dying.
A sick everlasting.
You call yourself fool.
Say these good hearts.
You give. God you give.


He is a man bound and bellowing.
Coated in sugar.

You dream someone is always
reaching for your hand
Kissing your sturdy neck.
You want to die in his arms- 

trapped between maybe and should.


How long before you just leap?
Say yes.
Say love.
Slowly the song crawls out your throat.
Your fingers are a nest of tangled thorns.

You want to be a better woman-but
you wait.
I want to point you out
in a crowded room say,
That's my wife, but

I associate marriage with death.
Last night, I couldn't sleep.
Heard wedding bells in the street.

You wait.

You wait.

You wait.
It is a quiet elephant I drag everywhere I go.
Attached at the neck by an invisible leash.



I want to watch the years build altars
of your face.

Nestle into your chest
as if you are something worth needing.

I want to fuck half of Manhattan,
forget their names and call myself complex.



You told me I was a good man.
But I am mere man, flesh and cheap
whiskey.


Flintspark.
I want to raise a defiant daughter.
A curious, sensitive boy with my mouth
and your hair.



I am a simple, easy-way-out kind of fool.




I never want to lose who I am.
Something must be surrendered.
Could not forgive myself
if I ever had to walk out.
I imagine my mother
abandoned in a marriage,
her face flood-ravaged. I see her now- 
Proud. Lonely. Free.
Single plate at a table for six.


I want to be a better man.
More than this circus show of impulse
and ache.


Where am I running?
I'm scared of coming home
to an empty house.

I will be there.
I wait.


Thrumming.

This life is a hard dying.
A sick everlasting.
I call myself fool.
Say these good hearts.

I am neither hero nor monster.
You gave me permission for what I am.



I dream someone is always
reaching for my hand
Kissing my sturdy neck.
I want to die in your arms.
I'm just
trapped between maybe and should.
Childhood nightmares and fatherhood dreams.

How long before I just leap?
Say love.
Say yes.
Slowly the song crawls out my throat.
My fingers are a nest of tangled thorns.

I want to be a better man- but
I wait.
the pink and fleshy occipital cortex
in a dark cave, wearing a furry loincloth,
finger painting on the inside of my eyelids

four wild hunters attack a reptilian beast
this is the drawing they will admire someday

my organs were around long before dinosaurs
my organs have died too often, stuck in resin
remains preserved for thousands of years

everything crawls out of an egg, not a mother
but Pangaea was born drifting into pieces

this is the myth chanted during thunderclaps
history has not yet begun, nothing is recorded
winter turns its belly to sun itself on a rock

extinction hangs its head like a toxic fruit,
its presence is ignored, even in desperation

here, intestine also means swamp-here,
my heart pounds its own chest with two fists
but there are no creatures left to threaten
The third time I was born
my shoulders were double jointed
and my mother named me
for the years I had slept in her mind-
the years I had wrapped
my arms twice around her womb.
Those first years we slept
shoulder to hip atop the wake
of the Oak bed - the sails of that house
swung open - our names carved in the floorboards.
Those were the summers moss grew in our cupboards-
the birthdays celebrated by baptizing our fists-
the evenings we watched the trains pull
people from our lives until their lights burned out,
swallowed in the heat rising from the earth.
I would lay on the gravel and lick the rust from those tracks
until my mother lifted my swollen chest
and wiped the blisters from my mouth-
hushing the war of my body with her silence-
rocking me against the sky until we both understood
how easy we were to leave.
There in the dark
my mother became the dreams of my father-
the history of a blue door - and we ran
like wolves and we drank from the Tukami until our bellies were full
and we could sleep in the bed of the river
with the moon in our throats.
These were the years my mother would speak of
when asked about the death of the trees.
This was before the migration - before she wrapped herself
around me like a dying pet and told me
of all those seasons I lived inside her without moving.
This was before she buried us in the pasture
behind the Railroad Station-
the wail of the last train
dying in our ears.
you want to change something about your life
but your lover took both pairs of tweezers.
so you settle for shaving your legs again
and writing around one calf
in drunken pen the lines you keep
reciting to yourself from Marie's poem
and which you will get
tattooed on that spot as soon

as the credit card company agrees
to pay for it: I am living.
I remember you. yesterday
you wrote a poem that began,
I go to work under a heavy
turban of grief and last week,
Gabi, I've been drafting epitaphs
all day - you find an old
pair of tweezers in the back
of the medicine cabinet

and get pulling. each sweet yank
a morsel of pain so good you begin
to understand those teenagers
who carve themselves into scarecrow
figurines. this small pain has
a location. a yes
and an end. what no one tells you
about grief is that it has no edges.
that no matter how much

you love the world, how grateful you are
for sunflowers and trashcans
and your unglamorously aging bones,
you'll still have dreams
where you're screaming across a table
at each other about something, you can't
figure out why until you realize

she died. and here you are. a dull
pair of tweezers in a cluttered apartment,
crying on the floor. you want to make
something beautiful out of your life
but you never learned to paint
and you're nearly 37. you have

no children and you burn dinner
more often than you dance. you feel

like a cloth set down on something spilled.
useful but soiled. handy, but not essential.
maybe you'll evaporate, or come apart

in the wash. maybe you'll figure out
what binds you to this planet
is not a magnet, but a cord so fine
you can slide it across one hand, fold

your fingers around the slippery
umbilical. pull. here is sorrow.
pull. and here is bread. pull. some light
breaks across the linoleum. pull.
where do we go from here.
I knew, but didn't have the words for it then.
red, a street sign's hint, hijacked lips,
a sort of silent agreement with myself.
compass point, my cherry skin, an afterbirth stain.

red, a street sign's hint, hijacked lips,
you'd never know it by looking at me.
the compass point a cherry, my skin an afterbirth stain,
I sat next to the bones in my closet for years.

you'd never know it by looking at me,
orange as a horticultural cult, a traffic cone homecoming.
I sat next to the bones in my closet for years,
a frozen corsage, neon trauma marker,

orange, a horticultural cult. a traffic cone. a homecoming.
nothing bad ever happened to me sexually as a child.
frozen corsage, neon trauma marker,
in my family, nobody really touches each other.

nothing bad ever happened to me sexually as a child.
yellow an old, unread note, silence a buttered virtue 
in my family, nobody really touches each other.
lemon pronouncement, loud, unsteady trumpet,

yellow's an old, unread note, silence a buttered virtue--
I've known since I was 11. I'm 12 now.
lemon pronouncement, loud, unsteady trumpet,
I was married for six years before I realized.

I've known since I was 11. I'm 12 now.
green the vernal arc, promise, a dirty, rapid season,
I was married for six years before I realized
an unripe vow, the death years receding.

green the vernal arc promising a dirty, rapid season,
I was 17. I was 45. I'm still not sure. I don't like the word.
an unripe vow, the death years receding.
mostly I fall for girls, but I like guys too. it's confusing.

I was 17. I was 45. I'm still not sure. I don't like the word
blue. anonymous, necrotic mouths, back pocket testaments,
mostly I fall for girls, but I like guys too. it's confusing.
last-call royalty, the night's best bruise, a uniform

blue, anonymous, necrotic. mouths back pocket testaments
when I heard about Matthew Shepard,
last-call royalty, the night's best bruise, a uniform
when I couldn't stop thinking about my best friend's neck.

when I heard about Matthew Shepard,
indigo, a minor distinction, a kite the sky lets go,
I couldn't stop thinking about my best friend's neck,
an electric pulse, unexamined tradition, spectral heretic.

indigo, a minor distinction, a kite the sky lets go,
when I saw a man without a shirt on TV,
an electric pulse, unexamined tradition, spectral heretic.
honestly, it was porn that finally made me sure.

when I saw a man without a shirt on TV,
violet, arsenic's widow, arrowless crossbow,
honestly, it was porn that finally made me sure,
that manipulated interruption, inherited ritual.

violet is arsenic's widow, an arrowless crossbow.
they begged me not to tell anyone,
a manipulated interruption, inherited ritual,
they said I had 24 hours to get out.

they begged me not to tell anyone
this prism, this spectrum, skyblood, chimera,
they said I had 24 hours to get out
a spectacular mass of refracted atoms,

this prism, this spectrum, skyblood, chimera.
they hugged me and said they loved me.
a spectacular mass of refracted atoms,
it didn't feel like a lie until it did.

they hugged me and said they loved me.
a sort of silent agreement with myself,
it didn't feel like a lie until it did.
I knew, but didn't have the words for it then.
Remember you used to kiss girls,
how you played boyfriend
and girlfriend with no boys

just your hipless, day-of-the-week
panties pressed together in the top bunk
grinding to shivering warmth,

how it shook you like morning's first stretch.
In my country, the silkworms are barren.
Our fathers planted the wrong mulberry trees,
the red kind,
all the way to the horizon,
and the worms
make no milk and become brown moths.

Instead, we farm spiders.
They upholster the trees in cobwebs, the orchards draped
like furniture before the house is emptied.

We are known as the ghost keepers. In August
you can hear the wings of monarchs beating
against the silk long into the night,
there are so many. I have heard owls
I could not find to free in my dark orchard,
begging softly from their cocoons.

It is quiet during our days, without birds.

Everything is caught here: dragonflies, milkweed seeds,
a low-lying moon in the silk purse
of a dead mulberry tree,
glowing like an x-ray.
We are caught here, too,
in our abiding way, accustomed to the spiders
that tiptoe across our sleeping infants' cribs
and leave strands of silk in our hair
and bites on our thighs upon waking,
spiders glimpsed in the bathroom mirror, the still spiders
that watch us make love from the ceiling,
the spiders

that sew up the entrances to our mailboxes,
our church hats, our front doors
if we are not always sweeping.

It is hard work, to keep from being stitched into their fabric.
The web will blindfold and swallow you if you sleep too long.

But we are happy in the harvest season, when
we shake the spiders from their wool
and children chase and stomp them
beneath their little shoes
and we play the violin as the looms keep time.
It is the best silk, delicate
yet impossible to tear
like the blueprints of heaven.
It loves indigo and the purple

we boil from snails.
Only the richest can afford our silk.
It takes ten thousand spiders to weave a shirt.
But they say you can feel
your own heartbeat when you wear it,
that nothing compares to its touch,
how it moves intimately like it knows you,
how you barely notice it
crawling across your skin.
I

3,656 seeds I shaved from their insides: wet with sinew and so white that I should have planted
them in high ground so next year he could have walked among their sensation. . .

Instead, I washed the sin off in the kitchen sink, seasoned them with Lowry's, and roasted them
in the oven. We lived for days this way, the seeds and my breast his only meal. I pulled the extra
shards from his teeth and begged him to eat more.

The stuffed black cat you gave him meows every time he crawls by. It wakes me from my dream;
beside me in bed, your hand between my legs, my breast under your arm, touching your mouth.

II

It is no use to try to make sense of what happened to you in Blessed Sacrament's side yard or
why you believed that Mary cried for you when you touched her feet, clutching my rosary beads.

You told me that you were not asking for forgiveness but for something more.

How many trips it must have taken to bring all those pumpkins, one by one, to the back
porch? I have imagined the hollow sound they must have made as you dropped each one;
the way the orange of their skin was the same color as the sunset the moment he was born.

How we knew that you weren't just sleeping. And the note--

"You will have to teach him to be poor with grace."
black is the color of my true love's hair
black is the color of all i care, black records
black stax, black bodies stacked, shack(il)led
by o'neil english. speak back, black backs
lashed raised scars, Africa attack, black oil
black guns in the hands of blue, black foils.
blues black serum, black sermons, black sirs
ma'ams, black surgeons, eugenics ebonics
black persons, black eye-susan, black gruesome
most fear when black fester, black grew sons
spores, black moors, black muslim round black
Ka'bah tours, what black for? black spades
dig black earth, black words i learned

to speak
first
1.
g-d must be an english teacher who likes irony
and master tongues. a creator of slipcovers, i guess
create is a strong word, perhaps supplant is sufficient,
like the new testament and what not. all of this built
on atlantis and Choctaw. g-d must like clouds alot
considering he is said to bat cave there, a resort
among the light and billowy. clouds remind me
of rabbits. rabbits scare easy and burrow into holes
and scamper all over the forest and fuck alot.
g-d must like to fuck alot so america made tuskegee
and immune deficiency. barbie the apple headed
wishboned from walt disney. adam smith quarters
the garden into enclaves, robert moses parts the bronx.
america must think it was typecast in g-d's biography
on network tv, a big budget and eminent domain.

2.
emmitt smith ran for 18,355 yards
the most in NFL history / he ran
most on sundays / g-d's day /grid
iron / metal / rust / industry built
war /mongered / mongrel sounds
walter mondale / half majestic derek
jeter / jesters / dick gregory / albert king
rodney / jesse owens on a sparrow branch
rickey / henderson / stolen base /swollen
face / emmett till could not run fast enough
at 14 / july 4 / the candles are roman /pies
black / buried / snow / cones and levities
re /mastered / on a white / label

3.
letter to al jolson
i will place you in a wooden box
near the mirror i change in front of.
you crooned in burnt cork, i will not
have to. you one knee whistled mammy,
i will sorry mama thug a tale so churned
it will sing sweet butter in my mouth.
you wore the mask so i may rock the fitted.
you movied with aunt jemima, i will dawn
the do-rag. i get faded but black hung
in your pores. its ashes float in the blood

river. i honor your death pyre in memphis.
i upstreamed the mississippi like salmon.
crossed the atlantic in black vinyl to cess
pool in the short lives of beatles and stones.
your legacy; monster pack rats, we carry
crates of alan lomax ethnography. we dig
you like sick(le) /cells we can't jail break.
I.

My cousin Vinny looks up
to me like I'm a gold-plated
statue on the top of a State
House made of books.
Like a comet dragging a fiery
tassel. Like a seagull filled
with ink. He doesn't know, I look
up to him too: His hard smirk
that's taken a punch. His realness
I long for. I'm a wannabe Vinny--
When I'm brave enough for a fight,
I wear a helmet, and ice skates.
When I feel like talking shit, I stay
inside the car, with the windows up.

II.

With the windows up, we drove
in silence to The Hill to get my dying
father jumbo shrimp cocktail.
Vin was always on call for Uncle Guido.
On our way back to the car, two guidos
ran up on us. Vin went down
the alley with one, while the other held
my arm, Jesus on his ripped right tricep.
Wait, he said. I did, we watched, they circled:
the Tale of the Tape being worked out like
fast math in their heads. I wanted to charge
the alley, but I didn't want to charge
the alley, and I didn't. Vin drew a knife
and before I knew it, we were back in the car.

III.

We were back in the car heading
to the hospital with a half-dozen shrimp.
Vin was cool as cocktail sauce, cooler
than don't-give-a-fuck. Vin was all
live by the streets, die by the streets
as his mother followed above
in the shape of a crow. Little cousin:
growing into my father's fading shadow,
eating the poison from his failing organs.
Rubbernecking every girl we passed,
Vin sped down Atwells Ave in a Honda Accord
that reeked of the ocean. Just like dad would,

he parked right in front of the Emergency Room
not giving a fuck.

IV.

Not giving a fuck is a symptom
of tough, depending on who holds it
between their fingers. It burns cigarette
holes into the moon's pillowcase.
It doesn't care who you are or what
you do or who you know. My hero
once punched a guy, who was on
the other side of a window. Left hyphens
all over his face from the glass. But that was in '74,
when only cops had guns. Kids these days
are scared as hell, and gunning for a Vin
to earn a stripe. One night, when the club
floor musta been slanted, a champagne glass
perforated Vincent's neck.

V.

Vincent's neck had a gauze patch
blotted with a red Rorschach
that traced a silhouette of Uncle Guido,
and he told me it was: "nothin," some goof
threw a glass in tha club. I remember
"nothin" as a kid: waiting in the backseat
of a Lincoln Town Car in a project parking lot.
Stopping to get Pixie Sticks and watching
my father pour the blue sugar onto the street.
Vin was Uncle Guido's apprentice.
When I hear him say "nothin," I remember
my father pulling a fork from his stomach
at the beach house. On his deathbed,
I remember him crying out for his mother.

VI.

Crying for his mother, Vin still looked
tough as hell. I'd never seen him cry
until that day in front of her polished casket.
Vin's mom was my mom's best friend.
They grew up together dodging Italian boys.
Used to smoke Salem's on the highway overpass
and spit on the cars below singing "I will survive"
because of our fathers. My mom married
in first and his mom soon followed, except
his mom left a different way, slid out one night
in a dream. Vin carved her into his arm.
Vin preserved his mother's son under a mural
of religious tattoos. Grandma complained, you got Jesus
all over ya, and you don't even go to church.

VII.

You don't even go to church
but you pray, a request engraved
around your neck: God forgive me.
When I tell him I ask that too, he looks
surprised, because he looks up to me.
Like perpendicular pencils on the top
of a cathedral. Like a flag made of paper.
I can do no wrong. When he drapes an archangel
across his back, of course it's Michael,
with a sword puncturing the devil.
I tell Vinny that the spider web on his elbow
is not a spider web but a dream catcher.
That the anchor tattooed on mine is not
an anchor, but an arrow chasing Hope.
Blame your drag queen roommate-Lamar by day, Mahogany by night-and then
blame his sequined dresses-all slit high, up to his balls

Explain that dusk smells so different in Spain-musky cherry-tight tangerine burst-sage
mixed with lavender

Tell him you were under the influence of bees or bats-the spin and swirl of doves

Tell him you were half asleep-about to leave to the dunes just west of Madrid-better
yet say forest-he knows that crazy shit happens in a forest

Tell him no tongue but his mouth-wax-like and wet

Tell him timing

Tell him ease

Tell him sweat and sweat

Tell him lips

Tell him the juice-yeah saffron juice

Tell him flat-chested

Tell him, "crook"-I mean, "creek"

Tell him tales-lies-tears-water-weakness-churros-chocolate-hot-heat-heave- 

Hush

Hush

Hush

Tell him anything you want-then tell him

You did it again
We hairpin the narrow road
bisecting the foothills of the Northern Range
and I recognize the beat, the break
from the title track of the first LP
I owned two years earlier - a record
I played over and over in the living room
of the Winnipeg townhouse we lived in Winter of 77.
I keep expecting the group
to bust in with the song Good Times
these are the good times. . .
Instead an angry fast-talking man
kicks in the speakers of our Datsun.
You don't stop rockin to the bang bang boogie
say up jump. . .
I shoot up from the back seat
make some wild declaration
about the foreverness of the thing coming through
the speakers. My mother rolls her eyes I think,
as my step-dad maneuvers the car around
the Queen's Park Savannah. They are still
in love. For at least one more year. Everything
is sudden and new this month past my 11th
birthday. I've never been more sure of anything.
Will not be again for many years - first you gotta
Bang Bang. . .
They built a club in our neighborhood. Mecca.
I was too young to be asked what I thought.
There was talk of perversity, un-American
activity, talk of violence. Some families spoke
of fear of sending their kids to school
in a neighborhood where "candy" might be
found on the ground the next morning.
They built it anyway. Despite trashcans thrown
through windows, notes attached to rocks. Men
stood like towers in the distance, proclaiming
freedom, arms stretched, their hands held
torches, claiming liberty. The institution was leveled.
Mirrors broken. I was just a boy, who liked dancing
and throwing paper planes, who dreamed of being
a Sphinx for Halloween.
Dearest Pam, 
I still dream of you.
College. Our second date.
How the ceiling fan would not cure
my fever that day, the white walls
beaded in sweat. I could have killed
my white friend for walking in on us.
Or kissed him, right there in the dorms. 
Damn the smoldering Newport cherry
that bathed my room in red. And you
cocking-back that cold, hard Glock
against Samuel L. Jackson's dick.
My white friend and I, we could have
unzipped in front of the t.v. screen
and wrestled for the tube of Lubriderm.
I don't know what scared me more:
my roommate's wood or the camera,
out of breath, climbing mountains-
those muscled, brown thighs.
How were we supposed to compete 
with Sam? Richard Pryor? Or Kareem?
With any man on your list of lays? 
My mother's answer: fuck foreplay-
the other Pam's bed-tanned Baywatch
castmates, taped to her teen son's wall.
For my thirteenth birthday, she framed you
garnishing a large bed in red lingerie.
I'm sorry. I never hung your poster.
Even now, I don't know how 
to love you right. But I suspect I was
onto something back in middle school,
unsticking the other Pam
to make room for my present-
four walls. So blank
and unassuming.
Bruises cuff my ankle. "A woman drips and stinks," he said skinning a rabbit. Seventeen stitches to my navel and I see what he means about the clean kill of a bull, the subtle extraction of head from body.
"She's a statue in your garden," says a circle jerk of pigeons
you fed to death last Sunday, but you don't even own a garden,
so you chuck your crackers down the sewer's throat and hit 95
like it broke into your house, when in reality it got framed
by science.

Science built you a time machine that can say, "We're all
in this together," and now a mix CD says it, and four lanes
bumper-to-bumper says it, and your spicy chicken sandwich
says it, but none of them live inside of it and on top of all else
the deck got jammed.

"In silence, you can listen to yourself," says a cavalcade
of crunchy-mouthed drive-thrus raising grease-bright hands.
"We are each a prisoner of our memories," says a truck stop
named Love's to a boxy red car you named Zombie W.B. Yeats
who is getting exhausted,

but Ronny Foxy Baby said you got to wear your momentum
the same way you wear your scars. Grab a card for your mantle
at a tattoo parlor in Portland, but then pull that junk up the hill
until you don't hear the blind sirens of grief. Grief travels both
as a wave 

and as a barnacle.Even the ocean, that moody drunk, cannot
hide you from the law, front the bail, or recall one damn name
that you bark in that unfathomable direction-however, will mumble
some dry consolationif you sit beside enough evening, which is to say
that the tide will fall.
In the miles from your headboard
to your balcony doors
I have spent an entire morning
tracing the sound of you arriving home
across your ceiling.
There is no silence like yours.
It shakes through me
like the blessing of a new apartment;
the anticipation of surviving the night
to discover you in the morning.
In the morning
I watch God paint with his left hand
across an empty sky.
I count seven hundred fish scales
shivering in the breeze,
shaking out my old names,
calling you back to sleep.
They sound like a tired kitchen floor,
this choir, this praise under our feet.
They sound like your chest -
an acre of flight -
crashing into my hands,
wailing,
we're lost, we're lost,
we're lost again at sea.
Teenaged boys liked to lean on the hood of my father's Porsche,
black levis slung below their muscled waists,
crisp white T-shirts with tanks underneath, Jheri curls
oiling the backs of their yokes.

They stayed put when my father, dressed in Armani for his city job,
wavy hair Miami-slick, marched down the stairs rattling his keys.
They turned up their boombox, N.W.A.'s hard-on beats
masking the clip-clip-clip of Ferragamo loafers on pavement.

My father moved toward them, pointing his manicured finger
at the corner of Sloane and Compton asDopeman, Dopeman
heralds his arrival. He gestured wildly at their sluggish bodies,
and a sudden high pitch meant his voice was breaking.

When they slid from the hood of his prized German silver,
my father shook his head, slammed the door as he plunged
into the driver's seat, gunned the engine, and threatened to run them over.
But the boys refused to stumble. In their unlaced Cortez sneakers,

they simply strolled to the right, undivided,
boombox still blasting from their shoulders, as if they knew
where he was headed, knew no reason
they should split themselves apart.
Olives and old churches
are best hollow. I admire their blackness,
but water wells overcome with ivy
are more my style. Most nights, I see
buckets with holes in the bottom.
I see fruit rinds littering orchards
and I think about meditation. If self-emptying
is what the heavens want from us,
I doubt I would have come
with a sleepwalker prepackaged
inside me. Then again there's thunder.
If I could unload like that--
Fast forward ten years. The first thing you will notice is that you are taller. Not necessarily farther from the ground, but closer to the sky. This may at first be dizzying, especially if you never learned how to breathe. Practice. Meet your lungs. Take note of the way your skin fits, how your bones have grown into your skeleton. Your shoulders are perfectly balanced at the top of your spine. Your arms are long enough to reach your hands. This, you will discover, is what people who know anything mean when they say beautiful.

Investigate the body you are in. Reach for both horizons at once and discover your wingspan. Crack your knuckles. Lick the gap between your teeth. Place your fingers against the underside of your wrist and feel for a pulse. If you have one, it means you're lonely. That's good. This is a good world to be lonely in. Explore the space you take up, the way your body displaces air in the shape of: calves, hips, belly, chin. Trace the path of tingling from lips to nipples to between your legs. Notice that your skin is the color of new skin after the old skin has peeled away. Feel underneath your sternum: there. A scar. Your body has opened up, allowed egress to something it no longer needed, like an appendix. This was painful once, as doorways always are. 

Excavate yourself. Turn inside out like a pocket and examine what falls to the ground. There should be just enough coins to take a bus to anywhere. A pressed flower with a breath of purple left in it, the exact shade of I will always remember you fondly. Keys meant to open something old and worthy. Lint. The lint means you have been places, smelled dust, shaken off dead cells. A piece of paper with a name on it. Nothing sharp: you don't carry razor blades under your fingernails anymore.

The suitcase you packed before leaving your parents' house is here, spine-creased books and a one-eyed stuffed dog. The green dress that made your collarbone a lie. Your first lipstick. Jeans that will always have the stain from that night, an empty whiskey bottle. Spread them out like tarot cards on the pavement: the past, the present, the wish. Where the tenth and final card would be, place yourself.

Practice listening to sounds other than the grinding of your teeth. Songs are a good place to start, especially songs with piano accompaniment and lyrics about changing seasons. Listen to crickets. Learn how to divine the temperature from their chirps. Listen to the ground underneath you. Gravity will keep you here until you are ready to leave.

You can still recite those sad poems from memory, but they don't resonate in your chest the way they used to. You can walk across a bridge without counting the seconds between your bones and the concrete below. There is an ocean, but it is far away, not filling up your mouth. There will be people who want to touch you gently. You know that you can still feel pain, in your eyes and hands especially. But in this moment, all you know of your body is open arms.
the moon an open sore;
a ship as heavy as a chandelier:
se fue la lz en la Zona Colonial.
Santo Domingo is no stranger
to purple darkness rising
from sidewalks and sinking
to rest at the roofs of houses.
beyond its wingspan you can
see the lit world looming,
but under its feathers people sweat,
beat out stress with sex,
with beating,
with merengue,
with leaving.

the colmados with generators
are dim cigarette ends,
hot glows where the blocks bend
before alleys of tar and blisters,
before eventually the ocean's lips.
when the lights go,
thoughts stretch out like shadows
and chandeliers become eyes;
the moon an open sore sweeps higher,
casting luminous blood
and I begin to feel
the trapping of the wings,
begin to understand the need to flee,
begin to wish that I could ride
a chandelier out to sea,
beyond where the water bends,
beyond the sky's wrapped lips,
beyond sex,
beyond beating,
beyond merengue,
beyond leaving.
Would you believe if I told you
I love a woman named

for how the living greet each other
when asked,

"how you doing?" Or that the meaning
of what I'm called neither makes me

an angel or the capital

of Arkansas? I'm just a man
who moves from one mirage

to the next.

How she knows where I've been,
only the gods know. Some nights,

she makes a continent
of my body, pointing out her country

my spine runs through
like the Niger River. How her hands

play along me
either makes me a soprano

sax or a trombone
with a slide. The way she calls me,

sometimes, she could either be
singing a favorite song or renaming

what the stars spell out.
I come from a family where getting fucked up is an inherited recipe. 
Anything I didn't learn from a grandmother who drank herself to death 
on cheap vodka and food stamp tomato juice, I picked up from my cousin 
who chopped speed with a drywall knife 'til his knuckles splintered 
like fiberglass. There wasn't much new for Officer Weber to tell me 
when he came to my seventh grade social studies class 
to tell us about the D.A.R.E program. I distinctly remember 
how Officer Weber paced the length of the chalkboard, 
slapping his basketball of a gut in time with the pregnant pauses 
of his sentences. Well, kids, his thick fingers palming 
both sides of his stomach like Buddha molesting his own belly, 
I'm here today, to talk to you, about the dangers of amphetamines. 
The first time I did speed was about a week before. Mike dropped 
an eightball into our Super Big Gulp. We stayed up 'til sunrise 
smoking endless cigarettes, meticulously duplicating album covers 
on our notebooks. A few years later, Mike went to jail for burglary.
Took a vocational course on how to cook diet pills with gasoline for fun 
and profit. One day, Officer Weber played a movie intended 
to relate to us on our level. You know the story: a troop of bubble-headed 
teenieboppers get approached by a shady figure who tries to get 
them hooked on "the dope." Before my friend Lisa became a statistic 
used to scare parents, she sat at the desk next to mine in home room.
Once let me watch while she changed her shirt when we ditched.
I never got to kiss her, but she gave me her pewter skull necklace 
with the knife in its head and plastic ruby eyes. Over Christmas Break 
she whittled herself down to a skeleton in heavy mascara. The last time I saw 
her was in a hospital room. Said the day she gets out she's catching 
a Greyhound to Missouri. Meet up with a boy who loved her enough 
to tattoo her name over the abscesses on his shooting arm. 
At the end of my seven weeks of Drug Abuse Resistance Education,
we had a party with juice boxes and popcorn. 
Officer Weber handed out ribbons yellow as a streetlight 
in an empty lot, that read PROUD TO BE DRUG FREE. 
The acid I took at lunch was just kicking in. His voice 
sounded like the shriek of air from an emptying balloon
as he congratulated me and placed his award on my desk. 
Wrap your lips around something dirtyand homeless.
Give the song a warm bed, a soft pillow,an excuse
to dream of better lovers.

Strike marrow from the man in the last row,
don't be easy when you hurl autumn at him,sing
the color of cracked leaves undressing branches,
cut hunger into the cicatrix of your throat,
take a sip of the guitarskin's splinter.

Remember what Nana says about girls like us,
we scoop half-empty beds from our stomachs,
curl up inside throbbing aftermornings with blind men
sniffing out the click in our heels. Remind me
what love does to a woman when its evening gown
ripples in the glass.

Don't gargle these notes clean, just spit contralto
venom through that wide gap, Amy. Smother heaven.
Tangle the silence in your beehive bouffant,
tear the silk linens gathered around your breath,
when the smell of midnight thickens on the carpet
coalesce the words. Chasethem. Untilthey scatter 
outofyourmouth.
Be a fierce dragon lonely queen, 
Emma. Be a drunk barren

crowbar. Be a cocktail waitress heart-sewn 
tease. Be a desert plant, Susie,

succulent. Need no water at hand. 
Be an empty-fridge sale salad

scrimper. Be a sharp-tongued solo 
chef. Anna: watch TV on a lonely moon

through the static of milky way 
reception. Concentrate

on falling asleep. Slut, 
Mona. Slut your book open.

Keep your legs open. 
Do not write any name but

your name on those acre-wide 
pages. Be hollow,

Sally. Keep canary-singing 
in a thirsty well. Be a singing

flighty bird with open beak. 
Don't try a cushion,

Mary. Don't swallow soft.
Chew only sticks: carrots, twigs.

Sit on your bones. 
Sit on their bones.

Don't try for dreams. 
Don't try for dollars, 
Leah, this is a coin job 
for you. Turn out the light. 
Tear out your eyes.
Tuesday afternoons this November,
considering the yellow to green gradations
of evergreen needles,
I scuff dry leaves until reaching the market.
White-haired men and women clog the analgesic aisles
or argue with the meat-man over naked brisket.
I hover in the solace of the salad bar--
bruised spinach leaves and halved pears
out of heavy syrup caught in green JELL-O.
Securing the plastic clam shell with a rubber band,
the cashier smiles at me smiling at him.
"I am young," I think,
navigating between the nosing cars towards the park.
The public lawns are alive.
Squirrels circle the garbage pails then dive,
emerging with bread ends and empty doughnut bags. 
I find a bench where I can tune my feet to the sun;
munch my string-bean salad and cottage cheese.
I could be the secretary to someone's
tomorrow morning,
an orchid in my hair,
steno pad balanced on my knees.
I'd be the keeper of the honey jar,
content to drink spiced tea from the dish
of a man's mouth. 
We find an abandoned house.
Once inside, we clear space,
look for kindling.

Zeke starts the fire
with a wooden chair from the kitchen,
cabinet doors, stuffed animals,

the end table, magazines.
In goes a foreclosure notice.
In goes the couch

-blankets we keep.
The broken dresser drawers
warm our legs for hours.

There is so much left to us.
Box springs, an empty jewelry box 
we burn it all

-bookcases, a desk.
Pitch the dead plants in this furnace
Small patent leather shoes,

a pink swim suit.
Pull up the floorboards.
Leave the pictures on the walls.
Burn what burns.
At the top of this poem
there is a gun hanging on a peg
like you would expect a hat to,
and you're starting to feel a little
uneasy because this is no Winchester Rifle
that hangs over the fireplace
to honor Pop-Pop's old days
in the African bush.
No, this is a simple black handgun,
you can't tell much more than that,
because you've always pretended to know
a little bit more about firearms than you actually
do, when in fact, you're a little afraid to find out
what makes some guns better than others.
So you decide to look away from the gun,
resting so casually on its peg,
at the top of this poem,

and look out the window because
yes,you've been sitting at the window
all along. You look out on not much of a view.
Two small boys are playing
with sidewalk chalk in a narrow alley
between two red-brick buildings.
They are coloring something in.
They've done the outline already.
One boy is filling the legs in purple
and the other is filling the chest in red,
and it's a person.
It's a person.
You look around for police tape,
or for a fallen body that wouldn't
color outside the lines.
But there's nothing, and it's finished;
a purple silhouette with a bloody beating heart.
And now, one of the boys lies down next to it,
and his friend, because they must be friends,
chalks a purple outline around him,
and it all starts again.

You just can't tell
if these kids have grown up around
too many suicides or
if this is the closest thing they have to
snow angels, and you can't quite tell
if they're smiling
and you're not quite sure which you'd prefer.
So now you look back,
back to the gun
hanging on its peg
at the top of this poem.
You are looking for answers,
but it doesn't take questions.
It just hangs there.
Like a hat.
And you've heard what Chekhov
had to say about guns that get hung on the
wall in Act 1, but you don't know
who will pull the trigger.
So you sit there,
waiting alone,
and hoping it isn't you.
Near the crossroads where I once saw the devil,
the moon's lost her song to the rain,
picking a tune to drown the sorrows of the world.

It's a story as old as time itself, poor Abel.
It's not by chance they found his killer on the run
near the crossroads where I once heard the devil

recite the killer's exact words, as if reading from a bible
of weariness: I been wandering the world since it began.
A tune to drown the sorrows of the world?

Better hope there's some whiskey in that still.
I was wandering to & fro, running hooch between
counties, & heard the devil at the crossroads, on a fiddle

of silver & shadow, his hands a blur, slick as oil,
lonely as a lighthouse. There's a price to hear a song
that will drown the sorrows of the world:

you might tell him you've nothing to trade, he'll tell
you different (he's just after a little company).
Near those crossroads we can still hear the devil
sing: it wasn't me that tried to drown the world.
His chair was my church pew. His tattoo shop my confessional.
Not that I would have told him. Not that he ever asked,
though the votive glimmer in his eyes said he made meaning
of the only purple on my thighs that would ever fade.
My nerves were flickering neon signs advertising
the scream still stuck in my throat, but he just went to work,
parted the stained curtains of my ruined skirt,
flexed the art in his fingers, made my shock take shape
into the kind of pitchforked devil I could face.

He's been exorcising my demons for weeks now,
working his way through the backlog of mistakes I can't unmake,
transforming the stack of bar napkin blueprints I thrust at him
into souvenirs of jumps plastered to my suitcase skin,
a haphazard map leading to the back alley that broke me.
His needles have prayed nonstop over me, only his occasional
wordless glance at the calendar noting I've been
stationary all summer for once, an exhausted hummingbird
perched in his bed, on his chair, under his hands.

Now I watch him sleep, his fingers uncurled
from the daily steady clench of their work, and gently wipe
a fleck of leaf green ink from his cheek
as sweat stings the new cherry blossom tree
unfurling up my spine, weeping a drift of
petals, the amen he didn't know that he was saying.
I grind out my cigarette, pluck his shirt
from the floor, and slip out into a warm night rain,
quietly excommunicating myself.
His long throat works like the corn snake
I watched devour a field mouse last spring.
Snake snatched that poor mouse by the head
and I couldn't help but cry a little at those
bitty back legs kicking and scrambling and finally
just giving in to the hungry ripples pulling it down
into that snake's belly. Those damn Hudson boys
spotted me sniffling and I ain't lived it down since.

I stare hard at the stage, figure there's gotta be a trick,
but he just slides blade after blade right on down
and they're sharp, too, the barker held out a hair
for the swallower to slice before tipping back his head
and gulping down danger. I need to know
how he does that, keep trying to ask Pop but
he's too busy talking crop prices with Mr. Granger,
keeps shrugging me off his sleeve.

So I shimmy through the crowd and right up close
until I can see the swallower's tilted-up face reflected
in the sword's slick edge, see the fevered glint in his eye
and smooth twist of his wrist, feel the audience
wrinkle up with nerves until they burst with clapping
as he pulls the weapon free, grinning and puffed up
on the noisy awe of the crowd pushing me against the stage,
and all of a sudden I don't feel so bad for that mouse.

The swallower musta seen my feelings on my face
because he barks out a ragged laugh and winks at me
as a snake of something fierce uncoils itself in my belly.
I want to be gargantuan, a death-defying wonder
painted on flapping canvas signs, a spectacle to behold.
I want a crowd curled up in my hands, the Hudson boys
staring up at the sharp edges of my daring, just once
I want to be the most dangerous thing I know.
will work for dollarsfor cents
for scratch bones pounds pence penance
sense shekels sentence shelter bread.

four times three bucks an hour
four hours a day four days a week
for the rest of my life

will sell knives will pyramid scheme will dress nice
will call during dinner will door to door will carry a knife

will work for peanuts for pine nuts for pineapple and cashew

will work for you for less than you pay others to do
will work force will force out will overseas

will nonprofit will not profit
wont trade but will eat for free

will burroughs will suck for skrill
will test pills will fuck for money

will call good will will drink on job
will of drunk god will lift for tips will pay check

wont background check will shakespeare
will faulkner won't dress appropriate
won't pass on purpose will laundry and transit

will work for store credit for college credit
for credit card necklaces
will you have anything else with that sir?

will work for a laugh a smile a blow job
an hour an asshole an alibi

will work for change
willblakewillpoemwillspokewillyeats
willsmokewillcoldwillbankswillbroke

will fold the will of a drunk god into my bones
though none of it
will work
for me
When Dad scooped the baby gerbils
and their mother from their cage
and placed them in a shoe box
and buried it in the snow,
did he balance it steady
like the collection plate at church?
Or one-handed, like a box of donuts?
Did they slide to one end
in the tilting dark like passengers
tossed on a sinking ship? Were they
asleep? Or full of spastic noise, eleven
high-pitched protesting squeals,
forty-four fists of claws
scratching the cardboard walls?
Did he plan where to bury them
or decide last-minute: by the tree house
or the mailbox or near the pond with the broken
washing machine, and did he dig a hole
or just heap piles of scaly snow
over the top? And did he use a shovel
or his hands? Were they bare
or did he wear thick gloves?
And did he mumble a prayer or
whisper something true he never told us?
And was it in the heat of madness?
After a phone call from Mom?
And should we blame ourselves?
Should we have kept them with the kinder parent?
Can I say I have a kinder parent?

"It was the humane thing," he muttered,
his voice heavy and confident,
a garage door rolling shut.

When he left the room,
my brother and sister and I huddled
in my bed and shrouded
a blanket over us.

If god had lifted
my mattress with one hand,
we would have slid
to the headboard, limbssmashed
together like dolls in a suitcase.

If god had buried us
in the snow
below the world where parents
decide the fate of the weak,
it would have been humane.
She is something like a bottle of Mississippi Mud.
Break her against the wall and she leaves behind
a rain splatter taped to the back of something upright.
Her hands are hammers, her smile a scythe.
You could build her out of bricks, you could paint her with mortar.

You drunkfucked her like someone in Tucson was dying.
You drunkfucked her like-goddamn, have you ever
seen such a gunpowdered nose?-fucked her like
the hurricane was coming and the sirens were sounding
like a fleet of motorcycle engines and the two of you
were locked in a dark room with nothing but a bare

mattress in the middle of the floor.
The walls weren't going to hold the wind out.
And you drunkfucked her through a dawn
the color of dried blood on dirty laundry.

She said, "I'm some sort of nun.
I look real good in black."
She said, "You must be a preacher
I can hear my every sin
diving off your tongue."

Her phone was set a-ringing so you threw it at the wall.
It broke just like the bottle, left behind a scar shaped
like a liquid asterisk. You apologized, but you did not repent.

You drunkfucked with a gallon of gasoline in your chest.
You dared her to strike matches on your skin, saying,
"Make me a candle, baby. I'm all wax."
She knew you were lying, but she struck the match anyway.
My sweetheart says I can no longer watch the news.
You worry too much. And he is right. My fear is a drilling.
Constant. Bloodthick. That girl in the suitcase,
that wife in the river, that woman in the elevator needed me.

I worry too much, it is my right. My fear is a drilling,
a songless bird perched upon my shoulder.
That wife in the river, that woman in the elevator needed me.
But I have three girls of my own, they are mine mine mine

and the songless bird perched upon my shoulder
watches over them, my sweet little Gretels who follow me home,
these three girls who are mine mine mine
gobble up my heart like a hunk of bread. When men

see them, my dear little Gretels, they follow me home.
When there is a knock at the door, I stash my darlings in a cupboard.
They come to gobble up my girls like hunks of bread. Men
line up like ants to take them away, to carry them home.

When there is a knock at my door, I hide my darlings inside a cupboard
like bowls of sugar. When they sleep, I wrap them in kite strings,
line them up like ants so no one can take them and carry them home.
They clutch their dolls and all night long they wish for boys 

like bowls of sugar. As they sleep, I hold them like kite strings. 
Constant. Bloodthick. That girl in the suitcase,
clutched her doll and all night long wished she'd been a boy. 
It is why my sweetheart says I can no longer watch the news.
When he finally said, Yes, I did,
I felt my skull turn behind my face,
then my cheeks caved in.
When he said, And that one, too,
it was as if my heart became
a dress two sizes too small. 
When he said, Oh yeah, and her,
too many times to count,
I guzzled a mess of poison
and belched up a tiny casket.
When he said the word, Him,
my skull came back around.
When he promised,
But none of them meant a thing.
No one. No one but you,
the baby disappeared,
like house keys.
I do have a seam 
and you see it, there
in the center of my chest, a string
to pull, a chrome zipper,
interlocking down my sternum,
belly to inner thigh, or
there is only a hole, barely
large enough for a woman's
two thumbs. Come,
press, pull hands apart until
my halves, billow open, and
muscle, sinew and organ are
right there, pulsing
in your bed room. Woman, here
within reach, woman
with plump thumbs,
with slender fingers- 
woman I'd fuck up for- 
hello, you
careful seamstress, you
needle in my sternum- 
stitch my selvage as it frays,
you know how ragged I've been,
but do you know what
I've always wanted
to be? Thread spooled into
the sewing machine of your hands.
My back bends like a bridge over water
onto the overhang of a circular bar
in the center of a bar. From this angle
no one above me is visible.

Hidden by the overhang of a circular bar,
lies a man who's seen the bottom of his tumbler.
No one is above being invisible,
not even me, with my shirt tidily pressed,

another man who's seen the bottom of a tumbler.
Each swirl of scotch nudges closer to the rim.
Not even my shirt will stay tidy and pressed,
my tie cinched and secure. It's waiting to unravel.

Each swig of scotch nudges me closer to a rim
every day. Drops roll off the cliff of my parted lips.
My tie cinched and secure, I'm waiting to unravel,
waiting to steal sleep-joints sore with memory.

Day drops off a cliff. My lips part,
I drool on scuffs and bruises from boot and heel.
What I spill seeps, joins the floor's memory
of fools who try, who hide in the light.

I'm all scuffle and bruises barely healed.
A swallow of whiskey won't drown my questions
about a fool trying to hide in the light.
Why do I dress this precise?

Swallow whiskey? Drown in questions?
Why a beard so prepared, ensemble so neat?
Why dress with precision?
Why bother to drag a razor through the shadow

of a beard, prepare, assemble, neatly
tie a loop with no beginning or end, only
to be a bother, draggled, a razor thin shadow,
meeting no one here? The bar's arc

forms a loop with no beginning or end, only
interrupted by the hunches of our bodies--
a meeting of no-ones, here at the arc of a bar
that bends my back like a bridge over water.
If I'm attracted to a woman
chances are she's a dancer
and moves with a studied grace,
owns a dog, struggles
with some sort of eating disorder,
is a smoker, or has been raped
at least once in her life.

I've spent a lifetime telling myself
this does not make me ugly
but a lover of beautiful broken things
be they a little dangerous
or just lonely.

Needless to say, any combination
and I am likely to fall in love,
heart under heels.

Which means I fall in love a lot,
such combinations being as likely
as they are tragic, as common
as the bent and broken spokes
on rainy days of all the blown out
umbrellas abandoned in the trash.

Because they cause each other.
The dancer smokes to keep from eating,
or studies and covets her dog's sheer love
of movement, lies with her at night
and whispers I will die before
I let someone hurt you again.
Diane couldn't keep my cock
out of her mouth.
When I was soft, she took it
as an insult, or a challenge.
Otherwise it was an order,
or an act of devotion
like lighting a candle.

Once,
running late, I actually said
I don't have time for you
to give me a blowjob right now!

Before you start thinking
she was the perfect woman--
do you? would anyone? I did--
know that there was something
tragic about the way she held me
in her mouth, as if she had been
taught years ago-or if not taught,
had somehow come to learn--
that's all her mouth was for.
People who die from jumping off bridges mostly die
because their bodies hit the water at a bad angle. My friend Josh writes poems
to a girl named Ramona, wailing her name throughout, Ramona,
Ramona, but Ramona
isn't even real. In one poem
she jumped off a bridge and didn't die, her body
swanlike, pitched at just the right angle. In another poem,
she is a small beetle, stealing across Josh's sleeping face at night.
Is that true, Ramona? Ramona, I am stealing you.
I have questions only you can answer.
This friend of a friend I once knew in Alabama
hopped train cars for a few weeks when she was young and had dreadlocks and she said
sometimes she'd see one of the train people leaping into the cotton fields
and they'd steal food from nearby towns and every now and again
someone would try to rape you while you slept. One day her foot
got stuck in the machinery between boxcars and when the train braked
it was chopped right in half and she strapped it back together with duct tape.
Years later she named her kid Star or Astra or something celestial
but I didn't see the connection. Romanticize life here, Ramona,
was something I read once on a bathroom wall with an arrow
pointing down into the toilet. What were you doing on that bridge, anyhow?
I imagine you leaning over the balustrade, reading missives
scrawled there, dark and unread. Here, romanticize.
Each day I cast out of myself whole paragraphs of memory. Last week
it seemed strange how many dead birds were in the streets.
These long summer days I take four cold showers in an afternoon and still
feel for a fifth. I sleep with the fan
full-blast upon my skin, drowning out
cicadas in the neighbors' trees. I buy bumper stickers in towns I drive through:
Virginia is for Lovers or My Other Car
is a Georgia Peach. It makes me sad,
that protracted moment
in which a spider goes on weaving a web on your porch chair just before
you whack it with a shoe. Life, here. Last night, Ramona,
I was cleaning the mantle and found daisies
pressed in an old book. From what field? From what
life? Still in my possession:
seashells and seashells and seashells. From those beaches,
I never sent postcards, all of them now
nameless. Do you remember, Ramona,
what any of those missives said? Were you sad about something or
just following with your eyes and then unexpectedly with your body
the trajectory of a swooping bird? Morning and evening
my cortex casts out memories like so many fruit flies
vying for space on a ripening plum.

It is not the law of chaos but something like it
that says if four dissimilar things are in a room, say
a donkey, a book on the Roman Empire, some fireworks, a couch,
there is a high probability something will go
terribly wrong. For everything you add, that probability
increases exponentially. Ramona, I have questions. You
have answers. In tenements in the Far East, families
are getting rid of things because the houses are too crowded.
Everywhere on the streets:
old bookcases, mattresses. People have taken
to sleeping together on blankets, four at a time.
Soon there will be nothing in living rooms but kids and dogs
and lovers and the memory of lovers and then
no memory of anything at all.
One way you came back was through a steamy vapor 
when the shuttle doors opened, skin smelling of moon rocks,
solar wind, zero gravity. Another way was on horseback
galloping through some meadow, a cup of tea balanced
flawlessly on your knee. You were speaking Old English. Or French.
When I closed my eyes, we were riding on the backs of jaguars
through savannas in the moonlight, the word moonlight
falling from the sky in sparkling fragments. You came back
another time carrying sea turtles, your arms slicked with oil,
carrying brown pelicans, all dead. When I open my eyes,
you are in Vietnam and I can't see you because you are either
shell-shocked, covered in banana leaves, or already dead.
Generally speaking, you are neither
dead nor alive, depending on which branch an African giraffe
yanks from the tree tomorrow evening at dusk. If a crazy man
in the Little Rock Inpatient Mental Health Facility throws a fistful of macaroni
at his doctor and the doctor signals the guards and the guards
swiftly pin him to the cafeteria table and he is taken into
a confined room to think, I most certainly
will never see you again. You will be gone for good.
I will end up stumbling at midnight through a canyon in San Diego. I will find
blood on my shirt that I cannot explain, no trace of you,
of us ever existing and I will probably also
be knee-deep in quicksand, bugs swarming, a bad song stuck in my head.
If neither of us smoked or if I had brought cigarettes that night instead of bumming from strangers
and we never met, it would be me and not you going to the moon,
to England, wherever it is that you go. Yesterday at the hospital
I understood my grandmother's confused expression, weeping in the hospital cot,
staring at her catheter. I try to make sense of you, the way it finally made sense
why priests drink, why slugs foam up, why most churches have done away with
confessional booths. In 1962, you will recall, someone at a truck stop
called your mother a slut and this changed things forever.
Her skirts grew shorter. You would not
even be here. You would not be coming back, would not have yet gone.
This time you would stay, immobile, you would be a word plucked from a mouth,
belonging to no language, attached to no thought.
Jew boy never believed in Santa Claus
or Jesus
or pro wrestling.
Jew boy onions.
Jew boy pickles.
Jew boy well rolled blunt.
Jew boy left god out of the pledge of allegiance all through elementary school.
Jew boy had no apology for the teacher.
Jew boy never learned not to throw like a girl.
Jew boy never built anything with his own two hands that wasn't made of plastic.
Jew boy can type faster than he can think.
Jew boy burnt latka oil.
Jew boy chicken fat cinnamon in the center of the matza ball.
Jew boy musk of inner thigh of the first Mormon girl he went down on.
Jew boy fetish for summer camp counselor uniform.
Jew boy never chased by German Shepherd.
Jew boy never seen inside of smoke stack.
Jew boy never given rocks for soap.
Jew boy never not know holocaust joke.
Jew boy half rat.
Jew boy always over tips.
Jew boy knows all the lyrics.
Jew boy stay wavy.
Jew boy stay hyphe.
Jew boy keep it 100 all day every day.
Jew boy understands every word coming out of the speaker.
Jew boy understands prayers in Hebrew and curses in Yiddish
Jew boy brucha
Jew boy fakackta
Jew boy always says he's Jewish
except when he doesn't.
Jew boy has almost one tattoo.
Jew boy rolls down sleeves around grandmothers.
Jew boy's groom's man was asked if he was a waiter at the wedding.
Jew boy dirty looks at Hasid black hat.
Jew boy would not like to pray with you today.
Jew boy printed counterfeit with Myer Lansky and Karl Marx.
Jew boy shot dope with Lenny Bruce and Sigmund Freud.
Jew boy corked up his face with Woody Allen and Bugs Bunny.
Jew boy sucked Allen Ginsberg's dick and fucked Roy Cohen in the ass.
Jew boy crush on straight boy cigarette tucked behind the ear.
Jew boy knows when to not act queer.
Jew boy descended from sawed off last name and nose bump.
Jew boy descended from people who ran faster than swordsman on horseback.
Jew boy has a mother who still does.
Jew boy's house still in the shadow of the cross.
Jew boy always thinks about the stains on the table in a holding cell
when lighting shabbas candles.
Jew boy always thinks about the fragility of a book when compared to a rock.
Jew boy can tell the language by the smell of the paper when it burns.
Jew boy doesn't think god is watching
any of it.
After suicide counseling session number seven
in at least as many months, I began to realize
she didn't want to be dead bad enough,
and I'd stand there, watching the butter knife
and bad intentions, and let her scrape her arms to shit.

I had spent the seventh grade in dutiful silence
buying home-pregnancy tests, stealing alcohol,
sneaking out to keep hold of this girl
and the naked damage she'd let me glimpse, lusting
for the moments that always came; finding her
in some small, unpleasant place. I, her savior.

But once I found out that she had shared her secret
with several other girls, I became thick with jealousy.
Joined with my jilted others in comparing versions
of the stories we'd been told, fingering the holes
and inconsistencies like dirty old men.

The day they called the entire eighth grade in to the auditorium
so the police could explain, you could hear the rough scrape
of stone against stone, as a thing so real ground into
the dirt of our imagined truth. It made our teeth ache.
Not for the arrest of our favorite teacher, or the sick
of his wandering hands, not even for the broken body of a liar
we despised as much as ourselves, but for what we knew
and did not do. This ugly child of silence still
so much alive, despite turning all our hands to smother it.
I'm sleeping as I write this; you're standing over me crying
while Ella belts out: No, no they can't take that away from me

If this is all I can get, your hand on my shoulder in the dream,
lips warm against my neck, I'll take that

The alarm clock becomes enemy; I press snooze every few minutes,
search for you and finally press stop when I can't take it any more

Please don't mistake this for a love poem - I stopped writing those
damn things once you left; anyhow, that last poem I wrote: you wouldn't take it

I call my mama and ask her how she lived all those decades
knowing her lover would never fully be hers and she said: chile, you just take it

Wake up! Rewind routine daily, tuck kids in, cook dinner work round the clock,
leave patience on the dining room table while making breakfast, and the kids take it

As I wake from the dream, your tears fall from my eyes and I ask myself:
J why do you complicate love? Why can't you just take it?
The yip of a red fox pup kept me up
all night, intoxicated, and you, oh,

you think you're so cunning,
goose-stepping the block.

Your cock: the rooster tail of dust
as you sped off in your rusty

Mustang. Me: the empty brick
garage. I've, I've got a bone

to pick and a crow to pluck.
I've got my tail tucked, wound

to lick. I prefer not to talk.
I said, I prefer not to talk.
The first time I found feathers on his pillow, I ignored
them. But it kept happening, each time I made the bed

the thin shafts poking my fingers. Finally I asked
my son where they came from. He had already begun

changing, his eyelids receding to thick pink wrinkles.
He only stared at me, unnerving, unblinking, and turned

away. What could I do but let him go. They were small anyway,
the soft afterfeathers matted together at the base of the shaft.

The next week he threw his favorite cat from his room
with a grunt and slammed the door. I pulled a feather

from the cat's mouth, this one longer, the shaft spotted
with blood. The next day I saw a wound on his hand, angry,

swollen, as if something had been stolen there. He tripped
in the living room before breakfast, said he was still tired

and escaped to his room but I saw his feet later that night,
toes knuckling up, even joining together. He began to creep,

head bobbing forward. His mouth hooked to an unmistakable
beak and he stopped asking for dinner, instead tapped at the front

door each time a car passed. He said he could hear them,
the small animals unlucky enough to be hit. He begged

for me to bring them in, their small fresh bodies still road-warm
and soft. Because we do what we can for our children I agreed,

slipping each dawn along the road in search of last night's erroneous
instincts, my palms itching against the fur matted with blood and dirt.

His teeth disappeared, his body turned in on itself. He no longer
tried to pull the feathers out, stopped wearing clothes entirely.

So dense, this new dark plumage. He said it didn't hurt,
the hollowing of his bones, the reversing of joints. His voice was

the last to change, reducing to simple grunts. I didn't know how
to talk with him then, just let him follow behind me, his eyes

unblinking all the way. I was lonely with him there.
One day I led him out into the yard, watched him test

his wings in the soft spring breeze. He lifted again and again,
the shadow of his wingspan darkening the yard, and I slipped

back into the house, closed all the windows. Locked the doors,
pulled the curtains. Turned out the lights. Ignored the tapping

on the window. I think he roosted in a dead oak tree out back
for months, a vulture only slightly larger than the rest.

After a few weeks it was hard to tell one from another.
In the garden, the stormtroopers
grew unnoticed. They were so small, tiny white hats
poking through the soil like strange mushrooms.

I was clearing the lily beds, tearing out by the roots last year's
overgrowth when my fingers brushed across the top of a helmet,

cold and hard, like a rock. There were more, every one
the same, ten of them in paired rows, and growing faster

every day. Soon their black eyes and identical frowns peeked
above the ground, scowling up each time I turned the corner

of the house. I learned to avoid that garden, the lilies unkempt
and dying. Still the troopers kept growing, mission unknown.

It was something beautiful: I watched them for weeks at night
as first their vulnerable necks then armored shoulders broke

through the surface of the dirt. When finally they could pull
their arms free, they pushed themselves out from the ground,

a simple formation. I hid behind the curtains and listened
as they marched, blaster rifles shouldered. Who could stop

them? The next morning, my son's incredulous face searching
the garden: only a fray of black and white roots trailing

from the earth's broken jaws.
It's always the boys (we boys)
who mistake our heartbeats for blunt instruments--
our arms bent sinew and strong enough to move mettle
like I got the steel for this
like I am not movement and men, real men are foundations.
Why do we boys tempt the water when it wakes?
We boys, who know the armistice in its steady hum
how we engage quiet with a fickle fuse
how we tuck it tight into the chamber of our palms.

Who would pray for rain on a day like this?
For the creek to build into a mean froth.
The white of its rushing, like a static pulse
like bent teeth. The long descent into the ravine,
pushing through the brush, your dirty sneakers
rattling the creek at its streaming margins.
This much motion, it can make a lie of us.
These lives we made building ourselves into brick.

