Can I seriously take around this pale mask,
this variation of myself,
this visceral ruin we share like gravity?
Only your arm futures, looks past the snuff of quarantine.
Can I attend this like a woman on my face?
Can my devotional self of feet and hands, of body parts and gloves,
expression in that language you read backwards?
I speak a hurt you won’t return.
In what mouth do you recognize these wings?
What speaks those other faces you carry in magazines,
what discourse, what gossip-circulation dreams my livelihood?
Ours is a story, a face without hate or love. A face,
unpunished, goes thinking: This vicarious universe,
this inviting keyhole. If I am a lung
then you are the presence of dogs,
the ode of lilies strung dark with angst,
my service resembling your hope-stolen skin.
On the floor, tonight, you might know which masks you reviewed,
which faces you played to dreams.
Tonight you might make me a different image,
make me a disguise of hands, make me hungry like a key.

You were an acre of field behind the house.
You wore your shorts low around your hips
and when we climbed behind the trees there was more of you.
You said you liked to fuck until you sweat.
When I slept with you, your body was like a rag doll’s.
I pressed my tongue against your cloth tongue
and whispered you’re so beautiful. So sexy.
You weren’t an oil painting.
You were a greenhouse of fruits, sun-drunk, singing.
I had to color my fingers and rub the pulp into your breasts.
We were a Blind Melon song. You were drinking in a diner.
I was at the VFW hall watching your flashing accident of hair,
the shiny skin of an apple, the elastic of your underwear.
We wanted to run through the grass but we were busy peeling things apart.
I followed the concise thread of hair around your navel,
followed the thought of you, not like a peach and not like a melon,
not like anything sweet, but like a robbery, a sweaty violence.

This is a poem about the way you move when I see you talking to me with words that are made of lines.
 I do not know how else to explain it. When I worked for the paper all I ever did was smudge oil on my face. I was violent. I smoked as if I were a gorgeous woman.
 When I dreamed of you talking I saw lines of text like the great articles of god and when I woke I never wrote this down. Instead, I wrote poems made of the things you didn’t say and when you never said them I felt alone.
 I wanted to promise you my love and then I thought better of it. I want to promise you my love but I’m feeling so goddamn happy.

I sat in the backyard on a tree stump. My feet were on the concrete. I thought about
moving to a folding chair to have something to press my back against. In the kitchen it
was four degrees cooler and upstairs it was fifteen degrees warmer. Planes moved
overhead loudly. The christmas tree lights hung around the windows nicely. It smelled
like it had just rained. Straight ahead in a window I watched as a woman turned a very
bright light on and off. I called my mom and told her to build a veranda. I said there
weren’t enough verandas being built these days. She asked me how I was doing. I told her
I was getting over a cold that yesterday I thought I’d gotten over entirely. We talked about
the last time we’d seen constellations.

I wanted to ask them why he was sitting face down in the creek. Why she was moaning
and why the horses’ legs looked so loud. I wanted to ask them if they knew a good place
to get a bite to eat, maybe with some vegetables. I wanted to ask them to come by some
time as they looked like the sort of people who could tell a good story or would actively
participate in board games. From above on the bridge a train stopped and it seemed like
people were jumping from it but from where I was standing I couldn’t really tell.

I began thinking about styrofoam, earthquakes, floods, whales swallowing people, foxes
or wolves I couldn’t tell which, but they were slowly moving, in that order. I thought
about diving into her mouth while she slept and living inside of her, silently controlling
her every movement. I thought about going far away. About pulling off my penis just to
see what it would feel like. I thought about vomiting for three hours and then the feeling
passed. Everything passed. The wind passed through the trees and the fences and the
windows and everything we could name.

First

He went across the floor to where she sat. One sleeve of her shirt dropped to show her shoulder, salted and brown. One hundred fish filled the wave. Now, he said. Now is now.

Second

The car wouldn’t start, sputtering time in falling snow. Crows stood in the tree above. Give me, she said, reaching over the knees.

Fourth

They walked the dog, hardly filling a black space in the dark. The houses had lit their windows red.

Fifth

Don’t watch me, he said. I feel frail. She kept at it though, the bottles in the windows having broke the light.

Third

It was second to longest day. The swimming pool gleamed green under the calving sky. She curved her hip to the water and pushed. Now, like ever, he could not keep pace.

Sixth

As they ate their lunch, a thousand flowers the size of periods. Your hands, he said. Though she had no embarrassment.

Seventh

The ring twisted, burnt gold on the black street.

Eighth

Leaves were bright crusts of bread in the grass. She filled her shirt to parade in the street, rocked back on her heels. That’s too easy, he said, misunderstanding again.

Ninth

Her leg held steady the tree. We should rest, one of them said, for Christmas. The floor was a wasp of needles, the house a caught fire.

Today I think I’m going to find a random email address and email the following email:

“Alright, the gun is in locker F8 at the gym. Get it before tomorrow. You know what to do.”

You made me do it.

Pterodactyl spirals.

Conjugal visits.

And so goes my brain,
doughy lump,
eternally stumped;
I’ve got nothing.

I’m drawing exploding
fighter planes in the margins
of my final exam on Modern Ethics.

Scratch tickets suddenly sound like
a whole lot of fun. Hot dogs for dinner.

There was maybe a month
when I would drink nothing but
Ralph’s Cantaloupe Cocktail,
and that summer was the one
when a girl from northern Maine
became a lip balm model
and rode around on the roof
of my mint green car.

The flavor was like fake sugar
and a very cheap postcard
and not unlike cantaloupe
in the way that it only maintained
my interest for a few minutes.
Then, I wanted to swim
at midnight with the new girl
whose lips were even mintier.

That summer now serves simply
as proof that before I was a man,
I was a shitty man, and
even now I can’t deny that
my taste buds are any less immature.
Now, before I drive nowhere,
I like to buy a long tall bottle
of Stewart’s Key Lime Soda.

Living in an Apartment Building

means hearing noises at night.
Living in my building means

knowing that those noises
are paramedics carrying

my grandfather down
five flights of stairs—

roughly—smoke tinseling
from each limb,

wrapped in
ripe orange plastic.

My grandfather. 2 AM.
Living in an apartment building

means turning down the volume
to hear the paramedics talking

about football while they
fumble with my grandfather.

Five flights; it’s like death
isn’t quite ready to pull

the shades on life.
My grandfather. His limbs

are like dried-out branches—
a blue spruce on January 1st.

He’s a fire hazard. Tinsel.
Living in an apartment building

means not always living
or not living always

or not living all ways.
The noises at night always

end with a glass of Cran-Raspberry,
my girlfriend asleep,

my grandfather rifling
through the recycling bins.

there’s a swamp in my mouth
& my face is words that feel
like someone else’s face.
my tongue like it’s numb with skoal.
but you rollercoaster. you freefall.
you a river stroking wheat field
that’s banking your hips.
& if everytime I say your name don’t
sound like it’s your name I’m saying,
you gotta understand. you gotta understand
I can be the summer vacation of your bed-
room. hell, I could cut myself
with your photograph & bleed
like a boat. but why stop there
when every word I say to you spills
like pondwater all down your t-shirt?
& that’s something, right? that’s
better than me saying again how you
a river & I’m a fish & the night, shit,
the night could go either way.

before it gets all rat poison
in my gut I’m gonna lie down
on the sidewalk in front
of your apartment & pretend
it’s railroad tracks. I been
walking up & down your street
since like 1992. now all
I think about is you &
you know I’m sweet on you,
would sing my favorite mr. t
experience songs to you over
the telephone. you can call me
anything you want but I am not
your saltwater taffy & sometimes
you shuttlecock me. I think
about sleeping with you in
the sleeping pill heart of the afternoon:
wanna wiretap your clavicle. dance
church clothes. rhythm your blues.

all night we should go arson & I want nuclear
fingertips so I can scrawl dirty words into
the bottoms of your feet. I beg you because it feels
so good begging you & I wanna beg forever if
that’s what’s gonna get me buried inside the buttons
behind your buttons. so all damn night? my heavy metal
records turned up real loud, your hips & how about
we buzzsaw all this fucking pretext? I wanna unzip you.
your spine, your dress, your skin. make you blue
with fleshliness. practice stories in the bathtub. practice
your belly. I’m a tightrope walker. you can be the wire
or you can be the ground but ain’t no one gonna give a shit
unless there’s blood. call 911 & I’d love to play hospital
with you. I’d love to say one thing you’ll believe is true.
be your empty wheelchair & we busta rhymes all night.

No Fugazi trains ever ran for little old me
the Pink Floyd shuttle provided alternate service
between duckling and chicken. I feel passed over, I’m
a pity pot, I

cannot blame my parents no punk boyfriend delivered
the perfect mixtapes; that I was too busy waiting
for cashout at King Soopers, sick to death of slicing
choice boneless ribeye

or otherwise engaged at The Dark Side of The Moon
laser light show, 27 times, holding Chronic
in a Barbie lunchbox (I preferred to be the one
holding, I really

love power). Yes, sometimes it seems everybody
good got a piece of Ian McKaye growing up, girls
even; at a used bookstore in Boulder, one lady
told me she listened

to Christian rock exclusively before she landed
Ian; Fugazi about-faced her from a dunghole-
snarfing-piggie, a spectator, security guard
for a shit shelter

into a baby blanket of perfect compassion.
Fugazi is an American punk band formed
in 1987. I think I’d like to be
a fallen Christian.

Music never saved my life but I once ate crudite
off the same plate as Joey Ramone. Yes

the man enjoyed a good veggie but only snap pea;
and he double dipped. That evening I had a feeling

I could up and die once I told everyone I knew
that something extraordinary had happened,

how a higher force must have caused it, making me
more special than people ever thought. Alas

the next morning I awoke to find myself not quite
dead yet, feeling like a dog who’d broken Joey’s trust

or returned a gift from whatever made the crudite,
Joey and me come into alignment. I thought about

my neighbor’s kid who wears little purple Ray Bans
and a mohawk. He would have kept it a secret.

Now I’m at CB’s every night, looking out for rockstars
to share fingerfood. Richard Hell and I might split

an order of clams casino or some angels
on horseback. I’m told Debbie Harry eats fondue.

I wished Miley dead, Miley and her Wonder World
Miley and her makeup team, but I suppose I didn’t
want to watch her die, because when she choked
on a giant smart phone I called out: Miley Miley
can you talk can you cough can you sing? and pounded
between her shoulder blades with three sharp blows
which failed to dislodge the giant smart phone
and Miley fell down ringing, reaching with taupe fingernails
for my unpolished toes; so I suppose I imagined
it was me falling backwards through softball practice
and family dinners, a turkey drumstick
all turning to glitter, when from some magic well
I pulled a starlet Heimlich maneuver
until her voicemail gurgle became a steady breath
and her instant messenger a tumultuous cough—
her highlights sparkled as she burst into song—
and the texting halted and the vibrating stopped.

Weird, alone, I sit in this house,
right broken foot notwithstanding,
or standing. My wife and daughter
both gone to tangent. The fake leather

chair and the lamplight surround me.
The sound of a mower making pretty
for the neighbors. Pretty or petty—
who cares, it’s all appearance. I think of

my friends only months entrenched
in Brooklyn, especially Jane, who is ever
and Ohio. She wrote the saddest letter
of her life on a train, with references

to Plato, what can anything mean?
Everything is mean; the dog growls
at runners. We are but marks on the face
of the skyway, a drawing of the infinite, yet

perishable particulars. I paint here the gate
in my mind out to sea and there hope
for monsters and possible returns.
Maybe life is best next to mice in a nest,

or maybe with exploding in a con-
stellated glee. Mine is a fog of chairs
and walls, typewriter ribbons, and trying
not to falter, not to muddle forever

the beginnings and ends. But yours,
Jane, is massive to match your affections,
back and forth beneath the city with a store
of varnished talent. I’m sitting here broken

and thinking you’re enlightening, and in
lightning . I want you to know it,
my silly heart goes out. Ours
is a friendship no distance can diminish.

Even now I see your features in an idyll
raging fire. The house closes in
and my foot neatly throbs. I miss you
as you miss me, and the noumenon

between us. All my dumb love,
then a siren.

Upstairs, a terror.
Soon I will take her and wrap her in fur.
These are the reasons: my wallpaper.
Overhead the rabbits do flutter about me.

Clearly, they know nothing or the awful
I throw through them. And you,
such a lovely—a brightly rendered thing.

The problem of meaning can’t begin
until you think it. Be like the voices in the trees.

A geranium grows through the roof of your mouth
until finally your fire expires in a house. This
wouldn’t be so devastating, but it is or it isn’t.

You’re saying so to the fire and rescue,
and to the emergency room of mysterious shapes;

you’re saying so much so
you’re saying you’re in love with the price
of an oil refinery. You feel like a pipeline

clogged with the sound of its breath in your ear.
And while you are nowhere to be found this year,

you’re sure in your veins that your love is a virus.
You’re sure if she knew it, she’d be tearing through the forest
to liken the two of you to lichen, spreading

over the carport and onto the porch, through the front door
and into the entry, dining room, living room,

kitchen counters, the century, children’s toys,
your favorite leather chair, then
up the back stairs toward the rock

where you’re sleeping. Caught
completely off guard,

the bear trap is yours, and a miniature poodle
prances over to observe you,
to whisper in circles what a pity.

It was the worst sort of enchantment—
spring, and all the cherry trees on fire
in the park across the street. I had a bruised arm,
a polka-dot dress, and you, a canoe
in your garage we couldn’t carry.
The morning was disguised
as a toothache and there was no getting over it.
We were the worst sort of accomplices.
replacing the arbor with tin cans
and tissue paper. The picket fence with chicken wire
until the evening spindled to an argument.
That night, I pulled enough hair from the shower drain
to make a doll, rode the bus home imagining feral shadows
moving in grass along along the shoulder. Really, I was out for blood.
Biting your lip and moving over you in the orange glow of the streetlight,
something soft and fur-lined in my moth when I kissed you.
We imagined horrible things were happening in the suburbs full of
key parties and discontented husbands.
Broken fences and children crouched in closets.
The boats in the harbor knocking sides in twilight.
The prairie stretching around us black and flat.

First, there will be a thin string, winding. A monster
in the gridwork —terrible— half god, half man.
A horned Anteros hiding in the bushes.

You’ll be half cocked, half alive, half-gone by the time
you get there, where the girls turn into trees then back into girls,
their crippled ankles turning in the wind.

Imagine that you are pursued by a stranger with very white teeth.
Imagine the hunters gone from their supper at the sound of the trip wire, the whirligig.
The thin spindles of your spines snapping and cracking.

Here, the girls are always changing into cows then back into girls.
Into tables and countertops and stairwells with steep drops.
You will be pursued by a woman with a bow and arrow.

She may be your mother or your sister but you can’t tell for all the blood
You’ll be wild with fever by the time you reach the thresh hold
where a stranger will cut your tongue, your hands before he takes you.
Before we replace your body with a doe at the very last second.

For months, I couldn’t write. It was the loveliest vertigo, sort of like drinking tequila but
without the hysterical blindness. My blackbirds were wingless, legless. They sputtered on the
ground like firecrackers while you played flare gun, fire engine. I smelled like grass and rabbits,
waited in the field for days for lightning, wanted that spark, the mailbox sticky with wasps. I
could say I wanted order, all my ducks lined up like a carnival, playing hide and seek, patty
cake, with the wedding rings. Shiny, sharp toothed and singing. But I meant I wanted us strung
together like lanterns. A sort of morse code in my molars. Once for no, twice for yes. Meant I
wanted turbulence, trouble, to be sawed in half by wanting it.

The embryo in the brainwaves
thrashing around on the brainshore
would be a horrible job.
Processing info in sidereal chunks
sent from a dying star called childhood.
Sending ripples into the afterbirth
of the giant gaseous afterthought
that barely acknowledges your existence.
Blip, blip, blink, blink goes sonar
in the eye in the forehead of the nothing
that perceives you as a speck of dust
fledging on its lash for a moment then shhhh
I feel that way too. And then I feels
something else the flux of a moment
where the particles cohere to produce
another version of Ben Mirov.
Alone in his apartment. Sipping coffee
in the dream. Most people are at work.
It’s beginning to rain.

My mind is a calm cool
bowl of shaving cream.
I say this not to you

but to the antenna
buried deep inside you.
By say I mean hurl

gobs of my mind
at your antenna.
When this gets old

you roll over in bed
and say Thank you
that was wonderful.

I’ve spent all night
with these words inside me
and now here they are like snowmelt.
Like a long dark slipstream of mistakes
trailing out of the future
into the abyss of the of of of of of of of of of of of of of
Are you still there?
I’m a little surprised you didn’t hang up.
I spend so much time
whispering into the ear
at the center of the labyrinth.
I forget other people.
Standing at the edge of an amorphous
blue feeling ringed round by what
did Keats say? I can never remember.
Though I carry it with me
wherever I go. Like the simile.
Like the symmetry I give
the mirror. If you’re still listening
Put me somewhere safe.
Put yourself to sleep.

A muskrat
carves verses on the pond
each morning at ten

tears hyacinth, flag iris
pickerel mouthfuls
uproots the lily pads

but I admire
her tail
the oily needle

quivers north
as she paddles industriously
south

and how she sparkles
then dissolves
in mud clouds

underwater or
spotting me
goes motionless

as those
first floating moments
prayer is over

Do the hawks know I am
counting them, my head cold
and heavy with salt? To fly
that way must feel like finally

you belong. I stand here hugging
my surfboard, going over
a scolding. The wave yanked
my body wrong side out

like a skirt inside a washer, like
a ragdoll wrenched from a hand. I
thought I heard the ocean ask, Who
do you think you love?

Now baylight lowers its body
onto the great dune’s body.
Beach grass whispers to water and
dwarf pines sit on their hands.

Just as the ocean makes its bed,
the sky comes on like a furnace.
The hawks drift higher, ashes,
ashes on the air.

I rename this place Point High Time for the world
I am in love with. Rename it for
this life, the place we all fall down.

I say and all the mushrooms open
their wings and come with me

In my hands are geology, salt & friendship
so of course I’m not scared

The sky is bright! Seeds everywhere!
I take hold of a sailor’s knot and ride into the trees

A small god flies forward with sand in his mouth
& bangs on my forehead a little

Seeds everywhere! The purple wind
full of rosemary and drug

I don’t know where I’m going but I’m going
where the gold foil roasts

Edge 1

The intrinsics of your bristle +
rabbit feet + elaborate tress
performances + I am very expensive.

Edge 2

With the shades
open I see your red car
coming down my
street quick like the ruse
of spit or the way a mouth
blooms dark parts up
a neck or another trick
still I am slotted apart
by what your red vocabulary
drafts in me

Edge 3

(It exposes
my gambit. It garbles
my gams. It makes me
a garter. It takes back
my girders. It acts out
of turn.)

Edge 4

Inaugurate this: In any other kindle
this impeccable spur would not shine.

There is a tree outside my tree.
Here I am in the thick
of nothing. When you left,
it was like a huge red balloon had exploded
noiselessly. Below the highest branch
are ten more branches. It makes me feel tiny
how cactus pinches up. In the middle of the movie,
the other woman enters wearing a little dress
and little else. I draw two towers
made of ghost. My cats begin to doubt
that I will ever feed them again. The last time I saw you
you were talking about medicine. I consider
filing a complaint. I buy no-name
drugs and tell it to the camera. My landlord stops by
with boxes for all your letters. How it does not rain. I pack you up
in two beautiful boxes. I circle the fire
department but no longer have anything sexual
to say. A tree grows

outside my tree. The last time we fucked we fucked
like you were fire and I was fire and so I become a firebreather
overnight. I listen to Springsteen and stomp the floor
with my thumb in my mouth. I love you
because you are that rain
and do not come.

Parsley sprig or melon
wedge next to the fried eggs.
Someone says: hold

the garnish, it’s a waste,
and the waitress
refuses to serve him.

As if the kiss
at the nape
of the neck

could be loaded
onto scales, weighed
and measured.

I heard you texted
John about the moon
last night. He gloated
when he told me.
I told him, no,
you didn’t text me.
Why text the one
you’re standing next to,
beneath that lucid moon?
Of course, there was
no moon last night,
none that could be seen.
It was like the way
you stood by me,
beyond what the naked
eye can glean. I read
between the lines,
between the clouds,
that’s how, despite
facts to the contrary,
I found you,
breathless, there.

Early one Sunday morning, razor burn
like abrasions on the A-side: “Revelations”

in the guitar hitch. Still slatting gospel
with railroad ties. Still spitting half-stains

as if they were creeks out where even
the cactuses get thirsty. Juarez: you’re

all wood & wire, cross stitched
like a longhorn’s horns. The B-side

locomoting from here to no-self-control
like a box car hopping the tracks with sterno

cups instead of wheels. Like claim jumpers
hopping the potter’s ground. You sang

they put me on a train & took me back
in a voice that split the crank pin, loosed

ribbon from the Good Book. You wore
black half a life. Your joints disjointed

like a drunk’s story. You played guitar
strings like they were a convict’s pinstripes

turned out of their black & white minds.

Each day I woke
as it started to get dark
and the pain came
month after month
of this, who
in hell knows
when I got well
Now
with dawn, waking
from the rampage of
sleep, I am walking
in the Lincoln woods
A single bird is
singing loudly—
as I did before
I walk here, as though
through tall room
after room in a house
where the owner’s not
home, yet observing
my behavior
from behind
the two-way mirror
of appearances; listening in
on whatever it is I am
thinking, listening
critically. Not too,
though, I even feel
liked, I could swear
it, at certain brief
instants as the sunlight changes
swiftly, leaving, leaving
and arriving again—
that invisible
bird is still
bittering chirping away, as
if the words were
meant for me,
their intent,
the translation within
my grasp, and yet
it will never come to me.
Nothing is left me of you.

It was finished.

He glanced at his watch,

like the doctor who pronounces time of death.

Then he went to bed.

Outside the wind was blowing.

Some more hours passed;

he opened his eyes. And

on the whole he was pleased

to have awakened once more, even though

he still wasn’t that good at it,

and found it so painful and strange.

I did not let you fuck me when you asked
so you assumed I was a gentleman,
tied back your locs to keep them away
from my eyes. Your name will fell you.
You like soul music. Your body is Biblical.
I am learning not to want sons
with you. Both eldest and youngest slain
by prophecy. I am supposed to say
things that will make you believe—death
is a sweet song. Because you only held
me with your big body, I will thank you
with my small voice. This is an elegy
for you. Fear not. Doomed flesh, I will sing
you down, I will sing you to your knees.

The first sip I puckered. Sucked
the roof of my mouth like the night
before. Nothing prepared me for this
or, that night, my own blood dripping
its juice box drip from a loosened tooth.
I told you—in the bathroom, sodium
peroxide, warm saltwater, gargle, spit.
Your arms awkward around me as we both
looked into the mirror, my bottom
lip gesticulating like a man on fire.
I told you I don’t like nobody playing
back there. You held me like a lush holds
his drink: humming down each swallow, holding
firmly the glass to break then lick each shard.

The first sign: his stepping into the puddle, not over it.
That he wanted to lose himself inside of someone else
and would pull it out if invited to; if, as though satisfaction,
its promised arrival, was enough to believe in—of course
he would show someone who said sweetly, seeing in him
something in need of a soft voice, How beautiful is it? Show me.
And the unzipping would be brief. The pull down
of an elastic band would become his life story,
dividing him into what should be left behind and what is left
behind but continues to follow. I’ve forgotten already
how it really ends. But here, in my hand. Look. Room enough
for you to, inside, make a home. I’ve split myself
from myself like a man who wants to disappear. Slowly,
in successive tugs, I’ll show you how. I’ll show you.

dear johnny i would have sent you this text: new bikini wax and not wearing underwear, but i don’t have your number. the only time i feel like a girl is when i have velcro rollers in my hair. people ask me if i like living in new york. sometimes i come home and it smells like vegetable oil and salt in my apartment. i pick up a dish and think about smashing it. i feel good about myself when i go to sleep hungry. it would be inappropriate to bother you at work.

dudes it is possible that i will make out with you after reading your poetry but then i’ve kissed some unforgivably awful musicians. liesel asked me if i knew how many hours she’s spent watching some guy mess around on his guitar. i wish this question wasn’t so relevant to my life. maggie packed body glitter when she moved to paris and amy is just fantastic. i found hairspray here and already feel more grounded. when i was younger i hoped to grow up and spend a day on far rockaway beach talking about how much i like morning sex. the bangs situation in asia is serious. years ago we spent a weekend with ghosts in the mountains. the ouija board made us promises. i hope we wrote them down. leaving is only leaving in the context of returning. the letters i sent out can stay unacknowledged.

Scene I

Are primates the only order that fear rain, its shedding downhill?
Do they think,
                    my bones won’t mind: they’re always and already dying?
And this man, though he’ll never find feathers under her arms,

can’t stop from wondering where he’ll seek shelter
should the sky open.
                              Maybe the rain was never the problem
to begin with.

                    Finally he comes to realize he’ll never understand
birds, though he wishes they’d burrow in his bellybutton,

give him a balance he can find no other way.
He is not a birdwatcher, but the grackle’s dirge,
its turn, its biting grip
                              of the night, how it is thinned
with rain, with hard rain on a roof made of something
other than stone, other than thatch and light and thunder.



Scene II

Already shadows have made their mark.
Even a tuning fork pitched just right
          couldn’t pierce her eyes.

She’ll have regrets. In her hips,
or maybe just below the bowing
          in her calves.

She’s a torn corner, she’s what’s missing
in her portrait: a signature, a blemish,
          both. And my god

she’s beautiful, the way archery’s beautiful
or chop suey or shipwrecks
          and so much wine.



Scene III

It’s not called thinking when a mirror’s involved.
Then, it’s called studying:
                                        Bees are building a hive in the bedpost,
and I’m exactly one year old on Saturn.

The mirror is propped up in a chair,
nearer the floor than normal, so light
won’t find its way there, so she’s backlit

like a firefly against the neighbor’s
brick siding. An almost-curtsy,

her hands:
                    Like casino night at church, or the flip
of the porch light, perhaps I’m off to bed,
but first, just one more look.

 More and more your memories
            of having fun turn into memories of you
being insufferable.
      You did what you wanted,

      singing Bon Jovi in the karaoke room
            while your best friend slumped over the song
book and your girlfriend stared
      in amazement from across the room,

      wondering, Who is this guy?
            as you pointed at her and sang, We’ve gotta hold on
to what we’ve got in a voice
      that can only be described as terrible,

      and the small Korean man
            brought the soju bottles and arranged them
artfully along the long table
      around which knees were politely

      avoiding any facial expression,
            except yours, which were squinting under the strain
of all that falsetto and the raw Japanese
      denim you’d been crushing them into

      day after day, trying to hone
            your sleek, ideal, repeatable shape, you, you,
look at how thick and glossy
      my you, your hands sang as you

      petted your knees on the subway
            and imagined they were looking more like
Roger Federer’s knees,
      which look so good in shorts,

      you liked to say, Federer is the only man
            who looks good in shorts, you liked to expound,
and you wore these comments
      like your jeans, which is to say,

      everyone else had to wear
            them as much as you, taking on your singularity
and shining it back like
      so many moron moons, and, as any moon

      can tell you, it is one thing to shine
            back real light and another to boomerang knees
and denim, who’s not going to
      resent that, especially under the strain

      of weightlessness. You feel the weight
            now of all the ways you’ve been unfeeling, the little,
nameless, unremembered acts
      of blindness and self-love that have

      slid this distance between you and
            your friends, worn down the once bright image
of you they had when you were
      younger, the ballroom self baring

      its bathrooms and closets, its cranky
            janitorial staff, and while the self, you know,
is difficult to pin down,
      flowing somewhere between

      ballroom and bathroom, you’re sure now
            the weight of it is the weight of all those little acts,
how they’ve piled up
      and left an imprint on your friends,

      something a little sunken
            in how they regard you, singing and making
a fool of yourself, jumping up
      and spilling soju on the knees of the girl

      who’s the only reason your best friend
            stuck around, so that at the end of the night
he ends up stuck
      holding your stuff in the elevator

      on the way down, and when
            you stir from your drunken half-sleep to shout,
Where is my bag?
      he gets to assure you, I got it.

Someone said something
about the geraniums that got back
to the geraniums. That roses
were preferred. That colors
such as red are everything but.
Gossip, you know, I said
on the other end of the hotline,
is bad, really horrible
to the sniffling of the geraniums
and told them not to jump. Imagine
the difficulty of the outline in chalk
on the sidewalk for he
or she whose job is such art
with especially your roots, I said
while wondering what the relationship
is between empathy and guilt
and would I want my death
outlined in pastels with a bunny
added in the background
or lava. You never really know
if you’ve done any good with your life,
so why not act as confused
as everyone else is the philosophy
I’ve evolved to fit my collar size
and lack of control.
I never tell the callers
that the whole time we talk
I’ve got a gun to my head
and a knife at the throat
of the gun and a machete
somewhere, I lost my machete
but found my grenade, what’s
the saying: god
never closes a door
without breaking a window?
And what’s the difference
between aphorism and epitaph? Nothing
but a headstone. A chisel.

There was confusion on my end.
I thought Jesus was bringing the five bean salad.
I thought the war had ended.
I thought I limped on the left side.
I thought the cloud a Lamborghini and got in.
I thought the zoo deserved a hacksaw.
I thought the tree had climbed the boy.
I thought the grenade a potato and ate it.
I thought Francis Bacon was painting my heart.
I thought bears would stop us
from killing the oceans.
I thought pole dancing had made a comeback.
I thought the Decency Party
would offer a full slate of candidates.
I thought the snow fort
a metaphor for the womb
of public housing.
I thought Zen Buddhism
would beat the New York football Giants.
I thought San Francisco
a roller coaster and screamed whee
into the ear of noon.
I thought you were alive
when I packed an extra pair of socks.
I thought you were alive
when I realized “manumit” was two down
on the plane.
I thought you were alive
when I asked a mutual bartender
how you were.
I thought you were alive
even when I peed Sam Adams a first time
after being told you were dead.
But I thought the war had ended.
I thought the half-moon was winking at me.
I thought cabernet on the roof
with two of your ex wives a lovely funeral
ten years too late with jumping
at the end into the pool the only way
to prove I’d paid attention
to the jump shot with a second left
you’d always tried to be.
I thought a good, steady rain
would bring us to our senses.
But five thousand years
into the flood, I just don’t know.

The blanket I’m wearing over the jacket
over the sweater over the lava
barely keeps me warm on this, the first
October day of holding
the broken sparrow out the window
in both hands to heal it
with the integrity of weather.
“I have not forgotten you,” the sky
says to the hurt wing it has shined
over and under the aerodynamics of
in the coy manner of being
its usual ebullient self. The last time
I saved a life I was twenty three
and thumped a heroin chest
in a doorway in Detroit and breathed
mouth-to-mouth shovelfuls
of the daily recommended dose
until what was coughed back
tasted I can only imagine
what a toilet tastes like
if it woke one day as a guy
named Steve who’d smacked his way
just shy of the opacity
of the cheap tissue you find on planes
in a bathroom so small
it’s like you’re being told
you’re not wanted inside heaven. I looked
through his walking away
to his dying soon no matter what God
put on his to-do list
near Wayne State University
being not a state so much
as a hamlet amid what was once
a form of vibrancy
known as an American city.
How did I get so sad
when I possibly don’t even exist
reminds me of all the birds
I never had a shoebox for. Are we alive,
is that all we’re proving
and need to prove: now I’m happy
we don’t fall upon our sandwiches
with questions like that, that I found
the eyedropper and that it’s named
for dropping what it doesn’t actually drop.
How weird would that be? Plenty,
I tell the bird not listening to me
with its open mouth aimed
like the last chance I hope we’re all given
at water.

Skosh to six. Dawn is one
hundred thousand women
with candles in the field.
White dresses, see through
to bones. The hex of sight
fixes me to the map
of here: belong, wind
recommends in the keen
of its can’t. Don’t believe
this shit, I’m just wording
awake. The truth sounds deep-
ly unsaid. Words erase
what they speak. A poem’s
a muzzle.

Skosh to six. Dawn
is the words “dawn
is the words.” Until I say,
no see. Seems. Why else
this inveterate lingual
scrumming? Head’s
head’s only subject.
Of course, sailors know
head’s a shitter too. So far
to go, to get from here
to here. Wind wends
from lost to skin
to mouth to lost. A poem’s
a sail

(billowed).

When a camel begins to die,
each tooth kicks out like
an advent calendar.

His gums go bald
and he knows.

I wonder how it feels
when there’s only one, maybe
two days left, if

in the language of camels,
the word for ‘death’ sounds
remarkably like the low hum
of “oasis.”

When he reached the new jungle,
with its metal lions and their peculiar honking,

he cursed the lumberjack who shaved branches
off buildings, and his own feet, for all he could not climb.

When he cracked open a pigeon and ate
its wing, a cult of boys in black leather

bowed down, as two policeman carried him away
all wide-eyed and feather-mouthed.

When he took off his hat to pray
in the language of wolves

it was so beautiful that even the busiest men
placed dollar bills at his yellowing toes.

But he grew thirsty, and shook a cup at strangers
who offered him pennies. He ate every last one.

But finally, it was the umbrella-selling vendors,
the blatant disrespect for rain that did him in.

He laid across the steeple of a church
and splayed himself across New York

all guts and confetti. The tourists
cheered like the ball had dropped.

He says
“I hate Bob Dylan.”
I say
“I think we should see
other people.”

In an effort not to crawl back to you, I crossed the 2 train off my subway map in blue ink,
called it a river, sold my canoe.

Swept the soot from the chimney into a vase, scattered it all over Manhattan. Husband, I
pretended it was your ash.

Spoke your name in past tense and still, when we found ourselves in the same bar,
phoned a mystic. Told her I was seeing ghosts.

When you confessed your mistress, her red hair, her scars, how you learned them from
up-close, from inside out, you were no longer the man I married but a dead deer in the
center of our swimming pool.

Our dog has always considered you a burglar. Knew to spit, bark, bite before I did. Once
while you were sleeping, I stitched her electric fence through your skin. I wear her shock
collar on nights I go out drinking, on days I can’t find a reason to stay away even though
you have left so many behind.

I’ve watched you with other women. The way you hand fruit to supermarket clerks, how
your eyebrows lift at anyone with fake nails. Your favorite party story is how you once,
publicly, pleasured a girl with your band mate’s drumstick. It’s no wonder we don’t
love the same music.

On our first date, I bought a dress off a woman in Brooklyn so I could stay with you one
more day. Last week I threw your clothes from our roof knowing they would have fallen
faster had there been a body in them.

When I found a picture of your ex-lovers tits, used as a bookmark, I began opening every
novel upside down like a teenager shaking birthday cards waiting for cash to fall out.
This explains my love for fiction. We were never married. The dog is not ours.

While washing the dishes I watch from the window as the children we never had drown
in the piss-filled pool. I’ve never tried to save them. I invented that pool, this sink.

Did you know that the metronome inside us quickens when telling a lie? I want to build
an honest house, where the motion detector is so sharp it knows when my thoughts leave
the room. Where the clap-on lamp works as a polygraph. When you swear you still love
me, the lights flicker.

my girlfriend said, because you said they’re like caterpillars
but all I’ve seen are empty leeches so this grooming is a lie.

for a fortnight I let everything grow. my armpits were itchy
and sweat smeared the make-up above my lip, but my legs

were lovely and warm. I ran out of conditioner within days.
after a month my eyebrows were fat and dark as burnt sausages.

I could not see past them and so my girlfriend had to lead me
by the hand. I stopped blinking because it made my eyelashes

tangle in my brows. after two months they got so long I could
only drink through a straw. I did not need to wear any clothes

because my body hair kept me warm. after four months the hair
up my nose was long enough to fashion into a ringmaster’s moustache.

after six months my girlfriend handed me a razor, scissors, and tweezers.
lie to me she said.

her
moonlit
sleeping
face:

more
holy
than
sunrise.

I’d like to be all of them —
ever her, possibly you, at times

what you see from the couch
with your feet on the table

and the creaks running up
the walls, amplified in the cold —

the seconds it took: I count
slowly, with deep felt sincerity

your reasons, shirt and hair,
your poems, hands and motion

and the monologues you ran
through alone, wet in the shower

small truths you planted in
blue-lined paper, decorated

with stickers and oval heads
covered in long ballpoint hair

but none of these are as vital
as knowing that I don’t know

what you mean

It was awkward, the way the tattoo artist
lifted up your shirt on my birthday

ran hands across the tan 16-year-old back
before announcing his love of virgin skin

skin turning into organic swells
of nervous girl, and me, speaking cleanly

thinking about bicycles and wheels, letters
I probably should have written, not those

Chinese characters stitched across your
canvas, a radio playing songs about

repeated knocking, knocking, but I had
tuned it all out, focusing only on the hum

It happened
again.
I
took a
photo.
I do
not feel
guilt.

Listen. Boys be trained like go wait stay shop. They purse and cuss on cue, like
television, and step out through black window dress like doors. I’m a street animal then,
named, turning looking spitting carrying cantering, missing my throat through which
three words saying, My ponytail, my chest, my see-through blouse pass smooth, Baby.
Car horses, car bikes, named Baby. Siren, floral bell, like floral white that serves and will
window from another reflection. Beneath the church porch ivies clutch my blouse. I’m
inside. Take me. Wait there. I’m still inside. I hover. Leave. I hover through, I’m told, and
by.

All these birds wake me up just like always
though the me that they sing to is new everyday
& relieved to find out a body doesn’t have to do
everything. I’m trying to believe it. I’ve only
ever wanted a reason to slow down, an angle to navigate
that made me feel worth it. Yesterday, I drove
the wrong way from you; soon I’ll jump back
& try the sequence again — you & me lost
together & looking for landmarks that tell you what’s
right: dragonfly light, summer bees exhausted
in the window, that wherever we are is okay.

It’s hard for me to hear over the din
of this living, the racket of oceans
& the gulls overhead. I started to forget
about me & thought maybe
it was for the best. Probably I had my greatest
ever shot already & all that comes next
is some new disappointments. Remind me
again that together is something we can’t
do alone.

Dandelion stalks populate the yard, reaching
in rusty light, & who knows why
their fuzzy heads are vacant? I can see
the dew on the grass from where I’m sitting
just like I can hear you in your voice.
Who would question my desire
to run outside & feel the dangerous AM
dampness or to risk it all to tell you about it?

Every so often, I arrive at a locus where I am unable to politely hold a ball of air. And it is during these moments in which I think of you, you, and you—though, perhaps, not in that order. Nonetheless, let the shape of my hand communicate my discomfort, my discontent, for there is always a slight pleasure in simply knowing.

I could be smaller, but I’ve been to Paris, the night. You will never find me alone, by a sunken ship—the wreckage, is too. I could have been a troubadour, left to be wild with fury. I won’t settle for homogeny, why, throw me in the pits! Let there be only a black black way by which I am thought about. Here, only dust, there, a goose egg.

I’ve been known to acquiesce myself to certain subjects: things of fancy, but never fancy things. Entirely different things, you and I, but more often than not I cannot help myself to a well-lit cigarette, any sort of calming vice, an established drug habit—I could never stand anyone who chewed his nails though, or shot his dog every time he was feeling prissy.

Like the busted jaw of a lion,
downtown lays open wide,
its teeth jagged from trying
to eat the stars.

We hold each other when
the earth shutters,
keep our heads down when
the windows fall like loose scabs.

In that embrace, our breath mingles
and we’re in a typhoon,
hidden from a crowd, looking up,
their mouths agape.

The sky crusts over
into the insides of a geode,
winking itself onto the walls,
refracting darkness into glitter.

Hold me, hold me,
because when we look up,
this will all be gone

and my eyes
will be moon,
yours, sun.

The fang tips of a demon mouth
cause the stars in the midnight sky,
trying to puncture the delicate
tissue over the world, blue—

the blue of a bruised vein
waiting to burst and flood the city.

I’ve got one hand in the wind
and one hand on the wheel,
the car leaving a trail, the cool inner bulb
of a flame stretched to a line.

Above, a flock of birds fly headfirst
into a passenger plane.

If the world was going to end right now,
I’m entirely fine with this being
my final stance, an anonymous statue
for whoever stumbles upon me in a second life—

frozen in the driver’s seat,
turned from the sky caving in,
monstrous stained glass falls,
knives, as ink covers my hands—

a smudged goodbye note left on a kitchen counter,
a broken pen in two halves,
leaking blue liquid onto the tile,
the molar white of the floor biting back.

Yes, there is a secret to the sky.
Unlock it, and you will have nothing.
You will be named God, which means:
he obliged to live forever and for the needs
of others. You will eat no divine jam,
no virgin will sit at your left hand.
You will have no son. Though it is true
you will have more knowledge than
when mortal, it will come at a price,
as did the gift of fire. Better to stay
where you are, then: in your body,
on your knees, open wide.

Dark, imposing flesh. Darker still
its center, like the tongue of
a cow that has for a week now been
dead, spent during calf-birth, and the calf
still clinging to her, and his own tongue
wild for want of milk, and the calf
with flies in his eyes—that color: near-to-
purple, bruised.

I should call it beautiful, or beauty
itself, this dark room, broom closet, this
nigger-dot. I should want to fit
into it, stand up in it, rest, as would
any beast inside a stable. I should want to
own it, force it mine, to know it
is my nature, and of course don’t I? Of course:
why shouldn’t I want it?

Black mirror. Space delicate
and cracked. Now anything could
go in there: a fist, veined, fat.
A body. And here runs the blood
through the body, deep, watery.
And here runs the message in the blood:
this is it—fuck her fag like you’re supposed to.
And when the wind shakes

and when the iris shakes in it,
the lips of the flower shaping
to the thing that invades it, that will be
me, there, shaking, my voice shaking,
like the legs of the calf, who—out of
fear? out of duty?—is sitting by his dead mother
because what else will he do? What else
has he? Only because the voice outside him
makes him.

We’re on display, one of those museum boxes
with a catchy title: The Way They Fly Into Themselves
or Chasm: A Study in Air, Walnut and Whiskey.
Here are the details: the executive’s diminutive shoes,
his frizzy hair. Also the posture I’ve adopted—
half raccoon, half movie star. Postcards spew
from my chest begging miss me, miss me!
There’s no way we’ll die up here. Too expected,
pedantic. Pretty soon, the descent, like sex talk
that sounds like mewling. Negligible as a pretzel.
Below, the corn is tall. The kid who totes our bags
thinks we’re assholes, and we are.

More than divinity or marzipan or plump
apricots covered in black chocolate, more

than jewelry — its filigree, the brilliant
bursting beads — we want this delight:

hours in the soft grass of an upper pasture,
sitting on a stone wall, the sun smoothing

over us, wild raspberries climbing. We want
this kindness. We, who have done harm.

Home again with all the tiny mirrors
struggling for breath on the wall.

Last night: moths overhead, thick snake
dead at my feet. I’m the one with the wedge

at my side, the one to rid the house
of the ogre, encroaching. Last night

I stole your winter coat (plaid, denim)
from the woodpile then ran in bright sun

to bury it in a swampy gully. I woke
with a start, having killed something mild

and not worthwhile, dismayed I did not
first rummage the pockets for something

I might like for myself.

In the snow the girl was out of breath,
her bones made of sugar. A red bird
landed on her chest as she lay in the drift,
then sank into her, began to suck at her ribs.
When spring came, the bird sang a song
everyone in town heard, then forgot.
The farmers and teachers and ragged kids
spent the summer searching mulberry trees
for the bird, plotting to cage or kill it: to set down
the song or at least force the longing to stop.

The horizon has come
to meet us, look:

the way it shakes.

A suit crowned with storms
wears itself out above everyone.

We go to sleep with the wheel kept still.
Each night and day re-invented in it.

A bumpy turn and the things we lug along
the streetsides—bags of threshed wheat,
an interest in photography, the colored tickets

flapping on the parked cars—these seem
to define us. But we will not be

a platter of books and pencils today.
We refuse to walk when the signs
blindly show their confusion. Both

the outline of a tiny body in white
and the outline of a large hand in red
blink at once, so we move

away from the corner in a series of flailing hops.
Over time we have learned that falling
up a flight of stairs is just as easy as falling down.

Anywhere. But what those legs beneath us know
is how to stop, not the height of the rise

or the length of the run or the stairs pet names
as they meet penniless against each other. They just step—
again and again. Sometimes we get caught

and thrown with our bodies
wholly up into the sky. One clap
of the eye, then nothing we know.

another chance at the lotto.

My niece
and a portable radio
turn on
the same way.

This everywhere.
This just-happy-enough.

We’ve liked before.
This melody
strong and paused.

We’ve trashed
cars or boats, pulled up
weeds and
strawberries, came to
with our education
batteries all full.

The city got swept clean
by men in blue
and sentences
beginning with ‘the.’

Here is a dollar
for everyone.

When I was a kid I discovered sex was about how far a boy could throw
            a felled tree, how long two people could stare at each other instead of rain,
                        how hard it is to remove mud from hair and handprints
                                    from thighs.

Because the first penis I ever saw belonged to a boy who used knives
            as language, because that boy was my brother, because the boy
                        was my brother whose words were serrated, because he lived beneath

                                    me, his wrists pulsing into the ceiling, listening for my heart
to cease being a haven, I began pressing my lips against any boy’s body
            who was strong enough to throw me. I was convinced that breasts were missiles,
                                    exploding boys until their gestures transformed love to pain

before sex, pain with sex, sex of threat and secret. Because I discovered
            the stains of sex live under the skin’s pores, in the pegs of teeth
                        and tastebuds, because I learned early that girls who stroked

                                    cigarettes were afraid and lonely, because whiskey burning
my tonsils made me remember my brother’s saliva would always coat
            my throat, I don’t remember the first boy I gave away a kiss to,

                        the first boy I slammed against my parent’s kitchen door,
                                    or the first boy who slammed me against the rough edges
of a tree. I don’t remember when I first allowed a boy to treat
            me like a dagger, or the first time I discovered that crying

                        in the rain underneath a boy you don’t love or won’t remember
                                    isn’t the fastest route to god, to heaven or the torments of truth.

1.

            A is in love, still she breathes in the phone, with a married man
            who is teaching her to nurture her nurturing side. He has bought
            her a pot-bellied pot, soil, rocks, and a large plant. Today, he will
            teach her the sensual art of fertilizing roots.

            2.

            Although he tells her she’s stupid and lucky to have any man, B
            clings to her guy. She suspects he’s cheating, tears through his
            closet, then carefully refolds his sweaters, pants, marries his
            socks. She asks me to send holiday cards to her parents’ house,
            one less lie to sift through, she says, before asking, “How’s A?”

            3.

            See, for two months now I’ve dreamed myself in Cairo with a
            man whose face presses into itself like an accordion when he
            laughs. We drink tea, talk to children and pause five times
            during the day to pray, then make love. He never mentions his
            wife and six children in Durban. I never mention my lover in
            Binghamton. Every night I wake with my hand pressed into my
            mouth and hum a song that lulls my lover back to sleep.

            4.

            After she discovered I could be honest on paper, my mother sent
            me a letter outlining my father’s affair with a sister from church.
            She said she’d never give her body to another man. She said
            nothing of the heart.

My aunt believed in the sanative nature
of Wonder Bread, buying enough loaves
to cover the backseat of her Oldsmobile.
She kept most in a chest freezer, others
lined her kitchen counters. My father
said it was the thinnest of breads, crinkling
a slice between his fingers. My aunt
rolled her eyes. They continued rolling
until November, when her son said he was staying
at the base. He wanted to be a career Army man.
I heard her cry for a minute, and then she packed
three loaves into a box and mailed them.

Some stay for an hour, ruffle the spread and sheets, flush
a condom and leave the beige wrapper in the trash,
then ask for the 50 dollars back. This is a motel, I tell them, not a brothel.

My wife says she can spot them two miles away: the girls
young and pretty, but a bit washed-out at the cheeks and lips, arms
too thin at the elbows. It’s always the girl who asks for the refund,

never the man, Mariners hat tucked over his eyes, leaning
against an idling pickup. My wife wonders why I trust so much.
Give a room to a couple during a storm? I should know better.

I am not young, not like these girls. The youngest of them—
I would guess 18—asked what a brothel was. I laughed.
She asked again, her mouth enclosing the word. I explained

that women sold sex there and she started to cry.
On the way out she dragged her hand behind, middle finger
outstretched, refund in pocket. If we lose trust, I tell my wife,

we will truly have nothing left.

My mother conjures a phantom orchard
from the fumes

of her polishing
before the strangers arrive—our pine floors simmer in oil. The scent:

my Italian friend, Safia, in childhood,
who—during her parents’ divorce—

throttled all four of her pet gerbils, tossed them into her backyard’s
oily lemon grove. We drank

tart lemonade while our parents sipped juleps, spun
spears of bluish mint

sheared from the dark side of the house. It’s always
the dark side of the house

in memory. The dark side. We sat
in a circle of frayed wicker.

It wasn’t a laurel
tree I turned into, but an acupuncturist
with an inked-in woodlouse
on her arm. A memento of my
childhood on the edge
of summer, those suburban woods
where my sister and I poked
roly polies with oak twigs,
watched the bugs writhe
into silver spheres. Like desire
to its object—needle
to its channel in the skin. With each one
sunken in, I can touch a lung, a liver,
a gall bladder, a heart. I can start
the thrum of blood rushing
up like history. I brush a stray
hair from my eye as you lie
on the table. As I raise
my hand to my face my creased
elbow releases its wrinkles, goes
smooth and makes
the roly poly unfold, reveal
its whole shape.

and uncle, you’re there,
where the black-eyed Susans mirror

and meet at the root, lose all
sense of direction. They grow straight

down, down where you warp
and ripple, uncle, down where you lean

on the handle of your blue-
spaded shovel after the hurricane

split your beach house’s sewer line—
after the dune grass flooded

and formed its own
wavering lake. After

your death your boardwalk
rotted in the middle, so to get

to the sea I now walk
through the tangle of your yard:

your salt cedars, your string-
bean patch so heavy the whole

fence sways. These days,
there’s another forest

growing in the water—seaweed
red as your mustache as it burned

in the funeral home’s
oven. What the tide tells me,

uncle: it must’ve been the first
part of you to catch.

in memory. The dark side. We sat
in a circle of frayed wicker.

The day the body of my good guitar
begins to resemble the pinched lips
of the symbol we all agree means
eternity, arpeggio of tundra, I carry it
out to my garage where the vagaries
of weather and ambience will do it no good.

Passing washers and wing nuts sorted
into once-empty jars on the workbench
I wonder, what if the ancient Atomists
were right? What if each object is busy
beaming streams of tiny images of itself
in a bid to be seen by the black hole
in someone’s unforgivably blue iris?
As if endless equaled hopeful. Just in case
I take the only picture of myself
I’ve ever liked and bury it where
no one will ever find it. I had
the only copy.

Afterwards, I hang the shovel back
on the nail, above the carpenter’s level
with its little swallowed-back bubble
caught like a secret in its throat.
It’s only ever asked a single question
as if that’s all a firm grip on equilibrium
is good for. Or maybe it’s a suggestion box
with only one admonition:
Look to the space where something is
missing. Or perhaps there’s no good reason
it’s also known as a spirit level.

Sometimes you come out of the house
to check on me, all blue-eyed and permanent.
The problem is, whenever any three
of the two of us get together, the walls
loosen, porous as birds’ nests.
The ax heads glint and clink.

After you leave, I take garage door opener
in hand, raise and lower the horizon, again
and again, repeating aloud so that only I can hear,
words beginning with ‘no’:
nomadic, November, nocturne, north.

The skyscraper’s amber-lit windows
are beads on a vertical abacus
reckoning the city’s insomnia,
toting like photons up its sins.
Holes in the dark’s architecture,
rectangular doppelganger of prayer beads
minus the turn and click of hope,
windows are the color of other, density of hush.

I circumnavigate the city for hours, recalling
the scarecrow I’d confused with a crucifix,
my mother’s bonsai heart.
Balanced on the seat beside me
is the bottle of eyebright you gave me,
saying ‘an herb for both memory and eyes’.
I took it, wondering: how can anything good for the memory
also be good for the eyes?

The taxi slows for a yellow—no, a red light.
Color is the Babel of the eyes.
For example, in Ojibwe there is a verb tense
for what was going to happen but then didn’t.
As in, I was going to ask the driver to start homeward,
but then the light turned green.
The city hides its horizon, conceals its vanishing
point—fractal of a planet you cannot fall off of.

In daylight wall is fact. Roof is art-
ifact, vestige of earliest human-hewn structures,
which were only roof, all loose suture, even then
as functional as a fontanel in keeping darkness
out. Or in. On the roof at night raindrops
unmake themselves violently.
There is so much chaos even order
is made from it. Even fossils have electrons,
along the cusp spinning. Hubble redshift
at the edge of the universe is the ultimate marginalia:
proof all things move away from their centers.
Another dark calculation for the halo-less,
the seraphs sans serif, all wall and no roof.

The trouble with the word ‘invisible’ is that
it can be written down. ‘Silent’ too
is a word that betrays: anyone can speak of it,
reminding us that at night fact is roof,
ancient marginalia. Like electrons. Like angels.
There is so much history even night
is made of it. And walls. It’s why, numb as numbers,
we keep burnishing the necessary stained glass
of forgiveness, letting through light but not fact.
As in, history is rain but raindrops are facts,
relinquishing their edges, like all facts,
when they run into a roof, a human edge.

Fewer facts than a tombstone
tree rings reveal. Wedding rings, too,
are stingy with details, data-vague.

They say nearly nothing
so as to avoid telling lies like a map,
which (just to have something to say)

pretends to know where, exactly,
water laid a hand on land.
As if it happened just that once.

Like all circles, a ring speaks
to only itself, repeating
secrets in a silent gold language.

You, of course, argue: Trees
aren’t conscious, not even
mobile—there’s not much

to know. In silence I spin
my gold band over the table
between us like a coin.

Headless, endless, which way
it pitches betrays precisely
nothing. Around the spool

of countable others, my mind winds
one more day of marriage,
rubbed thin and faint

as a date in the family Bible.
Greetings from a year without rain,
from the second most bitter winter.

Greetings from circles within circles
on the surface of a lake where
something small and contained once vanished.

I don’t love my son
the way I thought
my mother should love me
so I handed him a shoe box
to put the dead bird in
and shut the door.

It was a mistake,
not to be sure he buried it,
not to grab the children
gathered at my back
door by their shoulders
to push them
into a half-circle
and a prayer.

Should have made them
take turns digging the hole,
each one of their pudgy hands
fingering stiff red’s box
to lower it to the ground.

It wasn’t my place
to teach other women’s
children about death,
so my own son
snuck the shoe box
into his backpack,
dead-eyed bird rolling
like a plastic prize ball,
told the principal
this cold block
of field bird
had been his pet.

See him
clutching a coffin
the size of his feet,
eyes wide over a pout,
giving a man a reason
good enough to hold him.

dust churns
between the pews
I nudge simon
tell him how years ago
you dressed as a shepherd
complaining
the hymns
did your head in
or at harvest
the smell
of warm bread
you carried the wreath
down the aisle
now we carry you
pews creak
we exit
surprised
at the coolness
and the smell of
cut grass

I count to a hundred and eleven
just to give you the extra seconds,
nevertheless,
you are invoked easily,
a flash through the rusting ship hulls
on the cemented oxbow.

Recite the alphabet backwards in my mouth,
would I still lie,
would I lie?
Flush the pills
and you will see.

Blame the dioxine in the river,
blame the north wind, vicing my head,
blame your squeal, lingering as radio sound,
blame the way you freeze when I undress.

You are always there,
crouched beneath the horsehair couch,
grooming your ears.

Take the eclipse
the tallowed warren,
the damp bouquet.

Your buck-toothed keening.

When I pull you apart there is so little,
not a mouthful of fur,
not enough to sew a single earflap.

There is a straight edge at the juncture
where the shopping list interlaces
the butcher shop humidity,
which shines and pushes back at
the woman behind the meat counter
then evaporates in the air above the freezer.

The necessary ingredients
form a sharp circle,
a gas ring or maybe an open sore.
Your disappearance is the obvious selection.

Thumb and slick back the curl,
blow on the Polaroid.
Who is at the window wearing plastic shoes and crying?
Who is putting on his apron
and standing by the radiator?
Who shall be cured to intensify the flavor?

Concerning a stainless steel bowl,
concerning the jowls of a pig,
concerning your stained dress
and how the shopkeeper arranges time.

An easy bargain,
but you must decide what you will trade.
Consistency in the mouth and throat.
She can make you float,
if necessary.

To ask a sandwich
      to make itself
I frequently employ
      a certain sleep

The sisters run
      circuses
I slip my tongue
      under the door

Blinds mean something
      different
      in the dark
I’ve started loving
      our favorite holiday
      & someone else
You’ve got
      your clothes
      & some of me left

I want you most as raveled socks. I want
         you car, you Fiat and Trabant

that take the street on wobble-wheels, all spit
         and sputter. You plate without meat,

you Warsaw Zoo without its elephant,
         Swan Lake without Odette. In fact,

no swan in the aviary of your heart.
         No hammered beak. How long I wait

to hear No bread, No toilet paper, No sugar
         for a week. I buy you pickle jar.

I subsidize you cabbage in the fall.
         I eat you in my stew. You sell

for forty dollars on the black market.
         When you are denim counterfeit,

I like how close you fit against my hips.
         Old heroes may be dead, shops

gone, but you are still a marble bust
         that pigeons leave alone. Mostly.

You’re still the news on all two channels.
         How well they read your name. And still

red currants in a bowl. Who cares about
         the sour juice of you? What’s sweet

without the wanting, the queue around the block
         when even you are out of stock?

We all wore T-shirts that matched the White House lawn,

grass so green it looked like a music video.

When the First Lady arrived, we stood at the same time—

in unison, our teacher called it—as we had practiced

all that week. Nancy Reagan wore her usual shoulder pads.

My best friend Reese ate Reese’s Pieces, pretending

they were pills, first browns then yellows and oranges.

We all held green balloons—aloft, our teacher said,

which meant up high. There were some words about

peer pressure and children’s futures precious as a string

of pearls. An eighth grader read a poem about powder.

We all said no to horse and mary jane. Jenna Goodwin

let go of her balloon. Too soon, our teacher said.

A girl from Blessed Sacrament threw up her lunch.

A boy from Murch—who knew about such things—

untied the latex opening of his balloon and gulped

at helium, his voice diluted cloud, floating away.

To be On Sale among the merchandise.
To AutoVac. To Turbo Fricassee.
To Flexx and Sex and Silicone. To Ice
the shoulder when it hurts, to be Pain-Free
at last. To be a 2-for-1, a deal,
a steal, the One Time Offer just today.
To be SmartAbs, click Here. To be the Real
McCoy, Not Sold in Stores so Don’t Delay.
Go Slenderize to Slim your arms and thighs.
A Super Home Alert to Save Your Life.
A Chippy Chopper Bloc to Pulverize
your onions in a flash. Your Ginzu Knife.
Your Back Relief. Your Better Baker Bowl.
Your fries, your chips, your Perfect Donut Hole.

Being on a train seems
important then suddenly how
can you tell? It seems easy
to take a train and put it
in your stomach mouth to hold it
there like your brain and turn it into
a panda bear. What is of your
mouth? Is your mouth properly
paced? Is it making your heart hurt?
Your hair on your head is making
my heart hurt for a year I think
about your hair every hour for a year
and how it hurts I think your hair
your hair is in my brain your hair is
in my mouth that’s stupid your hair is
in your mouth is stupid yes that’s
stupid and we are stupid
yes lilac, stupid lilac.

We have this idea to put
our bed on the lawn so we never
have to make it. When it is on
the lawn it is covered in
pear blossoms and lilacs
and we don’t make it.
While I am in the shed
practicing my shrine
building your mother calls
and says Married people make
their beds. I am going to cut
some lilacs for the table. Call
your mother and tell
her what we’ve learned
from sleeping outside. How
even in summer it gets cold
before it rains.

First we are lying in the grass in
the shade close to one another,
we are taking rest. So I say
are you as afraid
of your mother as I
am in love with beautiful
women walking down
church steps to their cars?
Then of course we have
a quarrel until I become breathless
the trees are breathless my hands
are breathless everything is
near to us and then a copperhead
is very near to your leg. I look
to the copperhead and then I look
to the foothills the mountains in
the distance everything is in
the distance there is something
bigger than us and it is a star
if it explodes.

Remember your father returned home from what the 
newspapers speculated was “exhaustion of the nerves” or a 
“delirium” and your mother called, “his terrible 
melancholy.” Remember the papers reported how your 
father raved to “persons unseen.” How he fired his 
revolver at shadows and bayoneted the wind. Remember 
your father home and how he wore his uniform through 
the day and into bed and removed his cap only at dinner 
hour or at church service. Remember your father returned 
home intoxicated by the advancements in technology lately 
made. He had watched men alive and coiled within in 
barbed wire. He had observed their greened and their eyes 
burst for unseen gases. Remember how your father brought 
you to a mounded tarpaulin in the backyard and how he 
pulled this aside to reveal the red machine silent beneath. 
“The salesman suggested steam powered,” Father explained, 
“as the fuel is readily found.” Your father, however, had 
long understood the importance of the combustion engine 
and had opted for the gasoline machine. “It may not be as 
accurate or as gentle as that mower you have known but I 
have found in these years about the land that often the 
greatest success comes through the methods most brutal.”

holding the naked hours in my hands
         for my blue breath
         they are mortar

Before the Collapse
my jaw held stones         browned leaves
                                       mouth debris

flattened palms dripping

                  a pasture          fades

                  shadow of a
                  prayer

quiet brick

When I sleep I dream that I am awake & there are voices everywhere, touching me with fingers that are voices & not fingers. The fingers are voices, flexing their joints forever, telling me all of the things. All of the things I said I will do & have never done. All of my never done things. I will myself to disappear.

To disappear but instead I will fill the room & remember all of the things that I do not know & I will never learn: what you are made of & your head & your heart & what they are made of. What you are made of. You are made of all of my never done things. All of my never done things

like you & your heart & your head & your heart & what we have not done to make me to disappear.
The fingers shape signs that only I can see & the words are all things like “stop” & “money” & “love”
& “cunt” & “your heart is an axe through a cloud.” The moon is one of those things,

like your head, that is not also real.

How long you spent
waiting for the thin
and bony words.

The way that song
of soft complaint
was not pretty

as your mother.
The way you loved
her photograph,

her country’s war
fixed well inside
your father’s missing

teeth, and shouts
of how like you
were to loathe

that worried cage
of soft complaint.
The way you loved

ghosts far more
than a touch
or a clean bed.

The glistering lamp of the dockyard.
A chain link the size of your head,
or the length of an elephant’s tusk

laid end to end in a steady caravan
of lumbering skin. The heaping sheen
of the oilblack tide, of the plum shadow

of bruise caught in the corrugate
of water. Of the heaping corals of rust,

like the rough underbelly of lava rock
lining each ship’s naked corral, emptied,
for a moment, of all the impossible cold

of the bay, of the starving white
dressing of sky, scumbled by smoke and lit
by a white sun gone white. All of the doves

lined up on the mouth of the pier. All of them
turning, their sooted white cloaks, their inky black

eyes. In their ignorance, they scramble to nests
in the sky, nest in the rubble of ghosted earth
quakes. The rudders, a thousand times bigger

When the thing is seen
it can’t be lost: open door, lips wrapped
around a mirror. You swallowed
something sharp and now
it’s boring.
Tearing clothes apart,
the new technological cheerleaders learn what it means
to be disfigured.
Our persons, our web of skin and sloppy hair, come together in enclosed spaces.
The world, mostly reactions
then consumed.
I have a new flavor
called flesh.
On the park bench you give birth to a sensation
not unlike nothing.
Anything which isn’t inhaled is not worth having

You have come into a room to prove
the room exists,
your mouth full of fingernails, the television’s
extent unknown. The study
of genitalia makes them pointless, picked clean
of mitigating circumstance.
Bowline, harpoons through the window,
my body a street.

Bleached and starting to pass out,
the women in my life
hide for years.
Objects can only last as new for moments.
And then this thing grows
and is eaten. The box is another way of detaining art.

*

When you came out back
and asked me to admit it, I wouldn’t admit it,
and that’s how you knew.

A cell phone in the shower.

Our wolf-like boredom gets the best of today.

You have 14 minutes
and then Jeff Bridges.
He lets you win at air
hockey and soaks your
diamonds in No More
Tears. He even holds
your hand after you are
fired for being small.
Happy. You will be
happy and he will give
you the last airline cookie.
You will look down
at the weird tundra lights,
your America, the thing
with wheels for eyes
growing ever closer.

Let’s get powerful, Suburban Husband,
while I masturbate to some VHS of you
and pink cake. One small suffering for
each year. That you snore is gorgeous.
That it shakes the room. That your skull
is that of a beast and I am frightened.

On the third day, they gather around my buckwild ignorance. Someone says Young
Woman in an American City, the worst slur. Rubies get glued to my teeth.

They talk about my girlhood, that defaced church. The rhetoricians begin their end
times puppet show. The conception alarm they stuck in me starts singing.

I am dreaming of tornadoes again, too many for the sky to contain.
I have checked eight websites and the dictionary on my nightstand.
I did not need technology or a writer to tell me there is chaos in my heart.
I don’t tell people sometimes my dreams come true. I fear some parts are
not metaphor. In the mornings I check the horizon. I am relieved when
there is some whisper of light. On the way home from camping, a large
storm made the highway a blur of brake lights, my fingers killers to
my steering wheel. I kept searching for funnels, their willowy bodies
twisting their way to the ground. Mapped out escape routes and viaducts
to pull beneath. Today I fell asleep on the couch again. The wind rustled
me awake, and parts of the sky were dark again. I can’t shake that something
is coming. I don’t do well with worry. My mother built me to fix things.

after thirty days the doctors tell you
stop tearing through the rocks and mud
in your backyard. the neighbors have complained
about you in your sheer white night dress, standing
knee deep in dirt, the bugs hanging from your hems
like trapeze artists. the Stones drowning at the bottom
of their communion cups warn you of the spirits that roam
beneath the surface, ready to take hold of your arms, drag you
to some place that gives even brimstone and flame the jitters.
old lady Mitchell next door brings you a pot roast
and muffins, tilts her head to the side after she notices
the triple lutz two razors carved in your wrists.
the Berman kids dig up your daffodils at sundown
and that night while you’re sweating beneath the moon
digging up maggots and artifacts, you notice the Johnson’s
bedroom curtain pulls back and flutters every hour until
you’ve done all the work you can do before dawn.

Betty, what the hell is she doing out there?

John I don’t know, but whatever she’s looking for
she won’t find it digging with that tiny pen.

and still the body trembles
hesitates into the cool belly
of ocean, the salt staining lips
as the mouth wraps around apparatus
and breathes. head bobs below surface
sees the jagged cliff of reef, of urchin
its million hands dancing to your
welcome song, and though the others
fin past you; the dive instructors
out of bread to beckon the school of
sky stripped fish: you squeeze your eyes
take in every drop around you, let it
rub against your skin as tiny sand sized
lovers, and my when they come, they swarm
around your floating frame as a well-fit gown
and how you dance, how they carry you off
in a blur of azure

thin cotton, how it lays
lightly across the skin
gives way to the unfamiliar
hand: you have not been
touched like this in months.
what you’ve missed, the winding
fingers, the journey of this landscape,
this work of clay, this softened
canvas, how you’ve rediscovered
this art of knowing, mouth
the sculptor’s sweet name,
her voice, your own

I used to watch for bluebirds in the backyard,
tilting my body towards any chance
of catching that delicate blue in flight.
I relished each sighting
the way children enjoy chasing
bubbles from a wand,
the moment of pleasure
whole and circular,
from sighting to capture
to gone.

Then I washed and filled the birdbath.
I coaxed the birds to come,
jays, robins, and the beauty

just beyond them, bluebirds.
This one leans far forward to drink,
then rises back to the rim.
He remains there for so long,
eyes fixed, wings tucked,
that I begin to wonder
if he is taking a moment to marvel,
to consider what miracle this water,
and how he may secure its return.


Last night I locked the bathroom door
against the empty apartment.
Tonight: who knows.
YOU ARE SO CLEARLY YOURSELF
the ache in my ankle likes to inform
when I’ve had enough of nothing.
And but life’s still there
branded on each mug
that fills my cupboards. Overflowing
half-hearted into the sink.
And I mean eventually
I’ll succumb.
Fall violently in love and have
to make out with everyone
even my tormentors.
The Laundromats. The never-ceasing soup
of life. And but I don’t want to die.
I mean
I’ll just listen to my eyes
which claim I’m mostly made of light.

During autumn there is no chance for peaceful hot wings
amidst the screams of “I’ve waited all week for this!”
and I wonder if the chickens said the same.
I order a steak because cows have been abandoned by football.
I compare the uniforms at the bar, their complementary colors
and names for God, to my authentic James Wright jersey
with the tattered right elbow and collar frayed by so much indecision.
My team colors clash.
              And I am as bored as these passive girlfriends
sipping soda and clucking like pullets.
They’re not touching their wings.
                            I ask the waitress if they’re showing
the Ashberry/Collins game. She says “soda pop?” I fall in love.
She probably pulls for Collins. We break up.
              When the Bears score I cheer
because Chicago belongs to Sandburg
and by clapping I finally feel the ripping at my shoulders
that must signal manhood and I drink to civilization from a straw
while my arms are dipped in honey barbecue.

LXXI. We Give Answers

Yes, there are alarms installed in our bones.
Yes, there are circuses.
There is only one program and we have to share.
There is only one miracle, which happens every night.
Yes, there is illness.
Yes, there are quotas.
There is fruit, rotten fruit.
There are totems and ulcers; there is Ambien.
Yes, we lie next to them.
Yes, they excrete a dark powder.


LXXXIII. The Quiet

They give a presentation
on plural marriage,
how to maximize fellatio
and minimize cunnilingus.
They bring in mules
and call them sacred.
They misquote our obligations.
We cover ourselves in sunscreen
and pull the shades.
We let them urinate on us.
We do not notice
that they are multiplying.
We begin to lactate,
which we also do not notice,
until we do.



LXXXVII. Materials List

They tell us we are divided into three parts.
One of which protest inhabits, another tantrum.
Another what we in our own language call fidelity.
They do not ask us to quantify them.



LXXXIX. Add Gelatin

They tell us we are tender as gelatin.
They ask us to be hard matter.
We insist they use sorcery
to tame even the lamest
among us. They make us forget
our fathers, forget dissent,
hand over our things of mace.
They insist we be their designated lovers.
We drive them to the river.
For hours, they watch black geese.
They keep their plans in an attaché case,
alongside tangelos. They tell us we are not
ready to square dance. We kneel
at the edge of the dance floor.



XCV. Helium Games and Cinnamon Buns

They’ve been huffing Zyrtec.
We watch them make a mess
at Cinnebon, digging their teeth into
our names. They ask to see
our hymens after they receive
military updates. Nothing a round
of UNO won’t delay. One of them,
called Hortence, shouts
Copacetic! and passes out.

::

The Zyrtec has caused their penises
to emit light. We approach with lead mittens.
Who could work though all this petrolatum?
Their bodies look like dead rodents,
lax and seeping. We daub them with tunics.



XCVb.

For the moment, we are pardoned.
We coordinate the most timid among us
and head out in search of guacamole.



XCVII. Add Aluminum

Today they smell
like armadillos and coal.
We strum their hair.
Now, Now, they say.
The mundane illuminates.
They are a malady of teeth,
a sequelae of habituation.
Inside our uteri, we find pliers,
ginger root. They tell us our name
is diffuse as a tea.
Tomorrow we will take the mules
and go trading. What we have to give
we can no longer give to them.

::

What we know about ourselves:
We are without qualities,
as the fruit tree is without fruit
in winter. We multiply each spring.
We have feces and soles.
We are neither pristine nor asinine.
Like the possum, we agitate.
We look like meat inside our lingerie.

::

What we know about them
we know in another language.

Boy
baked bean colored
Boy

The energy just be sprinting
through your body
gazelles
through your body
and you can’t
help but to hover

waver
halfway between
the bases of common sense
and last straw

Boy
you want to be everybody’s friend
bad jokes
feet the size of welcome mats
B.O.
oily skin
welcome to the molting
Boy

so annoying
still learning how to
carry this new heft
trying to spin silly
into swag O’
Boy

Can’t hold still
the volts keep
coming
Boy

Soft eyed
Boy
hiding behind herky jerk
buck up
slap fight
say it with yo chest
Boy

Girls
undiscovered country
undecipherable tongue
Rosetta Stoneless
Boy

Sweat soaked shirt
Hand me downs
Let me down easy
lost
Boy

Energy
inner alchemy
mistaken for ADD
Boy

Just need focal point
Boy

Poems
to conduit confidence
Boy
Don’t you know
how to mute
the tremor to a hum
Boy?

What they been teaching you Boy?
What they been feeding you boy?

You grown.
You grown!?
You grown Boy?

It is not the flesh I want
but what glows behind it.
For you are not the face
softened with evening. Not
the eyes I’ve searched,
in vain, for my own.

Because you are never what binds you—
not muscle or organ, not even
the voice: that rupture of air
I dare to deem melodic.

Who can trust the body
when making love?
How it never fails
to fail so accurately. The way
it promises to wither
despite joy.

As I lie on top, my tongue
resting on your chest—
the steady metronome
blooming beneath it, I can’t help the urge
to pry you open, plunge through
the artifice of beauty.

And if I were to tear apart
the heart, lower my face
into that warmth, would I see you
among that glistening ruin?
Would there be
a small sphere of light
to swallow?

Of God, I cry My body
and evening shows its back.

Not the voice of cherry trees
greets me, not the low weep

of buildings bending to
the discreet architects of this 

looser dark. All around me 
windows light softly

as though a thumb dusted 
with gold had left its imprint

selectively, each a tepid blessing.
My thoughts tap themselves

out against the amber glass,
restive blue flames that flare

like tiny bodies and disappear.
Should I name these slender

privacies of the soul sorrow?
I prepare, with the rest, for 

evening’s first expulsion.

A man holds his penis in his mouth. 
Sprawled on a cheap sofa like the one 
that holds my bare backside, he stares blankly 

through the lens at the director for his cues,
through me reaching for his gaze. I’m twentysomething 
& home alone. I’m so there. I’m so not there 

or here alone. See the boy in overalls: cross-legged 
& wedged in the corner between two walls 
of books. He stares as Claude Neal’s limp tongue 

holds his own limpness on the fading page 
of one dusty tome, Claude’s sockets fixed 
on some constellation the boy wishes 

he could decipher. Claude’s body—chiseled 
& mangled—hangs in an oak by a rope. There is nothing 
in this body we can desire, & we want. 

We want a body, not mangled like ours, 
we can love without shame. The boy feels 
so small in his body, its scars that beckon 

stares & gasps. I am he, doubled in size 
& solemnity. I churn. I am an ocean 
of want. This video’s hustler must do. 

His left pec brandishes a lion’s paw 
& skull-&-bones. A broken heart heaves outside 
his right. With each kiss, our heads swell. 

He’ll make $250 for this trick, $150 more 
than he’d earn trading others in parked cars 
on a street corner where no trees will grow

all these miles from us. This director promises 
he’s stardust, has the blow to get him to the edge   
& may actually finish him. He tells him, 

tells me, what to do next, moans Big. 
Black. Cock.  I obey. I swell more still
& remember I should be studying

what Nietzsche says God isn’t. I am 
at a black university. God always 
enters the classroom here, 

& this philosophy professor, a newly converted 
agnostic, will prove her theories. But 
this video’s lessons will pay off sooner 

& take me & this boy closer than when 
he stared at Claude, hanging, in The Anatomy 
of a Lynching on that long ride home from the library, 

squinting but unable to see Claude’s pupils, see 
if peace eclipsed terror before he died. Child, 
they came from everywhere & all you could do was pray 

you weren’t the nigger they picked for the picnic 
on the courthouse lawn, our grandmother says. 
In the picture, Claude is alone, but as she speaks,

kids blur into the sepia background, ape 
the grins on their parents’ faces, await 
their turn to prod his charred flesh. 

The boy asks if Claude was a good student 
like him, if she was the one who would not give
the NAACP her name when 50-cent postcards, 

news of Claude’s fingers & toes sold 
as souvenirs, reached stands. I told that boy 
to leave that white gal alone: the only words 

breaking the silence of the rest of that ride, 
the only words her brother says at home. 
I told that boy to leave that white gal alone: 

their script a shroud over faces suddenly 
childlike, each crease around their eyes 
a dog-eared page the boy can never read.

The boy wants to ask where the family 
of Lola, Claude’s slain lover, lives, where 
his pickled prick must collect dust 

on some shelf, to say I want to study it. 
He wants to see how he’d hang, 
loosed to rove in a bottle. But he is a boy.

He does not know how to speak 
the unspeakable yet. I 
heave. It is almost dawn now. 

The courthouse towers there,
in the center of that town, & that oak, 
mostly limbless, looms.                      Still.       

Soon, its flaccid branches will shade 
more brown boys, guilty or not, waiting
to learn what their next move will be. It’s hard 

to get anywhere without passing it, passing them, 
bowed, not meeting my gaze. The hustler moans. 
I gasp. I cannot take this boy, this fallen star 

or his unseen master’s plan where I’m coming. 
I turn off the TV.  I am not afraid to raise 
this dead flesh, for all & no one to see, alone, 

like that other hanged man the boy followed 
so slavishly, to ask him what no man, 
not even Daddy, can show me: Jesus,

if a man is black & his manhood is forced 
into his own mouth by another man 
who’s as afraid of the power he holds 

but is pale enough to hold the camera 
or the noose, how much of a man isn’t he?
Like you, O Lord, I rise with all power 

in my hand, but I do not want to cross 
this tempest alone. I am not that boy 
anymore. I am not afraid to say 

I am a man, searching for a man 
whose flesh will rise, only for me, 
without force, without fear. Come, 

lie with me & be redeemed. See 
my yoke, this flesh, broken 
for you? Find here  

a different kind of holy, a sacrilegion, 
a sacrament for our sanctifunked 
souls. Dark & darker.                         Still.

Winter, I’ve traded 
     juniper elixir mixed 
with tonic & lime, 
     migrated North 
where night comes early. 
     Summer & South 
vague memories—like men 
& drinks, I cannot keep 
     count. It’s cold enough 
for Scotch; I credit older men 
     who’ve taught me how 
it blooms in the body, dark 
     atmospheres clouding logic. 
Sometimes I reject logic, 
     reject instructions 
to take Scotch slow 
     on the tongue, to take 
one lover at a time. I reject 
     this man’s “possibility,” 
his “Forever,” 
     tell him no mixers, 
just straight. I want truth 
     neat. He tells me 
don’t think. 
     Feel. I use flesh 
to find myself. Look, 
     I say. The last man I loved 
sober is disappearing.

Wings are no good
if you land on them. 
You fall to the ground
under the floodlight.
The armor you insist upon
carrying must be too heavy.
If what you fear
is the landing, then stay
in flight. It hurts me
to watch you like this, 
legs looking 
for anchor to flip you
right. Look, I know
what it’s like to see 
the world upside down, 
waiting for someone
to fix you.

Alone on Sunday afternoon, I watch the dog’s paws twitching as he sleeps. 
His dream turns like a newsreel: simple chase
between snapped branches, lurching toward a sky, 
the path irrelevant, his prey a prayer, the blue flame of his being
flared to high. But call it dim recurrent animal, this dream 
that all dogs dream. Like that relentless dream of ropes and stays
in which I turn my body like a filmstrip 
to the light. Yes, pin me
to the window, watch me jerk 
from frame to animated frame: each small, belabored increment. Each day
a pink sun moving south against the wall
glides through the strictures of winter. The camera
lucida or obscure. Here are my lumpy socks, my unmade bed. No tragedy 
in these particulars. But friends, when I sit at your table
there’s a voice in me that says Give 
up. Give up. It pumps along like a half-dead frog. 
Ladies and gentlemen, it says, this train has left the station. Wave
to your friends on the platform. You may begin 
to panic at any time.

This winter I learn to knit: a green and purple scarf,
which could be my last undoing, this casting on 
and binding off, a way to connect

each moment to the next. It’s a swaddling
operation for a mind that can’t be stilled. Because we are no longer
real to one another, this winter I walk on snow crust

gone vitreous with cold, shadows on it 
lavender, green ice on the pond. A plastic sheet that shreds
and shreds in wind. At times, this park 

looks beautiful, but I’m a stranger in it. 
Only phrases keep me: made
of sterner stuff, they say. They say aloof or politic or

soon when the weather breaks. The thornbush faintly
red now, and two unyielding greys: green-grey branches
pinioned on grey sky. The snow is a constant

burning, and my body—slow, molecular—also a kind of fire
almost, they say, unstoppable. When did it come 
to this. I hear myself say harbor me

although there is no harbor I can see
no one else to speak to, 
and the trail breaks off 

to every possible willow. Around me, ice crust circles
with a gleam and glare
that holds me, then gives way beneath my boot. The sky

in its abstract sphere, unfurls. God exists 
as the Nothing who refuses to reply. Today I have to practice 
how to breathe. Memory’s insistent,

too dangerous to touch. Each small amnesia 
till I ghost myself. 

here the dead orbit us
& most everything whistles
except for the teetering pines
& the ducks cut from paper

no two ever say it the same though
they have come close in the middle
where the maze takes on heat 
& they are making believe they can hack it

I’m not a supper person per se
but I may have been swayed by what glaze
they’ve slapped onto the bird
so much like the sun lowering onto my chin all aglow

while you are one with the dust & the dung
a shotgun hyphened at your chest
the leaves rusty & taken with death
as you breathe in more matter

I am finished with truth
& how it tastes to my tongue 
of philosopher’s busts
& light so antiquated it shuns us 

here I am speaking of it in a photograph
as well as the lack left by laughter & drinks
like the splash come to ice
that next mishap

sure its past can be taken up 
each moment worried into a plea
whose memory is a wheel &
whose flag is still blank   

I want to scream into the pink hearing aid nestled in his hairy ear,
Where is your fist?

Thick-throated men in black coats scurry to the windows of the suite,
scour the landscape with slitted eyes, estimate the arc of bullets.
They move me from one chair to another to another
until I am sitting so close his breath sparks moisture on my skin.
The pink contraption, imitating another flesh, fills his ear
and again I want to startle, to prickle his composure,
but then I see that he is not nearly the vapor I imagined.
I assumed his body would be temporary, with fingers, an ear,
an arm misting into nothing at odd intervals, a leg folding into dust,
his smile its own backdrop, the lazy escape of the recently caged.

He smoothes a wrinkle in his gray suit, grins sheepishly,
leans forward waiting for a question.

I stare at his fist resting on the table, ask with my whole mouth.
He hears me perfectly.

The animal quivers in a sleep
of thin needles and bells, beneath
eyes that never close completely. 
A stiff cool sheet hiccups 
with underneath heart, light forced 
through tubes as thin as thread. 
Today, its legs were broken, 
and a warmish vowel died in its mouth. 
Ached singing brought only 
the touch of wrong hands. All rhythm
rides the don’t-die-now, bracing 
for the next resurrection, another 
chance to salivate at the bell,
to tear at the milky film of its eyes, 
to jump one more time through 
the shining silver hoop of its life.

I’m sorry about hiring that guy
to wear a black bandanna
like a dislocated jaw, hide
the left side of the car
and then redesign your sweater
with pig’s blood; I just wanted
an excuse to be held by you.

I’m inarticulate like an action figure
but my skin is made from the tin
of an empty soup kitchen; charity
begins with your hands.

To close the chasm between us
in bed, I roll out like a doughy bridge
my farmer’s tan arms wrapping
around you like beams.

I look at the last picture of us touching. 
I can make my shoulders blossom in sighs.

When you walk into my apartment,
you’ll declare martial law. The office park
of wine glasses and cereal bowls
on the table in the living room 
remain 90% vacant.

To encourage me to clean my place
my mother calls me a hoarder. 
How can I explain the necropolis
in the sink, the vacuum as outsider art
as barricades keeping me away
from arms that aren’t yours?

no there was beauty in the two girls
sitting on the hood of the car

peeling mangoes in the city’s throat 
into the air that would be the end

of those years when doomsday was a place
they’d try to kill one and another time

its luxe too much in the way
of bedding down with wintered men

how men can smell close calls
with bridges

like a dog can smell a cancer
in the tit

Dreaming again of an effortless

brother. He estranges me 
with a plastic orange sword. 

Pirates at play are we? Or
hawking through a forest. Step carefully, step

carefully. A car

passes. Do we even think who our father
will teach to drive 

first? Double dare, double

dare. Never, no never. A cloud transforms
from shoe

& back again. All
that wasn’t allowed comes back again.

It’s the year I repeat
haircuts from the year 

I wanted to be a boy.

No thought to what I could become: 
cagey

bitch flicking photograph after photograph
with all the practice

of a trick punch. No stranger
to that feeling of bearing down

bearing down. 

     I want
a mask the width of a rope    The
sky



moony memories



and the cut

of them


By this writing

you’d think

I wasn’t born anywhere—


that I didn’t however briefly

uncarry a child


Here

comes the scything


We know there is a pattern



Now the staining


Why can’t we do it like that


With the taste

of mushrooms in the air


I say I am worth it

& we both know it’s true.


           We know

there is a pattern

The chimney      In the

rat’s



nest


The leak always starts

above



I ask for me

After all

I ask for it


From my father anything

I ask for


I get

But we

never do it like that.

Why don’t we

ever do it

like that

You took the auspices of my neck
			   and my dark eyes, watched me pry apart
	     a hollow bone. Outside, under 

the fluttering streetlights, the girls 
			   fingered their collars, touched each other
	     with quick, disappointed hands

like mockingbirds picking through
			   a burned plain. This night last year
	     you laid a fire beneath my mantle 

and when we brought it to the black yard 
			   it guttered in the air. There are 
	     no places for you that he hasn’t 

first touched. There are your hands 
			   in the back room, instructing
	     your birds for their flight. 

When we met, you coiled up my long hair, 
			   you pushed your lips against my neck. Inviso aves, 
	     you said. Build me my nest.

=

To keep alive I flick unpolished fingers
against the skull of this city, like, hey, my sister
bleeds forever from the head, in my head
she is four years old and jumping
under the porch steps, wet, everything
changes, New York, you would want, too,
secretly, for the rest of your life, to see that much
blood again, and on the drive to the hospital
you would understand everything and
imagine leaves as schools of red fish
flexing streams through the wind.
=

because there is none
the park lawn now
trampled black with charcoal dust
still two kids
chase the dream of an orange 
ball through the muck a woman
with a trash bag slung over
her shoulder crosses the street 
so slow the world
pauses it’s possible 
the mouth of a man
singing at a red light in his
minivan frozen open a sound 
no one will ever hear
slips back
down his throat not a single 
voice rises in the whole 
world as abandoned
cruise ships scoot along
the ocean of sky pretending
to be clouds
=

the breath of morning I can’t smell 
the difference between train stops what 
if anything 
does that mean 
people should at times be able 
to mention the names of poets
without dropping them 
and think for no reason 
of elephants as their hearts fill 
with coffee I think 
for no reason
if you like me you should
say you like me and hold out your hand
I’m headed to work with a small 
cache of great heights stuffed 
in my brain like I want to win 
prizes and never work 
again for anyone I’ll wear impossibly
red heels be 
the woman I will 
never be the woman on the platform
laughing into the wind of passing
time and train holding her leather
bag and cell phone like
no way is the wrong way home
=

The recorded voice of a politician rises 
from a slow moving truck bed. Everything
an overlay. The white
noise of trains and buses rumbles too,
like some long constipated volcano
we’ve all stopped
fearing over time. Only one man 
on the street still believes we will 
burn one day, and even he 
doesn’t move. Already a rock 
seared orange, he says, Watch the
steam rise from my scorched head
like the hair of an ocean god
curled by the sea. The politician’s
voice, unintelligible, booms
down the block. A woman’s 
laugh cracks the pavement, and I
crawl inside the dark gash
because haven’t we just
made a big mess of living?

Have a seat. Let’s go crazy. We have no 
hope and no money, New York. 

There are plenty of fish at the fish market. 
The sun isn’t going anywhere too quickly. 

Dear dreariness, consider that the elephant 
pretends to remember, that nothing 

is ever certainly known or felt, 
that while I don’t recall what I’ve forgotten, 

I remember that I forgot it. There are plenty 
of jellyfish sleeping in your storm. 

Dear kitten on the aching windowsill, 
please whistle a tune while you wash yourself. 

When you jump up, lean on your hind legs and press 
your paws against the pane, what are you looking at? 

Drear deariness, don’t end your search for reasons 
but maybe maybe there aren’t ones. 

Consider that every tornado is just one tornado 
who shows up, looks around, and then decides to leave.

What if I told you today sounds better than yesterday, then as the approaching tornado got too close 
	I rearranged it like furniture, divided it into fragments?

What if the fragments were kitten-sized, and everyone wanted one as a gift, 
	and I gave everyone one as a gift, 
and I said “Think of this as an early birthday present” every time I handed a fragment over? 

	What if it was your birthday and I forgot? 
What if we broke into a high school just so I could sit in a desk beside you and pass you a note 
	that reads I do declare, we sure would make a wild always? 

Would you put the note on your refrigerator? Would some people bottle their kitten-sized tornados
 	in mason jars? Would others buy leashes and take their tornados for walks? 
Would some fragments grow to be the size of cats? Would they all grow to be the size of cats?

	Today sounds better than yesterday. Would I often think 
about the way they looked, all the fragments of that tornado, just after they had been divided
	and arranged: stretched out across my backyard, 
ball-shaped and spinning, twitching little bits of lightening, ruining the grass: tell me.

	Tell me you would write a note, too, on a separate piece of paper.
Tell me what would happen in the event of anything. Tell me what the note would say.

Let’s say a comma is a little breath.  Not the kind of breath that follows breathlessness, not aerobics class breath, not “Every breath you take I’ll be watching you,” but modest in diameter, roughly the size of three cloud particles.  You may or may not be thinking, now, about how you’re breathing all the time, and isn’t that bizarre! how you place commas across paragraphs of sleep, while dreaming and not thinking about oxygen at all.  Or maybe you’re thinking about the last drink you had, how you could see yourself in it, in a little paper boat, braving the storm of a spinning straw.  To draw a comma is not difficult at all.  They are the smallest of crescent moons, with slightly more moon on the upper half.  When isolated

’

They seem to not mean anything at all.  They grow lonesome and curl into themselves. For what is a breath without surroundings? If I pitch a comma and you hit it and you get to second base and it’s still up in the air, spinning like a good memory, you’ll keep running.  You’ll run until you get to the home plate, and then you’ll keep running still, collecting and expelling breaths quicker and quicker, until the shadows get so long that they go away, until the paragraph is over.

It’s all position position and a push in a 
certain direction. We are not calm. A feeling 
like the daisies that wouldn’t die. It is not 
automatic. Then all of a sudden, automatic!
This is an old feeling. A feeling that feels good 
now. Like how lions do very cool things 
and then are also scary. You can observe this 
just after sunset. Just because you know 
something doesn’t mean someone else does. 
When do we learn this? An awareness of 
another’s awareness. I think you think I think
look at this! Faint sources of light! And water. 
Water may exist where you least expect it. 
There is water in the lava. The lava like a lion.
Water in the lava. Hydrogen in the hills. 
What sort of vision have you had? There is a 
heat in my head. The heat comes in distant ships. 
How far do you run when you run? There is the 
distance between two points. There is the 
distance in discussion. There other are distances 
too. Are you calm? I am better at hearing 
than I am at forgetting. 

A million different landscapes with snow. 
It’s a study of bees. These are your future ducks.
We get desperate. We start dancing. It is a weird 
come apart. No returns of cake. No exchanges 
of cake. Run your thumb across your bottom lip. 
Run your thumb across your bottom lip again. 
I float quietly. I have a nice stand. I don’t know 
how to say, I’m just looking. We breathe air. 
We keep the same body temperature all day. 
We are holding onto things. An unspecified
racket. A small wagon. The biggest warehouse. 
It’s ambitious and complicated. It’s a result 
that is still unclear and can go either way.
I do not know what I have to make. I make
mistakes and many of them. I’m afraid I make
many mistakes. This has something to do
with the desperation and something to do
with other things too. A web of smoke holding 
onto a dark night. Refusing to reflect any light. 
Tell me things. I am waiting for you to tell me things. 
I want you to tell me things. 

Becoming a volcano is the least perplexing aspect
of this situation. 
				I understand how bodies soak 
up heat from bathwater and that 

				islanded knees and breasts  are, 

like any archipelago, 
     				connected below the surface. 
The question of dormancy is redundant.

What matters is more crucial. 
         						Think elemental.

Consider how this water is dragged up too high 
				for its level, how parts of air are locked down 

into blasphemous globes and how the half quivering 
				liquid of flesh is anchored and solid.

We will not be the first to debate the status of lava,
or ask the elements to play 
     				      different parts for an hour,
but I am not getting out till the ceiling is on fire.

Often I just want your earlobe in my mouth.
It could be a sign of listening or 
a symptom of stealing everyone else
to bundle in my throat and sing their songs.

If I could speak without my native tongue,
talk in flawless Romanian 
I would tell stories of blue graveyards,
haystacks and severe pine forests, 
extreme in their size.

I would move my tongue in large circles
 on the roof of my mouth. Exclaim 
with no reticence the exact details.

It means I cannot speak
without the ghost of something further
dancing down my throat. It means
I cannot delete the space between sense
and sentence. Or it means the night

 my voice came to me, I whipped it
 with ash twigs and sent it away, 
crying. And now it never
answers my letters.

1. The Girl

Why I don’t get drunk anymore. Why I wear a wry
smile at the hardware shop. Why I pretend I’m

the cowboy in the country songs. Why I fell in love
with her. Why I wear sunscreen. Why I want you

to look at me naked and then I don’t. Why I like
to drive your truck. Why I sometimes want to be

the one penetrating you. Why I like you to trace
my scars. Why I’m delighted when you fail.

Why I want to make your name into a diminutive.
Why I only held the knife in my pocket

when he followed me home. Why I asked for
your middle name. Why I keep scotch in the house.

Why I cut all my hair off. Why I’m still afraid of you
despite your gentleness. Why I know what you mean

when you say sorry, sorry, sorry. Why I’m such a good
sport. Why I think everything you say is so

funny. Why I don’t answer when you ask if I’m
ok. Why I fake pleasure when I feel pain. Why I wore

your coat that day in the park. Why I don’t want
my dog to trust you. Is embarrassing. Is a swimming pool

at night and the sharks I see there. Is laughable. Is wince-
inducing. Is my mother’s frown over the phone. Is my

fingernails pressed into my fist. Is my jail cell behind
the velvet curtain. Is the welt our mouths leave.

Is the gutted building in my chest. Is two boys
necking in the park. Is trying not to want.

Is the bear who comes back for more poisoned
meat. Is knowing I’m a traitor. Is shame

like clarified butter growing cold. Is owning
what I’ve said. Is being mad at you instead

of myself.  Because I can’t help it any more
than you can. Because it’s not that we haven’t talked,

but that there’s no way to. Because all my excuses
have shriveled on the vine, turned so far inward

you’d have to eat them to remember the scent inside,
to ever believe they’d given anything up to another.


2. The Older Woman

What difference do years make? We call them
months: May, December. We say love thwarts logic,
and the thwarting makes it stronger, makes it true.
I came home from college to find your tube-socked

feet propped at the end of my brother’s bed. You
were his same little friend from a few years before,

but grown out of your cartoon-covered pajamas, the fuzz
on your round cheeks fuzzier. I took long baths,

imagining you imagining me under the faucet’s
wet lip. You wanted things you’d never

had before and didn’t know how to ask. Instead,
snow you rolled into balls and stuffed down my shirt

like a child. I’m just the same as every man I’ve ever
known: I’m trying to make this romantic for you.

My high school English teacher who rubbed me out
like a spent cigarette that might set his ex-wife’s

bed on fire, whispering, baby, baby, you’re so hot.
But then we’d be the other way around,

where I’m the thing that’s fresh and young
and you’re the man who’s ripping all my petals off.


3. The Whore

Our bodies are born liars. The yoga
instructor would disagree, wants me to

relax into the bend, by which she means
put my ear behind my knee. The man

in front of me does it, opens his hips
like a celluloid Gumby and tilts his ear

to the floor. I want to say, Get over yourself!
Then, Get over here! Better yet, Get on

top of me! Take the not-candy sugar
of my body and stick it on your tongue.

Put your hands on my thighs and feel
my skin trying to cool itself, the heat

that sweat wicks to the surface as I
prepare my contorted offering.

But his body is a liar, too. It’s not
for me that he makes his back a cane-

stack of ribs. Desire doesn’t make us
belong to each other. As starved as I am,

it’s for someone else that he makes himself
vulnerable, flowering his ass toward the ceiling,

his hibiscus-hole opening into the pink
plushness of another man’s love canal.


4. The Femme

I’m afraid of the ghost inside, its hunger to be
free, the way it waits for me to die. It wants me

to be like the ghosts of deer shot by
orange-capped boys, to pick my careful way

for the last time. Still, tragedy doesn’t undo me:
loneliness, fear, even the weightlessness

of a body without a double. But the memory
of another woman’s breasts, a beauty easily

recognized because it was my own, turns
everything into a receipt for my pain:

volleyball moon, red-bellied plane. If she
were still here, she’d call me a traitor.

If I could, I’d tell her I’m just waiting
for someone to bring the car around. The truth

is that I want to transgress the halls of sex,
eat the filter on the cigarette. I have

a thousand unlit rooms between my legs:
light a match, I dare you. But why

would the dead—which is what I am to her—
care about the living, their reckless streets, their wild

parades? We ghosts have our own invisible days
to cultivate, our own stillborn loves to nurse into bloom.


5. The Wife

We’re carving pumpkins. Somewhere,
two long miles away, new whales

so young they carry a crease
like a letter unfolded

by the wind, travel the night-
blind coast. Is all flesh fashioned

in the dark? If you want me
to remember that the abandoned

work of love our parents left
behind like a half-built house

is why we put our hands on
each other, that all the many

failures which came before us
have only made us hungrier—

then do me a favor and leave
my body somewhere I can

find it again, in a field
of stickseed and cinquefoil

with our fellow pretty drifters
who, like us, won’t remember

where their children came from
or why they left them here.

Let me build it for you: the sand with its forgotten patterns,
the tidal pools holy as the empty recital hall is holy, the ocean

and its deep and caustic search for a coast that won’t erode.
How good to feel so small, to lean my back against the rotten

transom of your boat and hope that it might give way
beneath my weight, plunge me into the sea to float among

the contraband of crab shells and Styrofoam. I could pretend
I was your only one, even as your hesitance unspelled me, even

as I became nothing more than a gunmetal sheen, a tick
in the wheat field of water. That’s the great luxury of enough:

thinking salt water will suffice against thirst. But I have
the rest of my life to be fucked in the dark. Whether you

loved me or not—if you even knew how—the tide didn’t
frighten me. You were the waves I couldn’t turn my back on.

When I think of a single bead of sweat
skydiving
off the bridge of my nose, as I cross
the corner of Swinton and Atlantic,
all I can do is smile. 
 
I revel in summer sweat. Maybe I should write summer
all year round.
Be content with soaked shirts.
Let the demons lie, tell them
stay put, I’ll be back for you in winter.

Dead trees? No, I conjure a blooming perennial every step I take.

My childhood was the thumb of Michigan.
I rocked a flattop, wore Adidas,
though all I knew of hip-hop were The Beastie Boys. 
Larry Bohl and I took over a small island in the woods.
Teenagers brought beer, we hid in trees. 
Threw acorns fast as bullets. Never gave an inch.
Riding bikes shoeless we grew sequoia feet,
this was our national anthem.

Every so often I look at the clouds,
all I see are joyous dogs.

In your hands, I sat stars,
Snowing on us, flowers,
I wish dancing on shoulders,
Night and dawn waving there.
   
The hair, I’ve paid longings,
I cried and begged moments,
Forget the new day,
Snow can envelop us.

On your soul, I wanted to sit butterflies,
To come spring buds,
So you could play and enjoy,
Soul decorated with lilies.

Another day of the same shit, today I’ll try
Brunch, never heard of it till I was about 15, “something white folks ate” my father would say or
Caucasian.  “Asian with a cau.”  Inside joke.  E’s mom said they smell like wet
Dog.  “Well niggas smell like ass” we would say.
E took a white girl to prom as did I.
Friday’s he had to be inside before sundown because of his religion.  “So do you even pray to 
God?” We would tease.  “We’re the real Jews,”
His mother would say, “everyone else jumped on the bandwagon.”
I remember when his cousin
Jared thought he saw demons and
Kanisha (the other cousin) was giving head in the backyard.
Light bill wasn’t paid so hide and seek was played in the dark.
Master slave a silly game that you couldn’t watch unless you played.
Never had any toilet paper, clean glasses
Or uncracked dishes.  I almost forgot Linda is her name, E’s mother I mean.  Tonio
Pissed on the mouse the cat scared into a garbage can.  Only
Queers and steers come from Texas and you don’t much look like a steer to me…You don’t know your
Right from left, you’ve got to be fucking kidding me.   Our sick
Sense of humor found all of this funny; watched while
Toasting bread in a skillet.
Under the car was an oil pan we forgot about while setting off fireworks.
Valentine’s day was like,
“Who are you buying flowers for, yo momma.”  And those stupid crossing signs with the
X then —ing always remind me of Christmas.  Nobody knew what a 
Yule log was and the carolers spooked us one year.  The 
Zoo in Cleveland has a big hill in the back.  I’ve only been up there once.

You told me in ten years you’re goingto be a bird
and then you just said blue, green and yellow.

We had pasta at 9:30 and coffee at midnight.

Purple nail polish and a red scarf.

It’s just sitting in a car, and more sitting in a car.

It’s more like sandals,
watching movies inthe dim den,
the three cars in your driveway,

and theplaces you go 
that no one else knows about.

I sent you a text message before I left
because no one talks on the phone anymore.

You told me enough times 
that you’re coming to Chicago 

that I stopped believing it.

One of my best features are my hands.
I’m so sorry I drive manually.

You told me your scarf is very warm,
though I can see the moon through it.

There is no body in my passenger seat.

In between shifts when I can reach over
it’s to pick up the cup

any farther and I’m just pushing the tab
and locking the door.

I dislike
poems that are leggy.

I hate men
who have a palpable
design on me.

You think it’s a small apartment but it is a big room divided into three smaller rooms: one for the dining table and the fridge; another for the stove and the tin tub; and the third space is the living room, the tv room, the play room, the homework room, the room where the rats dance on our bellies while we sleep, the room below the bridge outside, the bridge over the canal, the canal where the rats come from, the rats enter your little bedroom and dance on your parents’ bellies, the rats come to dance and your mother says don’t tell your teacher rats dance on our bellies but you do anyway, you tell him in Spanish even though a sign on his breast says “English,” you tell him rats dance on your belly then you tell yourself that you shouldn’t have told him, that there are bigger problems like the black widow spitting light next to the toilet outside, the toilet is outside, there is no shower the landlady says and your parents move in anyway, your parents move in the dark and the black widow plucks and plucks light, you can see the shadows of drunks walking on the bridge, it is dark inside but not outside where the bridge is bright, where you dream yourself running away with a Mickey Mouse coin bank and one doll, the blonde one with the black stripe on the crotch, but inside, where you and your brother sleep in the same bed, your brother’s belly is warm, your belly brown and soft like paws, claws of rats keep you awake

Let’s wake the dead girls with long hair,
she said,
and we did,
and we braided their hair.

Let’s take them to the church picnic,
she said,
and we did,
and they lost
the three-legged race,
the wheelbarrow race,
and the balloon toss.

But they won the staring contest.

Let’s send them to school,
she said,
and we did,
but they didn’t fit in.

Let’s make them new coffins,
she said,
and we did,
and they fit,
so we nailed shut the lids.I caught it like a shard of glass catches a beam.
How a stranger’s smile can level a man. Can light

his sunken chest. Swell a new breath. In other words
I was the shard who glinted your eyes. In that light

blue halter, fifth hour, you were the poetry
I normally ignored. Your ballpoint’s clean marks. Light

blue, light touch against my windbag essays. That made
you especially stunning. Made you lightening 

I had to harness, hand-in-hand, beneath a desk. Or
in an unattended dark room. Tenderly, red light

washing over us. As I did. Abruptly—telling
you it takes the right type of girl to make a black-white

relationship work. You loved how Common rapped “The Light.”  
I listened to him more than you. His sly anti-white

woman rhymes never touched me. But you. You filtered through
a magnifying glass. Warmed the cherry orchard, white

with frost. Your light sweetened my pit. You are lightning 
crashed through his pulpit into this poem. Beaming. Yes, white.

A gleaming axe hacked through what we were growing into.
I was the axe. You were two syllables too many. White

space in a wheeling sonnet. A corner I couldn’t turn
in nine lines. But now I am mourning. Thanks to you, first light.

Something like sleep dangled our heads from great heights. All of us, snuggling up to book bags and laptops in muddled morning light. A hard halt brought snow-flecked wind and three shadows to our heated bedroom—two of which shot past and rang through opposite sides of the aisle, arms outstretched, slapping what sounded like knees and seats. Something like a light bulb triggered inside the bus and a fair-haired woman shivered in a dingy pink cardigan near the driver’s seat. Her fine jaw line was full of life despite two types of red blooming from cheeks—only one of them chapped. Maybe we were all hung-over—too taxed from late nights at the office or library to wake. Perhaps, we were in another world—our headphones too jacked to decipher the driver when he rose from his seat, shrugged those monstrous shoulders and said whatever he said. Seeing this commotion, two tiny blonde girls, pigtails peaking from wet skullcaps, stomped toward the teary spectacle. Forming a wall before the driver, they spun the woman’s knees, nudged her hamstrings into winter wind streams, heads heavy with what pulls at my pen.

when the brown jock uprooted from the Bronx
beats his teacher at literary charades. Flared nose
pointing toward a ceiling, the teacher cants dense
lines of verse, of which, the homie always knows the authors.
What you may recall is the kid’s Scottish mentor
sauntering into an assembly, squashing plagiarism allegations
and saving the brown jock from expulsion.
You’re probably thinking this is about white men.
About gold-encrusted measuring sticks. How in the world
outside that movie, those men could pass for twins. You’re right 
I was wrong. Their game, more like literary “name that tune”.
Guess which dead white dude poet wrote this quote?
Wrong again. Do you figure a brown jock from the Bronx
could grasp geometry behind an arc or pool cue?
From whom or what does he learn dead white dude poets?
Here I am, stumped about whose brother I be. I think the teacher
was playing a game. I think the jock was maybe acting
bookish, but then, how does one finesse canon?

It’s a wonder I’m not kinkier, exposed so young 
to ecstasy of martyrs—Sebastian pierced with arrows, 
Teresa in her spastic arch, eyes rolling white on visions,

and weekends, entranced by men in masks,
one who reared his huge horse Hi Ho,
and one caped in black, with a rapier.

The pale neighborhood perv 
never came close, he flashed and fled 
in dearth of imagination.

Summer evenings, to the sting and slap 
of mosquitoes, we wild children 
chased each other round the well house, 

and I held my wrists above my head,
whipped my hair from side to side
when captured, unknowing shade 

of the Sabine women, their heads 
thrown back, tangle of thighs 
in the arms of their conquerors.

To get to the farm, look for the third hill on Highway 70
above Germantown Parkway. There is no stoplight,

not even a blinking yellow. Turn left across traffic; watch out 
for tractor-trailers barreling west to the depots by the river.

Follow the two-lane road through Barrett’s Chapel.  Be alert
for the sheriff who will bust you for two miles above twenty.

Wind past the old cemetery with the rusty padlock on the gate, 
and take the jog at Jack Bond Road.  You’ll see a cotton field— 

don’t let it pull your gaze row after row to horizon;
concentrate instead on the upcoming patch of gravel.

Now’s the time to put on your bandana, tie it 
around your head so you can stomp across the fields

with Dad, who’ll want to show you his cows.  Already 
you can feel trickles of sweat in the small of your back,

see the white-faced calves nudging their placid mothers.
Not too much farther, you’ll pass on your left a small lake 

half-hidden by a screen of dogwoods and rouge-red azaleas.  
Turn immediately past the water, down a dappled driveway

under tall white oaks and tulip poplars.  Pull around until you see 
hydrangea bushes and a red door on a blue house.

I heard nothing, save sawing of crickets.
I saw nothing, save two men resting forearms on a wood fence.
A nod, a nudge to the hat brim. Something settled.

This was accord—mysterious, unaccountable,
as when the fluff flies off the dandelion in one breath
and the herd of cows counted twice comes out even.

My father told me he had given his word,
and I thought of it as a stone, dense and round,
polished by running creek water.

I keep a stone now, in my pocket to touch
as I read the fidget of fingers on contracts,
tremor of eyelids straining after loopholes.

Can it be recaptured? Transparency
of creek over fish and waving reeds, clear tone
of dinner bell that called us to the table,

collards and sweet corn from the patch
behind the house, sufficiency of a man’s word
now startling as a horsefly’s bite.

I might have listened harder, looked longer.
Instead, I bent to the white plate, eager to bolt,
sling pebbles at cunning birds.

My poor, lonely brain.
Because no one wanted in my head,
I paint my skull
to be more inviting.

I use warm colors.
German cockroach gold,
open-heart surgery red.

I spend hours then years
with my cheek
on the dining room table,
with my skull in one hand

and my brush in the other.
Indifferently, my father passes by the table
and then from this world.
He’d always said,

“Do something because you’re good at it
or to make money.”

My mother grabs my brother
by the shirt collar.
He’s young. He tries
to disrupt my work.

He wants to shake my head
because it looks full
of quarters, but it’s not.
At work my head is full

of my brain’s electric ridges.
My loose, hanging eyes
wearing turtle necks

of muscles and veins—
red, tired, and tear filled.
All this work and no certainty
anyone’s ever coming in.

I’m only happy
when I’m winning.
Traveling city to city
to pedal my wares
to oceans means
I need a car
to move forward.
Last summer my grandmother
looked for nearly an hour
at the refrigerator
before finally asking
“What are you?”
I turned twenty-five

and lost my car keys.
The summer before,
I made my father-in-law
ride shotgun to listen
to the rattle of my driver’s
side; I turned twenty-four
if it helps to keep up.
He couldn’t hear anything
over me saying “There it is again,”
and the crickets in the hollow
we were driving through
were chirping. It was extraordinary
to hear with his window down

to let out his cigarette smoke,
and he couldn’t hear it.
I hate to admit
that save for the lost
at sea found clutching
at a wave, or a spooked cow
giving milk, I am
mostly unhappy.
I stare at the pale spades
snow crabs walked a long way on
just to bake on a foiled pan
in my oven.
I call that a tie.

It wasn’t Morse code for sex but you, actually, wanting me to walk the dog. The stepchild I always wanted in the form of fur and a sloppy tongue. When I come by you’ve left me rotten teeth in the coffee brewing by the door. The note says you’re out of blue waste bags and I’m feeling shame lodged in my throat like a used coupon. Between my fingers your salty resentments are all over the dog leash. I’m walking the dog and singing my blunders in a way only magicians could understand. Who calls who darling tonight? An anchor someplace longs for my legs. There are better places to be then walking your four-legged birthday present. Like inside the trunk of a car or at the bottom of the ocean. Tomorrow, I’ll let you walk your own dog and I’ll be chained peacefully underwater, searching for my own sunken way of life.

in the beginning there was a tank top with no face and you hiding behind a book trying to catch my eyes. the fumbling papers between us. the unlooked looks left me with just nervous winks and a stack of poems. how many times did the sweat try to tell me your secrets? the chalkboard was projecting the silent film we wish we had written. you warned me that once you were a fox in another life that feathers can fall from the sky if you hold your breath long enough. one by one you gathered all the words you could find to build me a dictionary. I never could appreciate clues or sunrises or orange juice. when I found out that your smile meant summer was just for us, it was too late, you were gone. so I left you notes on banana peels in the corner of every room we ever went to. I dreamt that you would find them. that you would swing from a vine or parachute down on a bridge we never knew existed. you’d find me there and tell me simply, there’s a chance someone misplaced our script. there’s a chance you and I can start from the very beginning.

After days of thirst, the island appears as hands bringing the sea up
        to a mouth, its leaves like drops of water across a palm.
I step from my boat onto its boney shore, walk through the forest
        for hours, looking for a creek, deer tracks, any sign 
of life, until I reach a well, cradled by roots and stones. Inside
       is a brightness of milk, like a muted word. I drink 
three handfuls, open my eyes in a field completely white. 
       There is a well in the center, and inside it a darkness
with no reflection. I think: lost sound with no one to hear it, 
       sound of the dead, your voice, which is like the moment 
a star closes its wave of light, which is like my body 
       curled on the ground. Where I wake.  My head opens 
its eyes, terrified the rest of its body rots in the well. Three days 
       bloom a purple garden in my mouth. No animal comes to eat 
the constellation of flowers, this waking the distant expansion 
        of a universe that cannot feel us.  

Out at sea, each night is long. 
Each night has one sound I know: 

the moon against the water
like your cheek across mine 

in another life. That world had no room 
for holy things, for any small 

city of flowers. I am finding 
a way to reach where you are. 

I am thinking of lighting 
the voice on fire. Of lighting 

the dark oil of the sea 
on fire, each drop a note 

singing daylight up. Listen—
I am trying to send you 

a human sound, which is bones 
cracking to bend an arrow 

back, a long whistle 
across the radiant field 

of a body you remember 
because it remembers yours. 

We are made to live in each other
which means we are built 

to ruin, and so each night 
I dream back another piece 

of you—an eye, 
a ligament—and each day 

wake on the water 
with another hole.


I come to him a waylaid sailor,
            outside the known map.
                        I come the foundling, the trespasser. 

Come calling with the broken cabinet of my mouth, 
            rescued from the collapsed mouth

of the sea.  For we all belong
            to one mouth. Is that not true? 
                        We belong to the same imploded star

and map of molecules, same 
            ribs untangled like vines that grew 
toward separate sources

of light.  So I come to him as part of him 
           and am not afraid.  Come because I cannot see

all the things seen by him.
           I cannot read the optical illusion
                       of the sea, the light pricking its water

like calculations, the many bright points 
           within the darkened portion of the moon.  

Come because the end of the sea was a world
           pouring into its beginning

like the pieces of shadow 
           encroaching upon the light
                       of a lunar surface, or a hand bending 

its bones backward into its own wrist, 
           resurrecting its one self.  

I saw the lighthouse 
           sever the wrist of the dark 
                      and knew I had never touched 

anything. No one has touched.
Still I come, opening the flooded islands of my palms,
            to ask this one thing—

Though water blooms their skulls, a garden
where the voice rots beyond hearing, you will hear 
them come. Listen for the rusted
gate. Listen, the horses startle. A body comes 
to stand at your door like a broken 

lighthouse. Wash away the salt, the blood, warm
the tongue and it will name the shape 
of your hands. The map will come back into its body 
and so the body to its map. As the spring light
floods each vessel, each petal of sweat 

across the backs of the horses.  As we all must raise 
kingdoms with only our hands. Shine 
your lantern on the last black flower wilting in the stone 
of her skull, then reach inside and pluck it 
from its centuries of darkness.

I’ll stretch humble 
over an anthology’s spine 

& crack one tooth open over you. 

Drop nerves & what 
ties thistle to my mouth. 

I’ll remain curious of where you’d fall on my shelf.

I.

I sat 
still so a spider 
spun from my toe. 

This wasn’t a pastoral 
gesture but a call 
to magnetism. 

Like a pigeon’s beak 
or brain. 

II.

In another life 
I was 
a human shield. 

In another life 
I was 
worth it.

In another life 
I was 
short enough for an afghan.  

III.

It’s a good enough idea for now.

& now I fold back into my own. 

This time brutality isn’t a player 

& yes, I do worry for my future. 

I worry for the whale 

in my spirit & believe I could be swallowed 

by an anxiety over which is the front & 

which is the back of a postcard.

Tell me about the destruction 
of your mother. 

& by this I mean 
tell me about loving someone. 

Tell me what it means to be domestic-
ally translated & akin to pigeons. 

& by this I mean I can hear 
your breath percolate 

through trees with 
astonishing body.

Chromatic refers to color or weather 
or intimacy of the air between 
two people that surrounds conversation 
or lack thereof. Within light: color, 
revelation of pigment so we see 
Eucalyptus, Monterey Cypress, Wren. 
As the sun rolls closer to our horizon, 
we distinguish small gradations of color 
like the way the center of a feather 
is darker than the outside boundary.
The news thumps against stairs, and rain intensifies 
morning. Under umbrellas men and women 
hurry to the station, a few spots of florals.
When I switch on the light, you turn over, sigh.

By sundown, I’d pulled three black bass 

and struck them on rocks. I used to have 

style: a wicker basket, trout, 
                                               a herringbone coat. 
In a grizzled autumn, 
                                   you told me these 

were merely echoes: the falling tree 
that took the forest with it, 
                                            crisp duff, another 

hunter’s moon. I enter the night, a sow 
sniffing in the cool, 
                                 so the passing leaves 

can cling to me for calm, 
                                          and you can practice 
in the loose 
                     sound of crows, 
with your medicine knives.

I speak as if my voice is a guidewire
sliding toward my brother’s heart, 
opening each vessel’s glossy skin, lighting 
the coal stove inside. Warmth might begin 
rising upward, his cheeks coloring like twin flowers.
I narrate the roads we drive by memory:
The coastline north of the airport, I say,
the tunnel beneath the harbor, and the city’s summer
market, each storefront closed. If I could see
my mother, where she sits beside the driver,
I’d see how tears can look like sweat—
as though she’s been running 
some long distance, her hair the wiry stems
of orchids in my father’s greenhouse.
When I was young, he lifted a caught sparrow 
from the soil bed and set it in my hands.
It rolled to its side, clawless, injured 
in the falling. Toss it up, my father said, 
maybe it will fly. The truth is,
I bring my father to the poem only
suddenly, to amend the law of his absence,
and because my brother’s eyes are closed.

The roof dances until it is quiet.
We sit still
as if we had unlearned the logic
of logic.
In the museum of the wished-for:
woman as chestnut tree, man
with a wing—
wing with a peony of lead
hung in the feathers.

 He takes the feeding tube:
music after only a minute.
When he moves a little, excited— excited
she sounds like water.
And the disadvantage of parting:
we must
unlearn the name of each town
in which we paused—
Jaw Lapse, Sand Spit,
Unfired Forge.

Hand-gift: someone in the court has mastered constancy 

by pressing through a pool. A cuspid letting go its theorem.

Retreat and gather. Retreat and gather. Through small turns

of finch, spilt lamplight reveals rain, one suggestion of outside.

What is it to be naked like pavement or goldfish, to learn

from their lending capacities. Someone in the court is alone

in her eating habits. Signals caught in the lint trap and forgotten. 

The cheek of a face is like the heel of a shoe: impressionable.

You said it smelled like moss. But my fur knows 
bog-tide, the violet threshing of Jacarandas. 
It was windy. I tugged at your cuff. A spoon 
tarnished in oatmeal and you cut paper
to mimic how luster wilts. The clamor was pieces
of cast music parceled into sheets. 
We both recognized the odor of sunlight 
across afternoons. Unknown like the gold of Van Gogh’s sheaves
you said you heard the petal abandoning the stalk.

More and more, I grow dizzy
in public places. The doctors cannot say why,
in the middle of trying on shoes, I list left.

Or when pushing a thumb to tomato to check
for ripeness or bruising, I stumble, catch myself
palms-down on a bin of avocado. Why the counter

at the post office seems more speckled with dark
around the edges of my sight than at its center. 
I make children cry. Their mothers think 

I’m a drunk as I dance a syncopated weave
in line at the bank. It is a nervousness of body—
twitches of flesh that loose my hand from contents,

jiggle the vision, suggest a letting go.
It is on the most crowded of sidewalks 
that muscle leaps for its getaway, snaps 

back, tosses my body forward to the street. 
Glasses smashed to asphalt, each molded lens
a foot from its other, my eyes see the asphalt’s

texture with a granular distinction. But looking up,
cars move by like diagrams of phenotype—
nothing but line and color in variation.

I imagine he was wearing tights  
his body taut 
bent around the bar on the mirrored wall 
like a guitar string in mid-pluck

his luck slipped on 
the sweat of another
dancer in the studio

his slipper slid left
like an election cycle
the joint buckled under 
the weight of puberty
 
(an awkward that even 
the calculating body control
of a budding cavalier 
can not always avoid)

the leg gave way
broken seesawed to ground
and then it came:

damn
shit
fuck
rahm

the sound stopped  everything
the teacher’s appraising eyes 
gaggle of giggling girls
levitating in pointe shoes
they all became static

four
the number of letters
a single syllable shout
a trumpet bleating, declaring

i am here now
get used to me
i am plotting loudly
how to fill the air.

1.
beats the Degas at the Musee des Demi Arts,
as you cleverly called it. A tour of pastel
dancers past their prime flaunting tulle
and Parisian hauteur? Fuck it. Let’s smoke

a cigarette. We walk to Four Green Fields.
The bartender says we drink like artists.
We’re Monet and Renoir under a thatched roof
they would have loved, drinking their debts,

arguing where light falls best, the distance 
between easel and vision. Which friend 
will find a buyer next? Which painting 
will hang in damp, neglected galleries?

A woman with a parasol and nowhere to go.
A girl with a watering can pouring out the sun.

2.
It’s your turn to pick up the tab.
You don’t complain. This is the last time
we’ll walk to my place together, the city
backlit by dusk. We dream of starring in 

a Merchant Ivory film with light like this: 
demimondes lounging all day, sprawled 
and complicated as a Jamesian sentence. 
In whale bone corsets, we’d whirl through 

a montage of gossip, white rum and men 
until our Oscar-winning close-up, cameos 
pinned like amber tears, and you ask:
How long will we pay loans? Why

did we read and study, read and study 
artifice—we, a pair of artless students? 

3.
In the club, drag queens strut like peacocks, 
throw shade across the floor. They make it work. 
We’ve all got bills to pay. But us? We buy 
a final round of shots, sweeter for our ennui. 

Strobe lights rattle green, gold, and red.
Boys disappear. We lose our buzz.
Even the queens won’t perform, too busy
preening their feathers. We’re not French, 

but in the Belle Époque of our twenties, 
futures unsure and uninsured. Let’s raise 
a glass. Rum stings our throats—cut
cane. We drink until Paris glows inside 

our minds—a disco ball, a shot glass 
shattering. We drink until Paris burns.

My thumb paces the lid. I never touched her urn or looked
  at the ashes until now.

Shawled by Spanish moss, an oak faces the warm sea, 
  in September an act of courage. 

Scrub pine, kudzu, flies—green, green, green—Florida
  you are viciously alive. 

Can there be a world without death and dark veils on trees? 
  Tell me how to mourn in you.

The sky arches like an extension of the sea: it takes a storm 
  to see change. I missed the storm—

a cane, a slower gait—until I walked the barren trail 
  it tore through me. I scatter 

her ashes. Dragonflies thread the rising air, a green scent: 
  pine, salt, sap, kin.

Her balance is empty except for light.
Unconcerned with worldly goods,

she pauses. Gold chains
and pearls bright as poured milk

recede in the allegory. Christ hangs 
on the wall outside her gaze.

Who could compare his damning hand
to her delicate calibrations? 

For once, light symbolizes
the pleasure of a woman tying pearls 

around her neck with yellow lace.
She sees the world in the garland,

all things held in common, and weighed
against the light isn’t enough to tip the scale.

The volcano in my grandmother’s Mexican village
smothered the town, though the girl escaped because
the axis of revolution sent her family into exile,

black clouds covering their journey to the north.
The axis of the earth is a skeletal bone extending
from pole to pole, the arm of someone holding on.

The Japanese earthquake shifted the axis of the earth,
moving Japan twelve feet closer to North America,
each day shortened by one second.

When a poet said the past never happens because
it is always present, the other one proclaimed the past
is in the future, the axis bending to allow these words

to skip the water like stones thrown by a boy in
search of his father, the axis of yesterday sinking
the stones the boy hurled across the pond.

If the dog should explode at ground level, it is not the violent world but what has been since you bowed your head at your nephew’s funeral, his 23 years of life given to a country that will not remember who he was. If the dog should explode at ground level, the clouds in the sky will turn yellow and the war will continue with little notice, pieces of the dog flying through the air to warn you it is the other world and not this one. If the beast should hurl at eye level, be sure to duck because the last flying canine hit your father between the eyes and he never forgave you for not being there, the absent son of the warrior hiding behind his childhood home because there were no dogs there, only insects that hummed before something happened. If the dog should explode at ground level, it is not then but now, when it is safe to walk out of the trees without getting bitten by a four-footed truth that stalks silent men.

It is the look of terror on his face—
the glossy flank of an open grand piano
untouched & muscled with light
behind them—that makes me turn
away, the saxophonist leaning
into the curve of breath, the arc
glinting from his lips, almost
unwieldy, thick-limbed, the precision 
of a volt striking the ground. He is cruel,
I think, his lips gripping the brass 
mouth & wood tongue, because
he knows he can’t be touched
as the fighter who doubles
inside the ring, winged fits
of blood & electricity humming
like a halo around the near-corpse
of the man he’s whipped, fists 
demarcating notes into the haze
between them, the guitarist’s mouth
& eyes swollen with knowledge
he is ill-equipped, his left hand
a culled constellation, flaccid above
the strings as if to form the chord
of a blistering universe, the first 
cut into darkness, deliberate chaos 
of the child who pretends to play 
lifting the wooden body to his chest,
who knows what stirs in his cells
has no name, the crook & jag, blue
smoke, a bud opening in his abdomen
swelled to the size of hope as we become 
the shape of whatever we hold 
in our hands when asked to lift up 
what we cannot bear to touch.

Barnacle, I would like to be remade 
in your image; hollowed tooth, dress of calcium, blue-salt tongue. 
Your language of echoes colonizes the earth’s cold thighs. I want it
as I sometimes want the uncomplicated diminuendo of my life,
to disperse and fade, blurred into the music of bees, thirst, words 
scratched into plexiglass, this being human such a dirty
business. I crave your sterile logic, philosopher’s beard glittering
with fleas. You, clutter of fossils, oxidized starlight, you fist
of loaded dice, three-card hustler of the sea, rapture of knuckles
along the mouth. You suicide letter of glee, treble cleft
kiss, you alphabet of orgasms, mineral lung, you bootlegger
of miracles, preacher with a lisp, you stripper’s robe
on the dressing room floor, you slow-cooker of meth,
glint of gold in the blues singer’s mouth, you rickshaw
vanity plate, you ten-part harmony grinding on a street corner—
Your solemn voice proliferates like spores, your junky arm
bloated with jewels, your face of scars made of history and indifference—
You breeder of ghosts, you sprawl of eyes, you cemetery 
of unborn children haunting my small city.

Maybe don’t for another minute be afraid
of anything. Because swimming is really useful 
against drowning which you didn’t know until
you tried it. And then your life was just massive 
regret. And then you thought about three 
purple blossoms in the hair
of a beautiful girl. But that’s not the part
that aches in a deep kind of place
inside you. Like if your dinner caught fire
in your stomach and then you ran
to the river which was dry. And your friend
was a jerk who doesn’t share resources 
including a hose. Most things lose
interest when you are quiet
and small. Most things want to be
around other majestic things that make 
noise or beauty. Wind plucks a flower
for sailing. You stand there in the presence
of whatever you are not.

During a football game so consider
that there will be other people. But they
can’t come with us. But they can’t know
that the most amazing part of waking up
is that you are not dead. You are wearing
a totally splendid bathrobe that hugs 
you like a dress. Hopefully there is some
coffee for how I am tired. Hopefully my head
opens up like a rose.

I came to the field 
where last I fed
your flesh to stones, 
before the boys spooned you out
and the river pinned you down.
Teeth to teeth, mud to mud.
I found a blue child, face down
in the grass. Her skin 
unimpressed by the sun. 
A hot sound moved
through her—forgiveness, ticking.
I meant to shovel her from the earth
but she cracked like a milk plate.
I am a troubled woman. I am forgetful.
I recall nothing of your voice.
Only your smile that danced
like static each time you spoke.
The blood wind lifting your face
when I’d press. Now
there is dirt on everyone.
A house of dark confessions
hived beneath our fur.

Like viruses that speak to one another, signaling 
small growths, the dead announce themselves 
in silence. They orbit the absence of my figure 
in the mirror. Among them, I approach you.  I let my voice 
pull you toward sun dividing waters.  Fragrance 
of butcher’s broom climbs backward up memory’s 
fresh leaves, as if water pools on the other side 
of this reflection.  You accompany the movement 
of dawn.  Though you are out now among the hyacinth-moths, 
a flicker of late embers between earth’s symmetry 
of shade and song—the seam between slight vibrations 
of chatter.  I have carried you in dream.

    I say: home                & show you spatter

             carved heart              still beating                 abandoned       Nairobi bustling

                        I say: comfort               show you corpus                                   corpses

                        tossed            in a heap                      dirty laundry

             corrupted corner                  in the world’s dark room                       I say:

            home                          show you                      bloody stump                chopped leg

filet cheek                 (your) eye        as vulture                       I say:

                        comfort                                  show you                     army

            amputation                 constrictor lips             prolapsed uterus             show you

squawking fetish        stripper leg                 spread                           pearlized pussy

           Africa                         gutted                         continent quartered

                         consumption             colonizers                    cut-up

brain bake                     show you                             sleeping            sickness

            show                 you                          war torn                       unbodied


                        baby foot                  fish fat                         flesh feast

show                you               oozing                         show                you       ahhhhhing

we see your brown foot with bells
the heavy garter of melancholy 
piquant behind your ears and underneath
the backwards black dress that catches us, 
zig-zag ivy, buttons along spine rock 
like the tasseled nipples of a pin-up.


it unnerves us, how our mothers speak 
cautionary tales from front gates. 
we meet long enough to hush your 
bare legs back into child’s play, 
chanting morning-after down to the house 
where our mothers wait with a white sheet.

I do it all the time: in public, midday
walking along Broadway or down the subway steps;

in dance class, eyes fixed on the heels
of the girl in front of me. It’s as easy as breathing—not to, 

suddenly forgetting to exhale—
the next best thing to pleasure, this

rubbing up against the back of Death 
as if he were a stranger at a concert. 

I only know it’s happened once it’s over. 
This must be what the medieval mystics meant

by ecstasy—this hot holy flash in the chest,

the good shepherd with his crook around my neck,
my life in a short loop, tightening.

All we’ve ever shared was a class together,
one common textbook and a few hours 
from time to time, between 2:00 
and 5:00 AM. I don’t mean to be moved by him,

to care how lightly the hair curls 
up his chest, to catch his back’s muscled surface
reflected in my mirror. But of course

the moon is full—it would be—
of course this animal in me, of course these wild tides—

Watch how he kisses me.
Look how my face brightens.

Is it raining, or is that my hand falling asleep, pricking its own fingers; 
not unlike the feeling of walking down a broken escalator, other people 

gliding by in the opposite direction—the illusion of movement 
under my feet, the touch of vertigo. I want to call and tell you I’m

touched, in the medieval sense of the word: sick, mad, stirred. 
My gut won’t settle. I’m all shook up. That’s just the sort of person I am;

I hate summer. The other night when I cried 
while you went down on me, I was really laughing 

under that pillow. I was tired of being touched.

In place of no, my leaking mouth spills foxgloves,
entire trumpets of tongued blossoms litter the locked closet.
Up to my ankles in petals, the hanged gowns close in,
mother multiplied, more — there’s always more
corseted ghosts, red silk bodies crowd
my mouth. I would say no, please;
I would say sorry, papa; I would never
ask for her again, but dresses dressed
in dresses are dresses own this garnet dark,
this mouth, these hands can’t find
the walls, only more mothers
emptied out.

A moonless night cliff-side steals the sea
from us. What was sapphire beyond churlish blue

is just howl now: waves darker than closed eyelids
wreck the rocks we also can’t see. Sunlight forgot

the two of us here. The taste of salt, an ungiven kiss
on our lips. And silence is the rush of blood

in our ears, a violent pause between your question
and what I will not say. I have no answer; 

My throat is the ocean now.

I. 

Before the only unbroken mirror, cobalt kimono
undone, embroidered sea at my feet: I’m the self-portrait of my father. 

Eyes deep as ravines, night-lined ribcage,
even the rage is his,

this dusk between both of me. 

II.

In a hour colored tourmaline, I mistake your guitar
for a body in sleep and smash you into effigy, 

splinter your way back into my skin. 

With silk-wrapped fists, I shadowbox your incessant reflection
and break myself back open.

It could be that nothing is sacred to me,
or it could be that I have seen enough of altars and alder groves.

A thyrsus is only a cock, after all
and a holy virgin only a girl who won’t call.

Let’s go ragged as old coats tattered by a wind
whose playfulness makes love to the idea of apocalypse.

Carry on, carry on, I feel it in the popping gears of my heart
that rattletrap old box of bones.

Some comeuppance it was, howled loud as a rabbit’s hop
and half as deadly, some great vindication—

all your books lost at sea but the painting I had given her
for her birthday still hanging around.

She had wanted it.  Love will leave you it said without prelude,
how macabre, and she wanted it.

Like when we were kids and smeared
rubber cement on the soft pads of our fingers 
and blew on them until they were tacky.

Press pointer to thumb and pull apart:
whoever could stretch the sticky threads 
longest without breaking them won.

The gum always looked like teeth and rabies spit 
to me when we played.  As if my hand 
were the mouth and the glue thick disease.

Or when Bugs gave Elmer Fudd the hotfoot
and his boots sank down, soles spreading 
and bubbling like pancake batter;

he tried to chase that wabbit but the melted threads 
yawning between the ground and the boot 
snapped him back like a rubber band.

Like that.  The threads are what 
I mean.  Like a mouth,
yawning wide open. 

Like Elmer’s soles holding on to the earth.
Like Elmer trying to run, that mouth
just eating him up.

always the prospect 
of thin ice. the innate 
knowledge of gradation: 

thick porcelain white,
then something finer
the rippled translucence 

of bathroom windows
and so on, down to the 
thinnest dusk-gray wafer 

where the first cracks 
split open, the drifting 
snow suddenly 

blue as a vein.

then

underwater, the ice
like a second sky,

snow skating across
in filamentary clouds.

the water only cold
for a minute

and the rest, easy.
so quiet 

and so still.

Strength comes in numbers—pick 1985,
the summer of New Coke and the death of Supergirl
when your needs consisted of 
puffy stickers and microwaved corn dogs. 

When you went out at night
afraid only of vampires, werewolves
and the legend of Bloody Mary,

repeating the rosary
on your way home.


Keep to those simple worries,
let them shadow large.

Cling to that impossible unknown,
its rules changing to your will.
Vampires won’t bite if you sing
"Come on Eileen," the louder the better.
Can’t attack anyone wearing pink—
when you are wearing pink.
Other days underwear labeled 
with the day of the week are your talisman.

The werewolves know you stole your best friend’s
glitter pencil, the only acceptable atonement
thirteen paint-by-numbers of 
St. Hubert blessing the deer. 

But what to do with Mary
when she only comes if you ask?
Just you in a darkened bathroom
fixing on the medicine chest mirror,
waiting to see what appears.

When you rumble by me, know this: My alarm 
is set too sensitive to be 
on this city street. The Jeep and red 
Mustang almost set me off, but moved 
away just in time. When I feel your hum,
the stick figure family on my back 
window trembles as if the mother 
in the pencil skirt may become burlesque, 
her flat vinyl chest leading the peel until 
there is only a hole between the fisherman father
and the ballerina-skirted girl. If you find her later, 
clinging to the side  of your gas tank, think of me, 
parked here at the corner of Broad and High,
my meter slowly running out.

this bird resembles a crane            flies like this:
its body swooped below two tense wings i want 
the weight of your body to collapse like that into 
the moss scented air                   southern density

i’ve turned you into a snowy egret and your wings
may they be finished holding up the weight of you
your feathered casing plucked + dirtied in the winter
you wore layers      told me i wasn’t dressing properly

in the worm-infested         too-much-kitchen’d
one-half of a house     i stood it was December
inside my lace shirt       held a bottle of Perrier 
to my lips + you said              frivolous 

you’ll sink into the wormed earth          wings defunct:
heavy-bodied  no longer able-headed     the blue ridge
mountains will rise above you               pieces of your 
finished body will lie below

took years to turn you into a white bird     that louisiana 
egret    took years to dissemble you        a wing here
a beak                 see you in dreams          the collapsed 
grass of my neighbor’s             fenced yard

may the keepers of my dreams be stronger than you
i sleep in my new bed in this life and pray you     go
remain wingless    windowless      in the fluorescent 
lighting   +    dropceiling’d      snowed-in        studio

He wonders what winter’s like in Pittsburgh,
imagines his father there—somber, alone—
waiting for the telephone to ring.

When he was young, his father took him out
into the snow and watched him eat his fill.
He wonders if the snow’s as white in Pittsburgh,

or if the steel refineries that blacken
the skies stain the drifts dark as wrought iron.
He’s waiting for the telephone to ring.

Downstairs, his mother knuckles dumplings,
kneading and palming them into shape.
He wonders what the girls are like in Pittsburgh

and wonders if his father has a new
woman there—another wife, a son—
and knows, if so, the phone will never ring.

His fingers graze the phone’s cold dial.
He prays his father’s still awake tonight,
pacing through a house somewhere in Pittsburgh,
waiting for the telephone to ring.  

O Lord, I have a thirst for more Miller Lite and to drag the rowboat
through the sycamore threaded dunes, to feel the weight of my freedom
tugged behind me, and at water’s edge push off towards the west
and find a passage to the Pacific.  I was short with my drunk neighbor
today, Lord, after he backed into my station wagon with his truck.
Damn Michigan no-fault insurance, Lord.  Damn the broken taillight.
But, just now, as I finished mowing I opened another Miller Lite
and thought how nice it would be to have another. And when I’m drunk 
in the lawn as the evening pushes on, let the yellow cucumber blossoms 
burn another sun into my vision. And thank you for the Mennonites 
and their sweet tomatoes, the blue heron and happy hour.  Thank you for
the rowboat, Lord, that leaves a dry wake through the sand.  And keep
the light from the fireworks a while longer, Lord.

but heavy pink organ.  And there’s no better organ 
than Steve Winwood’s in the Spencer Davis Group.  
I listen to “Gimme Some Lovin’” to feel something 
other than a hawk-call off the canyon wall.
Because it’s manic.  Rubber bones and new color.
A borrowed pulse rattling my palpitations.
I’m trying to compose my days into movements
of joy and kindness — which sounds like the bullshit
I see on kitchen magnets, but really, I can’t think
of anything better to guard the left over slice of pizza.
A good garlicy crust is a joy.  To appreciate the quality
of pizza ingredients is a kindness.  To listen is a joy.
To listen is a kindness.  To be interested is a joy.
To forgive one’s self is a kindness.  Forgive me, 
Heart, for forgetting you’re also a basketball,
an old birch tree, a good 45, a firecracker, dancing 
with an August woman, a heavy pink organ.

Peeling fingers can mean nothing but shingles, 
and human-sized amoebas lurk in every tunnel, 

like the time a bear of a man emerged 
in the dusk to ask for directions, then change, 

then what to do when galaxies collide 
and we rip from the pressure, crotch to throat. 

Are we a new species then? Or are we gone 
the way of ancestral mammoths, those giants. 

Quirks of survival leave us roaches 
but not pterodactyls. So much for majesty. 

So much for writing a letter to your best lover 
and explaining his pulse on your back makes up 

for rising in the dark, suiting up to step out 
into Milky Ways, yes, but also into nothing that you can touch. 

Slick with cayenne and stardust, let’s make an advertisement 
for despair:

Welcome to planetary warfare! 
Do you know much about lasers? 
Where do you see yourself in five hundred years?

I see myself in a spacesuit riding a mammoth,
trying to diagnose myself from fever and scabs,

and according to the internet reports, 
I may not even be human. It’s that bad.

I thought I was done talking about the copperhead, 
the arrow of its head that points as if to say, 

“I choose you despite your anemic eyes 
and attic sleeping place, chilled when the snow comes 

as it comes every dark-lidded January. 
You are no kind of heroine because you watch 

the burned girl in class without ever speaking 
two words to her.” Every part of that snake gleams 

kettle-colored, hear the hiss that says, “I’m ready for you.” 
And you deserve the punctures, the sweet choke, the too-far-for-help 

because you shouldn’t have been there in that field, 
too big to ever belong to a rag of a thing like you.

There are sharks, you just know it,
and you can eat them. Sharks, you say, 

and they don’t blink in their fish tanks. 
No need to cover carnage when prey 

presses its face to the glass.
The fisherman’s wife wears heels

you hear coming, little elver.
She’ll tuck you tightly into defeat. 

A child’s resistance to missing out,
your nightly epilepsy conjures

eels that spark around the doorframe,
crowing adventures that end,

too often, with busted everything:
eyes, teeth, and once a collarbone.

I walked around stuffing my pockets
and my shirt and my pants with snow
from the grooves of tires and the middle
of the street and bottom steps.
I built a man in my image, gave him a hat
a good pair of shoes, a dime bag
and everything I’ve learned
about being black and hurt
and holy and drunk 
and my mother’s son and not afraid 
of the gun and he looked 
more like stone after I was done.
I was so sure he’d see August, 
but like his maker he could only fight 
so long. I’m happy I didn’t 
give him a face, I didn’t 
hear him scream.

I heard you whispering to the back 
last night about skipping town.
You thought he wouldn’t tell me? The spine 
can hold no secrets, tell him something sweet
or horrible and he’s off dancing like a hurricane again,
singing devotion, humming everything you told him.
You know how this works, the eyes lure
the tongue prays over the prey, you come
and do what the body wants.
Yeah, we blame you for our lonely, 
make you the black sheep of this gang we call “self”.
Every body needs a villain, you fit the profile: crooked,
crooked smile, all that ugly and the bones still call for you.
Gagged more names in this bed
than the hands, they only want to hold
no choke, but you dream
rock and metal, dream clog and build 
yourself into a tower, make the blood climb 
till the draws fall
then you and the teeth make massacre
of every grey set of flesh and fat
that journeys too far into all this “this” that we all agreed
to call “I”. You “I” too. We know you mean well
trying to make some sun for this dark thing,
and of course I am begging you to stay,
but sometimes can you not rise?
Don’t always need the revolution of someone else’s skin
can’t you see the city’s still burning from last time?

Everything at once, reflected 


upside down


in a spoon. And another

 
pool of night droops 


across the sky 


I am underneath


sometimes begging 


for miniature explosions


and a new disguise.


Canoes and yellow dreams. 


There were boats in the streets 


after the flood 


but our houses


did not resemble islands.


I swam for days.


And everything swam 


like a cloud, falling apart 


for no good reason but to fall.

Today my nipples feel like valves cold                         as tuba skin.  Lie on the floor & turn 
my phone on & off—don’t want to know whether you plan to 

call me back or not. It feels safe to assume tomorrow.                           If you don’t respond, I plan to 
not bring it up at the karaoke bar.  Plan to sing                       “The Man                     that Got Away.” I don’t know yet 

whether sleeping with you was worth losing            my favorite sweater.  That same day all my pants 
disappeared from the washer & the same winter                  all my tights split at the knee. If we go to coffee 

tomorrow, I won’t mention this. Eat poached eggs, keep the conversation to public                     transportation & the preference 
for solitude. We can talk about the movies, of course                      I’ll blame Disney.   

What if I believe another sweater will sweep me                  off my hips from under 
this afghan? What if someone tells me I’m a fine woman, 

sober? I will want to believe it.  

Don’t talk about your garden. 
We all have our own kale                   starts in our yards.

Don’t talk about invasive species. I’m down to ice 
in my biodegradable cup & tumble mustard             buds thrive in the melt—

Everyone at Camel’s Back wears sandals                   with toe straps. The slope still reigns 
formidable. I descend perfectly                      only when alone; please don’t 

say hello. Not enough blackberries for you               to forage, too. 

Don’t say you’ll be my friend. Bouquets take                        time. Health requires     

a schedule & I can’t see you                every happy hour. At home, I choose curtains 
that let in the light but don’t let you onto                  my shadow, its salad, its plastic     

fork that digs for the best                  walnut & mizuna. 
What is spring                        to a thatch of dead 

trees & what is it to me if I can’t be the only woman           sliding fast down rubber 
soles with an anklet                hand-braided at summer camp?                   My past-selves sat

in cabin corners with spiders & mold. The other campers              canoed. I dyed my hair  
pink with the illusion            Manic Panic was made for me & I would be forever            incongruous

Darwin calls it universal,
himself witness to an Indian elephant
weeping, captured and bound in Ceylon,

stock still, tears the size of pisco grapes
the only indication of her suffering. Grief,
he wrote after speaking to a mother
about her dying son, was an orchestra

of contracting facial muscles: pleated furrows, eyes pinched,
abrupt arch of her brows, a relief
sculpture, levo—to rise from the surface.

How easily I think of the woman
and her sickly son, Darwin, the mewling elephant,

remembering me with you:

ten years too young to marry, to own anything
worth owning, a farm

that needed a new foundation and roof. I should have left

it to the fields to swallow whole; I didn’t

know it at the time, but you took
a dozen rolls of film
our first summer, documenting my slow progress

wedging rotten siding from the façade with a claw hammer,
running blood-colored rust from the pipes, patching

the chimney’s fissures with mortar. Bats, you thought,
entered through the eyelets and circled pell-mell

above our bed while we slept, feasting on a fog of mosquitoes,
moths drawn to the warm light of the lampshade. And me, five years away

from temperance, sobriety,
muscled into your photo with its smear of backdrop leaves, bottled bourbon
cocooned in glass, your camera trained on the furnace stack,

my gaunt face:  
he orbicular, corrugators, and pyramidal muscles
quaked
with regret, which Darwin wrote is indistinguishable from sorrow.


If they ask about the weather, say old men prophesy
from an ice ring that ghosts the moon,

seagulls scratching in sand, mackerel skies and mares’ 
tails. Say a wind from the south has sleet 

in its mouth. Say heat lightning under the North Star 
forecasts three days of uncombed rain. 

Say you were baptized by windburn; a sunshower 
in Lee County is the devil’s wedding. 

Say geese tornado violently above the slough. 
If they ask about distance, say neighbor, 

father. Say barbed-wire fence bordering a hundred acres 
of snap beans; say slaughter, goading 

rams from pasture to the kill floor. Say the gash cleaved 
from the ram’s thorax to flank. If they ask 

about fire, say the doublewide burned to its cinderblocks
 in Utopia Park; say bathtub meth, how 

the grounds reeked of ammonia before flames aproned 
the trailer. Say a half-gallon of diesel 

to scorch the ditches, fuels to burn back the timberline. 
Say the chicories flower sapphire, cobalt 

where flames clung to brush the longest. Say there’s more 
to ash than scatter. If they ask about misery, 

say Cynthia Johnson fell in love first, say her boyfriend 
plunged a screwdriver into her chest 

having extinguished a twelve-pack of Schlitz, free based 
crystal from a light-bulb pipe. Say the black 

tongue of Highway 61 where white-cross roadside markers
 litter its hairpin curves. Say the rawboned 

high school blonde in the backseat of your parents’ Buick, 
how her sex smelled of wet soil, wild 

mushrooms; how for hours you carried those smells 
in the hinges of your knuckles. If they ask 

about grief, say a dozen barn owls latched to the rafters
means another hard winter. Say steam lifts

as ponds unlock last week’s freeze. Say berries of ice
jeweled in the horse’s mane.  

XXII
 
Nothing winged, nothing consisting of hair or teeth or blisters. In the corner of a basement room a tear fell from the ceiling. Sad coupling ensued. It was the end of a long day at the foundry and the heat had taken its toll on the both of you. The diesel generator sat motionless in the dark. It would be days before the story of the killing made sense to anyone. It had been a cold month, to be sure, and the diesel generator had been indispensable. Images of it cluttered the landscape. Several winding paths ended at the base of the diesel generator. Here, even light succumbed to gravity. The rest was history. The rest was a study in trajectories.

A day is a single day.

Driven by the inertia and mass of water—
has the flesh been compensated?

The water meets inside us, around us, 
in clouds, in the moon, 
in a flood.

The parameters are skin, bricks, a shore.

The water breaks
the shore.

The sun is heaviest in the sky,
the highest is noon,
derived from Latin, “nona hora,” the ninth hour 
of the day, and is related 
to the liturgical term, none.i

After nine months, nothing.

I stood in the shade, afraid 
of the high light, the wide and empty noon,
none could find a voice, none
had cast a shadow. 

The moon, in opposition, in fetal position
could not resist the tight fist of night,
and crazed the pacing bodies
below.
 
I became a mess of morning. I have fallen
pace-less in my limbs, a swift
of hair against the early fan.

This is not death,
this is the oviduct 
it swells through. 

A season is cool if it has to be, a night
is cool from the rain. I am taken 
into the palm of these elements
and given possible courses of action.

Render imminent.
Render myself a translation.

If I must leave, I must be misunderstood.

These bones are constructed in the form of aching,
and these eyes carry the burden of light. To see
is lightness. I am assuming the stance of a desert, an ocean
emptied and realized 
in rhythmite.

A rhythm might use its will.

We await skyscrapers 
and rise.

From up here,
I only see my child
inside the furious waves.

The wild-haired boy on the platform
is reinventing civilization  
with two yards of used curtain

and a stare.  The kinglet 
is reconfiguring the stark, 
mid-winter tree.  Crown of ruby,

hair of gold.  Bold outline
of unforeseeable design: the honey bee.
The honey locked in its comb:

a sign.  What does it say 
in the book of life about life 
sweetened, packaged, sold?

It says crown of ruby.  
It says hair of gold.  Behold, 
it says, the kids roughed-up

with flounce and rainbow glitter.
Their gauges are stuck 
in the forward position. 

Like a maelstrom of feathers, 
they don’t know any better. 
They come bearing proof of the gods.

I am on fire.  No, I mean literally.  
Alcohol funny-car meet combustible jujube.  
Meet Ready Freddie, the legal owner
of an incomprehensible bust of carbon. 
A bargain at any price—this kick of joy.
Imagine how rice must feel at weddings.
It’s like, darling, earlier, when we watched 
that duck on a crutch exiting the school bus 
my initial thought was What the...? 
which was surely my best thought 
until the Oaxacian taco truck and a few beers 
later your organic, polar bear underwear.   
Have you ever had a dream that felt so real?  
Have you ever taken a trip that went so far?
Have you ever fallen into a painting 
that was so breeding cardinal hopping 
through butterfly meadow?  If so, 
why do you currently live in a snow globe?  
Seriously? The theory of pretty? 
Out of every two hundred commuters, one 
will spit-shine his own burgundy wingtips.
Most of the others just sit and stare.  
Imagine how the daily news feels surrounded
by all that scuffing.  It feels like some prior
minor damage to the central wiring may 
be triggering fierce sparks in the dream silo. 
Cue meadowlark flight. Pan to smoking tree. 
Teach me the difference between nodding
and empathy.  I am afraid of most things
that have teeth and smile.  I want my eyes
to be open when we burst from the sun.

Freedom is a thread of light snaking
the canyon like an ant through a conch.

A goodbye to each dead end and small room.
Salt, once of the sea, now of the wind, 
now on my brow, making a witness of me.

I open my mouth to the wind. The wind
opens my heart, my breast. I leave the bare

bones behind. I leave the soul, once another’s,
once my own, there in that maze of sand, 

mortar, and bellows. A golden light hails
me, pulls me like a worm from the earth.

When did one season begin and another end?
What branched like a nerve? What burrowed
like a heart? Can we say love?  
What will the yellowing tree bear?

                        *
Between each rib, cartilage and blood. 
Beneath this cage of bone, four chambers.
Inside each chamber, you, throbbing,
compelling the blood and air.

                         *
There is a body I hold like a sound, 
a name my mind cradles like a pit 
on the tongue. But where is the flesh?
And how will it weigh my palm?

                         *
If we can say love, here is the ocean. 
Here the white bird of your heart. 
Here the hard sun and sand. Here a town 

closed for the season, a man wearing 
all his clothes, asleep on the beach. 
We say mountain. We say nothing. 

We make a cross on the sand. We discover 
the wonder of perpendicularity.

ghosts in the weeds of a long sand
about to beat a look from lunch

about to keep pursuing   hands like a veil



a head of cornflowers  

gusto
 
wear tweed in a big saw hand

the dust             be sent 



ghosts are the weeds in a big lawn
an island of sand             you spraying your dance
down     

lift the trees back from what’s left




*

gone dead and light too to carry it                           ghosts 
in the hair and story make good (no hari-kari commitment)
 
the small one’s to spook



the smallest 
one runts           is running 

ghosts in the hairy porridge of soot

ghosts in the weeds                      rattle and umber



                             be sent (by gather)
 
                             be sent (by skin)




*

there—a stolen grand scheme to settle yourself under
now’s no place for earnest discussion

the keep             a pocket and nothing 



ghosts in the sepia         contents: slumber and eye gloss 




*

so narrow 
                         a whole spray

of you to dance with 




*

we same the afterlife up 

a slick yellow coat 
of salt and what can’t be left to touch               us circled

ghosts in the seed of a big lawn of sand



quit the timing and all 

need for what’s after hunger
(winterfiremess)
soft the voice’s hypnosis 



              a sail                  open

No matter how wide the horizon gets
you are always on an island.
Becoming a shipwreck is 
a god’s prerogative
but it’s easier 
than you think

pressed between miles of 
absolute colour 
like a fly on a Mondrian.

The sea offers me 
so little

blue waste with a human 
voice. Cough me up some red 
scrap of man and the seagulls
will burn all night. 

Give him salted palms and 
the stomach
for worship
I will give you the best parts 
to eat. Even now

the sound of
gilded wings. Listen—

Promise me there is an end 
                                   to this ever. Promise me the tulips that return 
with black centers and lurid pollen 
                                   will waste and wither in the heat. 
Promise me this Tom Collins glass 
                                   will sweat itself out. Promise me another.
Promise me another kiss 
                                   to my forehead, a sweating goodbye, 

promise me you won’t 
                                   come back. Promise me the rabbits 
will starve in their burrows. 
                                   Promise me the rain coming down. 
                                                           Promise me the fox kits will drown.

Promise me a house a car a gate
                                   a small dog to wag when I come home. 
Promise me a mailbox with my name on it. 
                                               Promise me a new name that suits me. 
Promise me the dog won’t die.
                        Promise me a mouse in the pantry and small droppings 
                                              in the food.
                                              Promise me moths in the clothes, 
the small holes that grow larger. 
                                   Promise me your hands tied 
                                                                       behind your back. 
Promise me we’ll laugh and laugh. 

Promise me a child will shake out like pollen from a tulip. 
                                              Promise me you aren’t the man you promised.
Promise me that the hands I cut off and buried
                                    in the backyard were my hands. 
Promise me they won’t grow back.

Behind this dress,
                       two women
           in the mess of one body hardly covered
                                  by the stiff beauty of lustrous rustle.

Behind these freckled breasts, 
                       two hearts that rush the blood, 
divergent desires—
  
           twin to the unseemly split between predator 
                                                 and prey,
the white pet-store rat 
                        bred for the boa 
                                               and the boa that would remake
the Florida landscape in his ever expanding image—

                       if the one woman is the call
to the other’s answer
            the answer is to keep calling and calling
into the swamp and humid.
                                                If the container can’t lull 
                        its contents into some sense of contentment, 
the glass breaks, and out rush the teeth.

           In a fixed loop, tie this sash of silk shot, plain weave, 
                       and with a half hitch secure
against a hunger
                        that grows without natural enemy.
A desire uncurbed 
           is a flagrant thing, is a woman 
                      in the mirror, seeing clearly.

He holds his thumb to the pulse 
                        in her neck, presses. 
I could make you lose consciousness, he said. I could do that.

                                                                        She is not adverse,  
                                                                                    has no allegiance 
                                                                        to the ornamental pears
                                                           that burst into selected beauty
                                                           all around them, releasing the scent
                                                                        of rotting meat—
The image of them in this garden, 
            sprawled on the last grasses of summer
need not remain
                       uncultivated,
                                             though he is a wilderness,
                                             though she is.
There are graftings that have taken.
There are careful prunings.
                                             She might see this last gesture
                                                         as kindness, not a threat.
           I could, he is saying, but I won’t.

When she shifts her position and her hair falls around
                        his face—again the beauty
takes precedence 
over any utility—
                       he doesn’t care
                                  if she shades his face
          from the sun, just that she is, for this last time, there.

Be stubborn under the needles. Soldier through pain
that you have seen fold men. Learn to answer to “dude.”
Become fluent in electronics as a second language.

Ignore the fact that among this forest of brightly scaled
men bristling with metal, you alone have no pictures
of adorable offspring at the ready when regulars inquire.

When you have to work a 10-hour shift, ache-bent and
bleary, uterus an angry unraveling, say absolutely nothing
is wrong if they ask. Don’t be offended when no one asks.

Pretend that your boss has not passed gloved hands over
great spreads of your naked skin when you were only
a client. Pretend that when his fingers barely brush

your clothed elbow, sparks do not clatter up your arm.
Do not let on that once, mid-conversation, he smiled so
thoroughly at you that your ears simply abandoned

their posts, decided your eyes had more important
work to do. Don’t ever let slip that you have tasted
that smile in your sleep. Dude, especially not that.

Promise low stakes. Promise to eat the truth.
Open your throat into a canyon, bouncing

back echoes of the voice he accidentally
threw out with Thursday’s newspaper.

Teach him alpha. Teach him instincts.
Paint your body a landscape he needs to climb.

When his arms turn to ivy at night, become
desert. Slip through his curled fingers.

My blood saves the coffee for later, 
so I go to sleep. This is the dream 
of the stale volcano: holes in the walls, 
rocks in the shoes. The citizens know 
their city will be melted, emulsified
in the glow of liquid ash,
and after knowing it a time
continue talking normally 
from their booths, over the white ears 
of the napkin dispensers.

At the school I ask the students 
do you know what disaffection means?
I spell it out. And their blinking is
the opposite of frogs trilling, 
for why make anything
is a reasonable question 
when even your mightiest crafts 
hang little in the vertical drear 
of the doom-cone, the hurt mountain. 

With people, it seems, there can be both food
and starvation, ready empty bodies
and abstemious mouths. 
The trees of our breathing 
and the trees of our hands 
lost in the knot of the root-balls, 
thrusting on clay. But then a knuckle will sprout 
on a forehead, out of sheer resourcefulness
because some part of us still belongs 
in the reeds where the song reproduces 
in the face of almost anything, 
until dearth, or talk 
takes the water from our throats—

There are no strikes 
in nature, no pickets over which the shore 
refuses to transact. The sky
shakes loose a few gulls 
like white hangnails
and it brings to mind 
a kind of matrimony, a kind 
of humble speaking on the beach. 
So I wake instructed, and continue burning. 
The bed is full of sand, the soft ordeal 
of the flesh, loose clump of carbon fragility 
in my moment inexplicably bold,
with death kept off, and the scrim held taut.

I want to steal from a thousand movies

the scene where a woman 
      screams and that 
      scream delivers an infant, 

an echo from a red cavern.  

The scream, the baby, 
both born from the body, 

both sovereign now and fading 
no matter how loud the cry.

~

In this scene the infant wails and the mother won’t wake

because all sound travels 

from its source, 

the direction 

always 

away.

~

Say the word. Say the word 
and we’ll rewind 
the spool 

of film. 
No scream. No echo. 
           No body 
leaving a body
torn, bloody. 
Just a woman 
smiling, speaking. 

This footage proves my mother once spoke 
the syllables of my name

in broken English. In broken English 

my mother once spoke
and held my body close.
From her then a whimper, then farther 
her voice traveled.  

From her 
                          this world,  
                                                         this mangled sentence.

I am two nurseries. Beside a box of ornaments the smallest organs reside, useful, barely, to the cataloguing flesh, an able choir. But what chews at my stomach? Another rain ruins another family musical. Who unbuttons? Birds point to my body and birds point to trees so woodlands flourish in these walls. The branches point to a prisoner: a girl beside the mouth of a lake looks downstream and waves. She has been dreaming of cities, dresses, the early moustache of a young man. 

Someday she will test the depth. I walk to that selfsame edge. 

The lake is a heavy coat. Pines sing. On her ribs she can feel the pulse of a pocketwatch in my grandfather’s vest (chained not only to each other) because our ilk-dream rummages in the tops of trees, high above these walls, but just below my lung resigns itself to paper cranes. Cement cranes. Falls to pieces. Rests and rests once. Under the grape arbor, I would like to think.

I hereby attest I am unable to know what will come next or even what has come next in the past, except to say, I might have thought in a moment of weakness that my English was of a free impulse, I mean my nature, and tender and would therefore pilot me to sustainability and Christendom. 

To say that I am exclusively interested in your miseries is true. My mouth, my steer, I have heard that in March all bear cubs are stillborn but their mothers lick them to life. I have learned the way a conversation can stumble in and out of prayer. How, in abandoned bedrooms, there is the sensation that things must still go in order, things next to things, each with its own essence. 

Because I am in a region from which, some nights, I can hear the barking of waves, what floats in the blood like a splinter, I am a village without a church. And the dogs lick me, they eye me. I have called on you today because there are questions that beg answering. When I return I will look you up and tell you to meet me at such and such a place; then, upon seeing me, you will employ expressions of concern and in your gentler voice you will say, my dear, you have grown so much faster than your cage.

on my lips oh your wild violet

your thousands of swallows please swarm my lips

on my lips the tip of your bill to the end of your claw

on my lips the longest location of your nesting

your falco sparverius on my lips

on my lips the naked part of your thigh

your white ibis on my lips

on my lips studded with your small islands

on my lips when needed your outstretched neck

on my lips oh you fearless bird

In the beginning, I bit back mosquitoes. Belly itch and low drone
all through, the humming wait of late June in me. You called 
from all states, told heat lightning veins Kansas, solid, soon.

I sketched your outline in espresso grounds—gave your eyebrows
a narrative arc—traced my forearm to remind you there is a kind 
of atomic resonance in touch. Held silence like séance.

Sitting vigil on a marble slab [except it was less vigil than penance 
less marble than pumice] something volcanic sloughed
off to sit with me skin to skin, a molting gargoyle.

I have compressed. Made the small of your back still smaller 
pulled my ribs into cages and slept, lone growing.

Let your skin find solace, nestling into sun-
warped sand. Locate salvation in an army boot 

or maneuver down a Tucson wall, hackles 
poised. Stinger craned into claw. Dedicate

your whole body to leaving the light that blinds 
that great exoskeletal eye, ultraviolet eddies 

along your pincers.  When scientists come 
to bleach your glowing bones, tell them you clung 

to the tumbleweed.  Crawled to center and fought 
centrifugal force the whole ride home.

And here is all we’ll need: a card deck, quartets of sun people 
Of the sort found in black college dormitories, some vintage 
Music, indiscriminate spirits, fried chicken, some paper, 

A writing utensil, and a bottomless Saturday. We should explore 
The origins of a derogatory word like “Spade” as well as the word 
For feeling alone in polite company. And also the implications
Of calling someone who is not your brother or sister,

Brother or Sister. So little is known of our past, we can imagine 
Damn near anything. When I say maybe slaves held Spades 
Tournaments on the anti-cruise ships bound for the colonies, 
You say when our ancestors were cooped on those ships 

They were not yet slaves.  Our groundbreaking film should begin 
With a low lit den in the Deep South and the deep fried voice 
Of somebody’s grandmother holding smoke in her mouth 
As she says, “The 2 of Diamonds trumps the 2 of Spades 

In my house.” And at some point someone should tell the story 
Where Jesus and the devil are Spades partners traveling 
The juke joints of the 1930s. We could interview your uncle Junior 
And definitely my skinny cousin Mary and any black man 

Sitting at a card table wearing shades. Who do you suppose 
Would win if Booker T and MLK were matched against Dubois
And Malcolm X in a game of Spades? You say don’t talk 
Across the table. Pay attention to the suits being played. 

The object of the game is to communicate invisibly 
With your teammate. I should concentrate. Do you suppose 
We are here because we are lonely in some acute diasporafied 
Way? This should be explored in our film about Spades. 

Because it is one of the ways I am still learning what it is 
To be black, tonight I am ready to master Spades. Four players 
Bid a number of books.  Each team adds the bids 
Of the two partners, and the total is the number of books 

That team must try to win. Is that not right? This is a game 
That tests the boundary between mathematics and magic, 
If you ask me. A bid must be intuitive like the itchiness 
Of the your upper lip before you sip strange whiskey. 

My mother did not drink, which is how I knew something 
Was wrong with her, but she held a dry spot at the table 
When couples came to play. It’s a scene from my history, 
But this probably should not be mentioned in our documentary 

About Spades. “Renege” is akin to the word for the shame 
You feel watching someone else’s humiliation. Slapping 
A card down must be as dramatic as hitting the face of a drum 
With your palm not hitting the face of a drum with a drumstick. 

You say there may be the sort of outrage induced 
By liquor, trash talk and poor strategy, but it will fade 
The way a watermark left on a table by a cold glass fades. 
I suspect winning this sort of game makes you feel godly. 

I’m good and ready for who ever we’re playing 
Against tonight. I am trying to imagine our enemy.
I know you are not my enemy. You say there are no enemies 
In Spades. Spades is a game our enemies do not play.

Lion Orders a Frisco Melt at Steak ‘n Shake

and when it arrives he sticks his face real close
to the plate, as if to nuzzle rising heat with his snout.
The waitress giggles and I giggle and when he tries
to giggle it comes out as a roar, which makes
everyone jump, but none of us are as surprised
as he is, so he sticks some fries up his nose
to get us giggling again. It’s cute. We joke about
taking the line cook home because he’s adorable
and we’re easily infatuated, but we don’t—
we don’t need a third. When we leave we take
turns losing at the claw game, trying for the pink bear,
and then in the parking lot I kiss him
because he paid, and also because I’m in love.

A slowness escapes itself
and enters, here, into the river,

into the bay, into the space
where water is neither bay

nor river, into the footbridge,
into the wisps of blue 

untangling themselves from clouds,
into the boys who’ve tumbled

down the hill, on their way
over the bridge, on their way

to the trees. They’ll go
just after they recover.

First, they must pant.
They must rest their bodies

after the journey, after
tossing themselves through

the grasses. They must wait,
close. They must pause.

I discovered you long before the city became my home. You lived in a studio under the el and wrote the Fibonacci Sequence on the walls with permanent marker. The landlord loved your quiet sobs and the springless sway in the center of your mattress. The night we met, I slept with my head in your lap while you preached a pulpit of your worst fears—the spines of desert flowers pierced through the palm of your hand, the venom of a jellyfish and the tender skin behind your knees. When our friends married, you carved a chimera from a roll of butcher paper and set it on fire. In the bridal suite, your chest filled with smoke. In the river, you placed your heart in the belly of a steel drum and watched it float away.

At first, her dreams were filled with water, 
           her body a boat lost at sea. 
                      Her boat-body: 

an empty hull, an open hatch. 
           She counted the waves 
                      that reached the break wall 

like some count sheep, but she 
           was already sleeping. In her dreams,
                      the lighthouse always moved 

further away. It was a match head,  
           a firefly. It was the dimmest star. 
                      She stood at the stern

and watched a duck eat the belly 
           of a fish, white flesh speckling 
                      the dark water. A tendril 

of fishgut trailed from the duck’s beak. 
           A ribbon. A string 
                      around her finger.

When the Musician was a boy, he carried a small blade in his pocket, he carried a tool box with three drawers, he carried the heart of a rabbit in a felt pouch. Flesh or twine, cable or limb. When the Musician was a boy, he memorized Leviticus, recited abomination and iniquity while his mother cut his hair. Her hands were quick, the scissors sure. These blades, the Musician knew, were not like the one in his pocket.

Speech whiffs of you and your air, its pocket in spice and near vanilla, from viburnum leaves matte with jealousy, Cinnamomum bark, orchid pod. I thought I smelled you in Inverness and I was the primeval stomach behind the new one when it smells real blood through new sepal swaddles.
        I was a bubble  escaping between  grouper scales and learning fast gravity, each cell choking with the jade brown of dirty seas or confusions of sight.
            When a mote is interrupted in love it shrinks heavy until it cannot be seen and itself goes blind: forgets, in the absence of visual. Its eyes reseed and this time I will not interrupt. I will buoy it so that I can watch something already so pure grin into the white-spackled spark, consummated.

when she leaves for work the morning looks like a commotion. he 
gets out of bed & looks at the wall where a mirror should be. 
instead of a reflection, he is shadow. there is a razor & a mason jar 
& for a shadow, he is not famous. yesterday was between the toes.
today will be the back of the neck. he lay himself on the kitchen 
table like he is made of gravity. she is an audience in another city. 
hanging off the table, his head is perpendicular to the mason jar. it 
will only be a small gash because art is important, but not valuable. 
the morning is misshapen & he is holding a razor. he budgets a 
small line across the back of his neck, an incomplete barcode. the 
mason jar collects each drop. once full, he seals the mason jar & 
stores it with the others. his refrigerator is a mausoleum of liquid 
ruby. he calls the work, “no use for blood, until you return.” he 
never wanted to become an artist, but each day, she asks him to.

somethin bout the way a woman cant 
see her own epigraph, till she sees it in someone
elses hand. the way she dont know

shes glass. that shes concrete.
somethin bout the way this woman puts me on,
one leg at a time.

how to tell her that her smile is a zipper.
that i am the tab she pulls
open. closes like teeth

claspin somethin inside me so deep
my body turns into a suitcase. sloppy-packed
with organs, things she cant 

fix. she tells me, pack smart, pack light, to pack
only a carry on. says, girl, why you got so many
locks? she tells me, leave that comb, 

don’t need those socks.
says, girl, you dont got room for 
all that pain.

you did not know i would 
dedicate the caw of woods, 
the silent morning 
that colors people. 

you did not know i would deal with 
the way pain hurt you, hated you.
could not know how i could 
live. but i lived and i lived— lived.

i went home and i wanted you 
here, wanted you 
in rouge, to not have to keep you 
only a memory 

on my writing desk. 
i watch you try 
and leave, like someone 
whose point’s been understood. 

sometimes the body fails. 
again and again, 
again.

the birds look    to me


                        like shattered pianos.
                        I snap

                        the necks of snapdragons in two.
                        all this nature, 

                        not a single straight line.
                        back home,

                        a lake, where they’ll baptize anything
                        but your body

                        & there’s a proper way to take off 
                        a dress.

                        the deer pile up
                        like meteor showers— 


& then             there’s another


                        bumper to hammer out.
                        god, a worm

                        in a bottle. everyday
                        another 

                        leaf falls,
                        afraid the world will run 


out                   of cruelties

I find my birthday in another man’s mouth. Mistake,
I know. The second sin of waking. Louis Zukofsky,
January 23rd, 1904, the winter droning on about winter,
The chiasmic wind tethered to the lamppost,
The modern world wrestling over the consequence
Of two snails rubbing their mollusk necks against each other
And deciding they are not modern though they grieve
Over the tiny disturbances palm fronds make upon ponds.
This is of little consequence you’re sure: the countries
Liquidated and burning through the last paycheck of autumn,
Citizens spilling themselves across sidewalks,
The police horses made nervous by the chants sliding off
The apricots and persimmons we ate this morning.
Where do the colons end? How do I say: I matter
As much as a winter coat draped over a skeleton lashed by snow,
Snow battering the lake, the storm shutters. A pair of ribs.  

The pressed grape and the thorn withering in the tongue,
Muscadine—the frank applause of your thigh against mine.

Who’s insane and who’s merely a Halloween mask worn
On Valentine’s Day, a face made to walk the wind of a lake twice—

Once for the lake and once for the small hands who lost you
There a few hours ago, the spears of spring in your throat?

I’ve become too attached to quivering, desculpé le bateau,
The shoe knocking against your hull is nothing like a heart

Or a wolf at the edge of winter and hunger. My mouth
Knocking against your mouth is nothing more than a tugboat

Dressed in ravens, black skimming black, hole for hole—
a lake of disaster we drag for more disaster.

The women have left chasing the leopard.
And we, diseased with stars, are idle boats
Driven apart by the incalculable madness
Of the moon’s gold lurch, idle knives troubling
Our thighs; blood can drift across boundaries,
And tonight we are blood in each other’s arms
From afar. Who dares to ring a bell
above the sea on a night where palm fronds
nick our knees and remind us that blood, oh
blood, can do nothing but run? Who dares
to take salt from a body without paying
with a bit of his or her own salt? Dear God,
I steady myself on the tooth of your day.
I bear a body for your mouth. Who shall I say
Sent me? Who requires a bit of meat to sleep?

once i was coral
living breathing speaking
to you
who would listen
once
layered days ago
lifetimes

storm was affirmation
once you were the you I prayed for
once rain was blessing living breathing once

we built our days
for presence
because where air
touch ground
touch water
is now
is always

people without winter
who could float
sometime we knew
we would always exist

that our bodies
deep of water
would shout our names
some hurricane later

once

we were not afraid
to blow away

1

Holy water
soaked in rouge

Sweet is her name.


2

The congregation,

          the people

believe revelations,   or
   some sort of salvation
drips hard and rugged
   from her voice

stretched out
   in the meat of her hands, her life
for all to eat.


3

Black runs
          from her strut like mascara,
pours from her
          thighs for the mother
God barely made her.


4

Shug shimmy is
   tucked away pain

some little girl spirit
   tugging at her hips;

Women like her
carry that pain everywhere
for everyone to see & feel.

Then she smile.


5

Red.

In juke joint shadows.

Red.

In a church aisle.     Red
in a sea of plum daisies,

Shug a burnt orange
horizon where all souls meet

in the hug of her arms
 or legs,

     a riverboat girl,
in a goldenrod dress, teal shoes
guides a mess of sinners home

          somehow.


6

Shug arrival is blowing fields
of purple, wind remembering its howl,
a bell recognizing its ting.

She the melodious clap pattern
          little black girls
plait to the scalps
of their memories.

February in Detroit. 

A kid goes door to door 
asking if people 
would like their snow washed. 

One man looks at the corpse 
of winter at the edge 
of his drive and replies, How much? 

The kid stares up 
and to the left, shifting his mind 
into calculator mode. 

A million dollars, he says finally, 
remembering a TV show 
in which a man in a purple suit 
said to a woman wearing nothing 
but a mink coat, Winners aim high. 

The man feels this is a lot 
but is worn down 
by the assault of grime. 

How about I promise 
to save your life one day, 
the man counters. 

The kid thinks of all the ways 
there are to die — gunshots 
on Dequindre, gunshots on Woodward, 
gunshots in the bathroom — and agrees
to this unspecified moment 
of deliverance. 

The snow when he’s done 
seems fresh fallen 
from the machine of the sky. 

The two of them shake hands. 

I’m your angel now, the man says. 

The boy wonders 
if angels are real. 

They’re not, the man says, 
reading the boy’s mind. 

Nor are these wings, he adds, 
taking his coat off.

Nor are we flying, he says, 
scooping the boy 
into his arms and flying 
away from the shadow 
of their flying.

There’s no way to know how many things I’ve seen: one million, two.
Picket fences. Stalin’s underwear. A woman nursing
while bouncing on a trampoline. I saw a man
in a stamping plant put his hand in a press
and turn his possible waving
at a giraffe, possible plinking of middle C 
into paste. And when I saw you
crying behind me going 70 in your ’99 
Corolla, I thought, let’s go smell 
a few cedar trees. The other options are

we get drunk as an avalanche, an abattoir, or keep driving
and crying, or pull over and you show me the shape
of your hands around the throat of wind, I tell you
I want to kill myself in French
and you think I’m sharing a recipe
for cake, when the truth is
I want to kill myself in English and know nothing
will ever take this desire away. I own four acres

and however many beetles that is, cloudshadows
that is, it’s a lot of cedars, a lot of prying
my lungs open in the cold
to this scent that cuts an awakening
through everything, I call it jumpstart, call it suddenease
with tincture of deer scat. That’s all I’ve got to offer,
really. Listening and that. Lending you a few bucks
and shotguns shells and that. Standing beside rivers
and that. But mostly that.

I don’t want her to die.

She doesn’t want her mother to die.

Five minutes after we were married, her father died.

The limo drove us to the hospital.

She stood in her veil at the side of his bed.

A nurse congratulated us.

We didn’t know what words to put in our mouths
so we left our mouths empty.

I think of us as the top of a wedding cake
standing guard over the door his body had become.

She doesn’t want me to die.

The Buddha said we shouldn’t want anything but the Buddha
wanted us to believe that.

At the funeral, she wore a tricycle being pushed by her father
when she was five, her legs out to the side.

That’s only true in this poem, like the cloud I’m looking at
is only true in this sky.

In all other skies, this cloud is a lie.

It’s about to rain, not in the poem but in the thinking
that lead to the poem,
the poem that helped me recall
I can still touch her entire body,
the soft parts, hard parts, bendy parts, all the places she’ll hide
from everyone but me.

Everyone but the doctor and me, the doctor
and mortician and me.

Small white church at the edge of my yard. 

A bell will ring in a few hours. 

People who believe in eternity will sing. 

I’ll hear an emotion resembling the sea from over a hill. 

One time I sat with my back to the church to give their singing
to my spine, there’s a brown llama you can watch
while you do this in a field if you’d like to try. 

I don’t even think calendars believe in eternity. 

Beyond the church is a trail that leads to a bassinet in a tree. 

Someone put it there when the oak and sky were young. 

I’m afraid to climb the tree. 

That I’ll find bones inside. 

That they’ll be mine. 

I want to be with my wife forever but not as we are. 

She’ll become a bear, I a season: Kodiak, spring. 

Part of loving bagpipes haunting the gloaming is knowing 
the bloodsinging will stop. 

Beyond the church I pulled a hammer from the river. 

What were you building, I asked its rust, from water and without nails? 

This is where I get self-conscious about language, 
words are love-affairs or séances or harpoons, there isn’t a sentence
that isn’t a plea. 

This is where I don’t care that I’m half wrong when I say everything 
is made entirely of light. 

This is where my wife and I hold hands. 

Over there is where our shadows do a better job.

THE DREAM IN                      
WHICH YOUR                        
TO-DO LIST                
DOUBLES AS A
 CATALOG OF  
TIRESOME EXPERIENCES     

Recollection has a strange virility, one stolen
from gravity, that angel whose OPEN sign
isn’t lit. Saturday leaks out of the radio, and I
am trying to hear what came ajar in my father
while he traced his sorcery across the operas.
I will prove that the translation of his spells
is impossible. That, overcoated, in his Lazarus
strut, he won’t be rehabilitated by new shoes.
Please, release me from pretending that you
never felt the dilation of his advance. My father’s
father had taken so many newspapers that our
quarrels grew bearded with grasshoppers. Spring
gallops through what it condenses, and no is
a very long time. The arbors my father’s father’s
father planted, those arbors aren’t. My perspiration
understands now how these lawns are English.

THE DREAM
IN    WHICH
THE
STONES
REMAIN
ERECT     AS
IF BY THEIR
OWN
VOLITION

A candle of train whistles
lights the wrong side of the pattern—
the obverse where its traceries
mushroom over. I have my surveys and
the traffic, stalling retrograde
into a murder of fiddles and tympani
that can barely picnic. In staying in, am I
preparing your mind? Is it that houses 
index consciousness? If books detain, 
are they houses? If I read your books,
will I again be devoured writhing 
by your voice? Will I love the inundations 
as much? Have I recited even this too 
somewhere else? Or just some other 
time, perhaps in that dark salon 
tripling time to the lope 
of the world’s slowest 
castanets.  

THE        DREAM     IN
WHICH THE ACHE IS
SIMULTANEOUSLY
SHARP AND DULL

Parallelograms of grass
occur here, all around,
tapering quickly to a point
behind the looming width
of their emergence. You
can ride them into streets
and more complicated enclosures:
parks and garages lurching
not as though they were smoke,
which they are, but some form 
that could be taught. Can you
teach me a river, granite, a verging,
an edging towards keeping 
it all just this simple? I can tell
you quenching, winter, I can 
show you a deja vu 
of temptations I’ll be 
pretending I knew.  

First, a chapter on the hammock a mother’s skirt makes
for her daughters’ heads at dusk on Sundays
after each has come out of her bath, thinner-skinned
and raw in the palms, smelling like the chlorine in tap water,
lotioned from head to toe because the rest of the week
they’ll only do their faces and elbows and whatever is showing.
What is the smell that billows around their ears? Wet cotton? 
Clean asphalt drying in springtime sun?
Yes, the sunlight is scented when white clove and clovers
grow with the grass. This is an old verse, the girls
like caterpillars falling out of trees when it’s barely warm:
even the inside of a quiet cement mixer would have been better
than cool pavement. They come with hair dripping ornaments 
on their pajama backs. What about a verse
for the dismay of one daughter cutting her own bangs
into a bald spot, the hair put in her top drawer,
a thousand lashes in underwear waistbands, gaps
in the wood. A mother might cry trying to put a tail or braid
where she can’t. Or, the surprise of fungus on a scalp,
the other daughter treating her head like bubble wrap;
the ointments, the red comb left separate for her,
the hot water and Tide bath it must take after every use,
the tuft of hair left by a dermatologist’s razor for yet another
sample, tufts of hair that fit no tail or braid. A mother
can cry trying. There must also be a line about finding
curly hairs in pantyhose, the runs the girls made using tights
as blonde hair. Flesh-colored tights. Not their flesh but sufficient
for bombshells frolicking in carpet water: an old mattress
made jet ski, fluorescent lights something like a music video
shoot. We must have a verse about the grease under a mother’s
fingernails, how they become translucent after twisting two sets
of prickly rollers, the rollers’ inserts so similar to caterpillars
or a bottle’s scrubbing brush. Also a passage for the little braids
or buds in the baby girl’s hair, the hair that barely makes tail or braid.
A mother can cry.

I always kept my knees together, even when I washed myself.
I know the story of Mary. The miracle conception.

Maybe I would walk too many times on the rusty railing out back
like a gymnast, like I was told not to.

My aunts said girls who weren’t cut had dirty shames,
could get pregnant just like that, henna fingers snap.

Niece, they’d say, kohl eyes kind, don’t run so fast don’t walk too far.
Don’t play outside after sunset.
There are bad men in the bushes. Only jinns go out when it’s dark.

Just him and me driving. Driving on a skinny road in a skinny town. Passing gin brave men. Passing sweat 
laced women. With braids that buckle and eyes that squint. 

A skinny town should carry smells of bread and horses. Horses made from hoof love. Bread made in a 
kitchen full of flowers. Fresh picked. Fever few and fox tail that sulk in a vase like 

sisters. We keep driving. Watching the wind ruin a wheat fields’ face, head lights willing a deer to stop 
and stand stupid breathe stupid die stupid. We keep driving. 

We keep the windows open. The radio singing about storm. The mosquitoes singing about blood. At 
stops signs I let them suck. 

When I was a child all I wanted was to turn good. Turn sweet like pancake on griddle. Chop all my hair 
and leave it to rest in father’s shoe. 

I loved my father and he loved my hair. Heavy as a quilt of feathers. Color of burning bush and name me 
one girl who has never hidden

beneath long grass with books baseballs and boys. Boys with knees thinner than bean stalks. I knew one 
with loud teeth, an appetite for rivers.

Water will not make me beautiful. Don’t you know that? Don’t you know the river in June is too tall to 
enter and the flowers are too young to pick.

There are too many wings in the sky. Black coated birds. Red coated birds. And who does the sky belong 
to anyway?  

I asked the boy with teeth louder than candles. He sat beside his river and looked at the sky and the sky 
looked right back at him. And that boy put his lips inside the shell of my ear and shouted 

no one.

I do not rouse for first-turn pacers
or pushcart ponies. I match stallions
with goose bumps to fresh broodmares
in season. They foal snappy, fleet-footed
hoofers like unbridled rhythms—rescore 
the classics with classy renditions—hot 
walking quicksteppers to lark in circles 
through Kentucky bluegrass. I cede 
them my will, then wait for time— 
                              to choose the moment.

This colt was a oner with bold bugler 
veins, stretched taut as casings stuffed 
with summer sausage. His muscles 
torqued & wrenched—clenched inside 
a coat too small by half. He had a heart 
twice the size of a muskmelon, & deep, 
jutting jowls that brandished his mane. 
Drops of ready-sweat lathered into a froth, 
& fell to dust behind the starting gate—
never tardy at the bell—
                             to lap a trumpet’s blast.

A man o’ war on charger legs, with lungs
like burner bellows, & piston hooves
that fracked the track—
                 to crack the earth with tremors. 

More pegasus than thoroughbred.
More feral god than beast: 
Chutzpah on an ego trip—
                      to claim the golden chalice.

This is the day she finds bones in the creek,
            cold and cracked as split lips.

                        This is the day she digs at the clay,
pulls out bone after bone 
                                    until she has enough 

to make a man. This is the way 
            she lays him out, in snakeskin 

                        and sweetgrass; this, the way 
the cattails bend 
                                    ’til the prudish stones 

murder the willows. 
            The shadows they bleed 
  
                        render flesh; the bees
on her face like a bridal veil—
                                    oh, he is lovely where he lies

beside the water. Oh, 
            she is blushing with stings.

The marionette—the cricket—the boy turned into a mule. The lonely virgin father drifting in the gloom of her belly—Monstro, the whale that swallowed his ship. Once, I accepted every word—that a whale would hunt a man, carrying her vendetta through the ocean’s cold desert, & that a man swallowed—Geppetto or Jonah—would not be crushed in the mouth, bones dissolving slowly in the belly’s acid, but would wait there for the son he built to find him & summon a fire that, defying biology, would force the beast to sneeze. In the story, it works: Father & son escape; the puppet boy loses his strings. That is, becomes mortal. Will one day arrange for his father’s funeral; will be a middle-aged man still wincing at the sea; will grow old, telling tales no one believes & awakening from dreams of a mule—its mournful brays familiar, ears gone gray.

Danced out and sweaty, with club-stamped hands 
and whiskey-wobbled ankles, we four women
direct the cab to The Jackhammer, a 4 am leather bar
where we can take our tops off and be in love 
with our flesh that keeps being good to us, 
keeps covering our meat and bones, keeps 
glistening beneath bar lights.  Shirts off
or leather, the bouncer says. I consider my boots,
my motorcycle jacket, the animals
I am wearing—but the point is
to be fabulously bold in our vices for a night. 
We huddle shyly like a small herd of caribou,
a full spectrum of breast sizes 
in a room full of men with assless chaps 
and furry chests. A man says, It’s fabulous 
to see women down here; he says our breasts 
are fabulous and motorboats M’s,
which are the most voluptuous and tempting 
in their otherness. In another bar, 
I might have slapped him. Here,
in this gaudy light, I want
to kiss his forehead and say
bless you. Here, the prevalence
of pain is made public. Men line up
to be tied to a wooden apparatus, 
limbs splayed open and secured
to prevent flailing when the whip
slices their backs.  Here, we call pain
pleasurable, as if an apocalypse
can be sequined with joy—
as if it’s okay to marvel at the beautiful
cloud of the atom bomb in photos,
at a hell we cannot know until
it owns us. I wonder
what could be made of my skin
by a disease that lurks in both loved 
and unloved bodies: human disaster.
There is something ugly in this 
worry, in having it here, some remnants 
of GRID and Ronald Reagan. Here is a prayer
in praise of the groaning in the backroom:
Let each body be loved until its end.

look up what grackles are. new mexico smells of roasting chilies & someone across the hall is 
sobbing. spires for ribcage & wake up in the muscle of cemeteries & southern church-brick. 
remember atlas? remember the way we touched the soil to our faces? that’s not a dog. it’s a dove. 
crayons on the couch. split the coast, fire the rifle in field, let me know when the tasting is over. 
there are geese in the field—

                                                how many apartments can you burn in an hour?

In the famous painting, God touches the man 
who will become Adam—not his son, but an experiment—

or nearly touches him and the question is like an alarm 
filling the fatherless space inside my mind, 

What does he want with Adam’s body?

— To fill the first man’s lungs, animate him 
out of the painting, so he’ll belong only to the creator, 
held up as proof the father is benevolent?  

—To take him into his arms and unmake him,
cure the plague of sons who will blight the field?

No god can be trusted.  Not when he fathers 
a man he’s destined to fail, a man he won’t call son.

                                                                      *

My father’s hands are breaking open; a rash flames down, 
lashing his flesh until he’s a man wrapping a pair of wounds 
around my back to welcome me home.  

In the shower, my father’s body cracking like sculpture,  
the water burns him to howling.  I wash away the dried shit, 
the desiccated food, then dry him with a soft towel, careful 
not to widen the gashes on his arms.  

It won’t be long before I will recede, dementia doubling
the distance between us.  Until I’m only the Thursday nurse 
who hurts his body clean, the man he calls fatass, 
holding his hands down while his face is shaved.  

I hold him as instructed, my hands gripping his wrists
at right angles.  At the appointed time, I will let him go.

You are standing above a kneeling man
in a rented room forty miles outside 
the coal and filth of Pittsburgh. This is a story 
about the man you collar and drag 
through mudpuddled streets every day 
of your customer service life, the mundanity 
of Liberty Avenue almost suffocating 
you.  Denounce beauty. You don’t mind 
that the hotel is economy. The exorbitant thing 
is the man, blindfolded, giving himself up.  
You’re going to punish him clean. 
You won’t be kept waiting. He can’t be kept 
safe. Order the tongue outstretched. Strike 
a match on it. The thin stick of flame
—hold it close to the earlobe, so he can hear 
the little hairs singe down to soot. Pat the head.  
Box open the sore jaw.  Tell him to bite, 
he’ll hold the live match between his teeth 
while you light the votive candle.  
What happens next, I can’t watch—the mouthful 
of hot red wax splashed on his lips, cooling 
solid, before he can utter a cry, 
before he knows what’s happening.
This is how you learn a language:  sound
and function before sense. You’re giving 
him a foreign tongue. Don’t stop until 
he cries, until that stops too, until he knows 
how to take off his tears for you. A man kicked 
past human is beautiful. If I were writing 
this poem, I wouldn’t stay to witness pain
of voluntary, frivolous kinds, to see men 
bonded by wounds, making love in a language 
marked by slur and Sir. But I’m not writing this, 
I’m in the room with you, a hot scald 
coating my left cheek. Kiss this mouth made 
raw and thick from burning. I’ve remade 
myself, a thing of fire. I can choose between 
him and you. I’m taking back myself, that abject
art. I tender pain when pain is due.  

Used to like matches—
wooden ones snoozing in box beds.
Never dad’s stiff-paper nerves
ignited by backtalk,
like when he called me greedy
for not sharing a shake with my sister.
He was pinewood and sulfur
eager to cook my behind when I said,
I wonder where I get it from.
I blazed those adolescent years,
when he said I had shit for brains
if I forgot to cut the grass
or if I didn’t take out the trash.
I was a phosphorus-headed
boy who, when struck, torched everything
until my uncle told me careless fires
hurt innocent people.
I remember mom clenching her jaw
and closing her eyes when dad and I
nearly came to blows. Something
about me wasting his money
for not graduating on-time. 
It was the same face she made
when she burned herself
while lighting a near-empty candle jar,
soothing her stung thumb
and index finger.

Because the day’s threaded through hours
the way a skewer’s threaded through meat
and vegetables. Because I needed your whispers
misting in the cave of my ears. I look for you
in a blur of blue jays. Your lips are red-
bellied cardinals tangled in each other.
I listen for you in the sounds of trees
brushing their crowns against a cold wind
that’s become hard and flat as cymbals.
I descend the stairs to touch your face.
Give me your skewered hours, the meat
and vegetable of your days. My mouth—
a welcome below a waiting threshold. My eyes—
separate skies you search for stars. Each hour
roasting away. Their ghost aromas
haunting the air. The smell of oceans
leaves your pores, you having pedaled miles
back to me. Your locks coil like coral,
your eyes bright as a horizon above water.
I give you my mouth, flying to what glows
in your dusk-colored skin. Your laugh—
the wind returning from somewhere
at this moment. Give me the heat
in your embraces. Give me your face
nuzzled in my neck. Here. Take my hands.
You place your heel inside them,
as if fitting the glass slipper.We want pictures of everything
Below your waist, and we want
Pictures of your waist. We can’t 
Talk right now, but we will text you 
Into coitus.  All thumbs.  All bi-
Coastal and discreet and masculine
And muscular.  No whites.  Every
Body a top.  We got a career 
To think about.  No face.  We got 
Kids to remember.  No one over 29.  
No one under 30.  Our exes hurt us 
Into hurting them.  Disease free.  No 
Drugs. We like to get high 
With the right person.  You got a girl?  
Bring your boy.  We visiting.  Room 
At the W.  Name’s D.  Name’s J.  
We DeeJay.  We Trey.  We Troy.  We Q.  
We not sending a face.  Where should we 
Go tonight?  You coming through?  Please
Know what a gym looks like.  Not much
Time.  No strings.  No place, no 
Face.  Be clean.  We haven’t met 
Anyone here yet.  Why is it so hard 
To make friends?  No games.  You 
Still coming through?  Latinos only.  
Blacks will do.  We can take one right 
Now.  Text it to you.  Be there next week.  
Be there in June.  We not a phone 
Person.  We can host, but we won’t meet 
Without a recent pic and a real name
And the sound of your deepest voice.  

Why talk
of time
zones, what

the apocalyptic
heat has done
for this summer’s

peach crop, all
the things I want?
Is the fall

visible from here—
through leaves
turned too soon,

the white glow
of a sickle?
Do you know

how last night
late (to think
of the morgues

in Moscow tepid
and packed,) I
unsteadily slunk

to bed (you
moving deliberate
in amber air,

scrubbing ash
from your
skin) alone?

All I get is more jagged.
           As if by the deaths

of many small mammals
           I could make 

a trade. Here’s a pile of meat
           for the one I want. Here’s

some difficulty for the difficulty
           I lack. In a halo of sweat,

I seize one moment after 
           the moment. When the concrete

abrasion was more like the inside
           of a shell, bore holes

where the worms came on through.
           Come on, I’m your 

clam shell. I’m your smallest
           palace wife. I’ll lie down

like a tongue in a tiny cradle.
           The waves are only made

of skin. Privacy. The silence 
           of the interior. Slippery

fish run deeper, run colder. 
           They are children 

with their unsealed skulls, 
           their hollow bones. The gill

slits I belong with— the blood 
           pulling up, 

then crashing toward the heart.

When I found that mass of scales and muscle, 
saw one anaconda twist around another, watched 
a split tongue flick the air, choosing me, black 

as the devil’s own and twice as thick, males coiled 
around the female tickling her back with their spurs, 
I knew I’d give anything to be her. I felt the pulse 

in my eyelid, tasted the ants that paraded over 
my plantains at night, drank all the darkness out 
of my wife’s breast. Lord, I’d rather be crazy 

than broken. The city bore its own children who 
crawled from the gutters, their eyes in their pockets 
and angels’ ashes in their mouths. They don’t believe 

you exist even though they wrap slices of lamb 
in the pages of the book you wrote for the illiterate 
shepherds. I know you know this. You with your name 

on the lips of graceless women. You with your face 
tattooed on men’s arms. You who weep fire but never 
for the dead. My Lord, I admit it. I let the angel win. 

He wrapped himself around me, pinned me 
to the riverbed, and I rose up wet, reeking, wearing 
my shadow like a dress. When I pressed my chest, 

milk bled a halo into the water and vanished. 
For an hour I was whole, my heart undressed itself. 
Temptation wore me down to my socks and assembled 

me back into my old body. I’m still the man you made 
in the image of who you used to be, my lover turned back 
into my rib, and you who gifted me with a second skin, 

I don’t want your inch of flesh, your interdisciplinary 
erotica, or the heaven you held to my feet like fire.
I want everyone who comes looking for me to find—

Did you ever ask the oatmeal questions when your 
own dreams were boring, Hank Williams?  I walk 
around that honeycomb in the attic of the honey-
eyed, the grandmothers.  Their minds are right 
clogged, dribbling into the bowl.  We’re having an 
auction of the stuff from some state museum no one 
visits—it all comes out with tags on, Hank 
Williams.  There, the lazy-looking beast of a slot 
machine that won’t crank. There, the pillowcase 
covered in the signatures of cat fur.  There, a boy, 
awaying to various stoops on boy feet, wanting no 
autograph.  

No easy way to say this, but I grew up in a house 
full of pistols & there were posters on the walls of 
dogs & they had human nipples. There I said it. But 
it scared me to see that dog come-hithering with its 
saucer-tits out & to see other dogs all drooling & 
this in the basement of all things, where no liquor 
was kept.  It was supposed to be funny, never mind 
what we’ll call the Real Naked.  Did your father 
keep pornography, Hank Williams?  What is there 
to be scared of?  It was like Mars, like waking up in 
some woods you have to chop down & build a 
house from & then fill with pistols.  

I have stopped painting out of spite, Hank Williams.  
It was all that illustrating how morning hits the 
raspberry business. Now, I am just an ashtray that is 
a mason jar, with water glass ambitions.  I am a jar, 
in other words, making installations now.  Hank 
Williams, I put things in. Your red glass may be my 
wooden chair.  I once heard that if you wash out 
painting still lives, you should at least use a really 
nice glaze consistency.  And in the chair leave your 
cup up turned, or downcast.  It matters, they said it 
matters.  

I tell him we’ll come back for camping with roots in our backs. We will lie rock-ribbed and heavily. The earth beneath our back will be still and when we shift it will scratch like fingernails. He might say you can feel the earth moving like we’re on the sea and it will become clear the lying has gone too far and we should sleep or have sex or another unmoving thing.

Once my attention is drawn to the framing I see nothing else. Gaps where the art should be. I pledge aloud my dedication to the men who make frames to keep their treasured objects. He says sidescuttle and scudding and tinkles a mobile of pink sea glass. He found it at the gift shop in a place I wasn’t looking and bought it before we entered the exhibits. Tinkle tinkle I hear in every exhibit and between them as we walk.

Breakfast at noon: mouthful of hibiscus leaves and peppermint tea. 
I peel the tangelo sun apart, bless my feet with the petals, lay hands 
on this accordion kinky nape, breathe ocean depths at my own touch: 
oilslick, Great Barrier, healing.      I have not tended myself in a week 
blunted by lack of sleep and war the world wages on my joints. 
I wonder, when brown girls/sunned grass/tree limbs dance,    
if God sees our shuffling and spares us all. Perhaps I am the trembling
wick of Her Diwali lamp, perhaps we hold the same things sacred: 
prayers learned and unlearned in lookoveryourshoulder alleys
bedrooms purged with smoke, laughter, and salt: that great purifier.
I wonder if she hears brown girls ask for days when the clock 
ticks slow, so we can sit in sun and break     fast at noon: unfurl
beneath a tangelo sun and a winking, restless moon.

Square overfull
With people

I am easily
Mistaken

For the ecstasy
Of we are

The unknown
Cascade

Of names
Issuing from

The center
Now rocked

And rocking 
I am slipped

Suddenly
Of significance

Marked as
Epitaph as

The stone 
Fallen from

The ring 
Never given 

Or long since 
Given away

1.  Until recently, I thought I’d experienced joy, but it was like sure, yeah, I’ve been happy.

2.  This was not unlike the way I understood orgasms as a teenager. Like, I’m pretty sure it happened that one time because it felt pretty good, and then I got kinda shaky at the end, right before he, you know ——

3.  Of course you’ve heard, as I eventually did, the classic retort from a lucky girl who knows better: Honey, if that was an orgasm, you would’ve known it.

4.  The happiest poem is the hardest to write.

5.  I know how to sing Joy to the World in two-part harmony.

6.  I’m a Jew. But I like the feeling in my chest when I’m in a big room full of people wearing red scarves and bad sweaters, inviting heaven and nature to sing.

7.  I’m looking back lately at all the grabs I’ve made for shiny things. I’m saying to myself, Babygirl, if that was joy, you’d have really felt it.

8.  Speaking of really feeling it, now I do know what an orgasm feels like.

9.  All orgasms are not alike. Some are like lullabies, they’re soft and put you right to sleep, while others slap you suddenly all the way awake, but

10.  I don’t call Jesus’ name when I’m coming.

11.  I do call Oh God. Oh God, Oh God, because something great is going on.

12.  I’m not sure how this turned into a sex poem, but have you ever rolled over after turning off the lights and felt a shiver pass through you, like you’ve lost something you’d been holding onto for years?

13.  It took me 29 years and 43 poems about heartbreak to experience 15 minutes of joy and it was worth it.

14.  It happened in small-town Iowa, on tour, on stage one night, in a lesbian-owned cafe full of prayer flags and rainbows and Chai tea, red walls, tattoos, children...

15.  We were late.

16.  We were really late —— that’s what’s so deep about this story —— we had driven eight or so hours virtually without stopping, none of us showered or ready. I got dressed in the bathroom stall, no mirror and so did not wipe the lipstick off of my teeth, took a deep breath before I got on stage, and

17.  Oh God, I’m not ready, Oh God I’m not ready, not ready, I kept thinking I’m not ready, and I began anyway.

18.  Sometimes not ready is the readiest you’ll ever be.

19.  I was so fucking happy to be on that stage, not in the car, not in last year, I was so happy to be standing there, calling God’s name Oh God because something great was going on.

20.  Sometimes it’s about humility.

21.  I only have one sister, a big sister, and her name is Joy. She’s beautiful and she smiles a lot but she’s never been very happy, so how was I supposed to know this word could be more than just a pretty bell ringing?

22.  When I read my happiest poem that night, I lived it. There was nothing nagging at the edges of my lines. No voice whining, but really heartbreak is your truest truth, who are you kidding faking joy? There was nothing fake about me, and

23.  the lesbian cafe loved it, but that wasn’t even the point.

24.  When I read my saddest poem that night, I was giving it away. It was a thing, like a cake, and it was not my cake to keep.

25.  When the night was over a shiver passed through me and I found myself humming. Let every heart prepare some room.

In the dream you were etching something and it was
                       to be, later, me. And so we go on:
           water, moving, makes its own hollow.

We teach ourselves, luck, and look: a moving retrospective
                       on, say, the thirty most recent nights.
           These I carry along with me, and no more

are we able to break. From this as from land, from ocean.
                       At times we are touching and mostly
           not. Mostly we are talking

and not hearing presences
                       in our blood. Listen: a man can apologize for only 
           so much. Not for the willows, their bends, 

not for the wavetips, each time inventing new forms,
                       each time collapsing in a new hollow of self,
           hollowed for holding. We keep from each other

just so much as begs belief. Just so much
                       as light, trestled in leaves descending,
           endures a scampered play. In time this too moves on.

In time there is shadow and also
                       coolness. In time silence makes its own river
           run through what has become our common day. And revoking,

never letting things come over, never
                       letting blood. What forgiveness takes
           it takes away. We are on riverbanks, brushed-up,

shored from movement, in shock, shuddering.

I know what it was:
your body stretched before me like a fence
keeping its shiver and creak, something incredible 
as if the forest I grew up beside but could never touch were,
when I blow cool air over my memory, stippled
with fine hairs that stand on end
in a shock of pine.  

When I asked for a lesson, you gave me a walnut.
When I asked for a spell, you gave me a hand towel
and a drinking well. It took all of my limbs to outrun
the wind which was harmless. The blood in my palms
pulsing like What are you doing; my shadow startling
at me like a cat in love with the sidewalk. These hands
are more accustomed to rougher: naugahyde and distance; 
heartache and the spear shaft that follows from it. 
A man could spend his whole life duct taping the seams 
of his castle. Still the ants would work their way in 
and we’d call it sadness. This place in which exposed 
piping is our only source of warmth and awe. 
When I asked for intention, you gave me the world.  
A spade and some dirt would have been simpler.

A bird with a tree clutched in its talons 
swallows its own song. A package man 
with a box stamped Fragile delivers The Better 

News to a house in which no one is home. It has 
been mishandled. I open myself to the threat 
of nothing until the first crick of arthritis 

twinges in my knee. Patience, patience. Prayer is 
not petition for something but petition to be at ease 
with all things. Thy will undone. Thy essentially

essential wisp of vanished smoke I’m thinking now
and I’m thinking that 23rd Street will always
smell like piss as long as this city stands,

that today is another day I will sleep with the world
unconquered, will leave its problems unsolved.
This is a definition of failure. And it’s not a miracle
 
but a mystery to me that I am able to speak at all. 
Melchizedek, please tell me there is some crust
of bread grown stale in the cupboard, some 

draught of vintage gone sour in the cellar,
some priestly garment for the layman 
with which to make this meantime offering.

And then that falsetto feeling.
The swim out to how

dipped in wreck. Age
of recreation or waves

of sweat. This is
a test: count the unfettered

floating up.
Up as awakening.

Count the fathoms. Inside
voice palmed as a stone

weathered, pocket-deep
and wanting

the ache of wind. Skip-thrill, souvenir
echo. Bless the whetted.

Reckon with small hands
cupped to collect. Fingers

poised to press. Spill
and spill and shhhh—
                                   put on

your wind. Put it on
and mouth the strokes.

I tuck my head into my lap. 
    
                        Old songs play
            between the warnings.  

I light a match and watch 

                        centipedes scatter  
            up the walls.  In the end,

it was worth it 

                        to have imagined stars 
            dancing near the sump pump. 

Bees shimmied

                        through mortar fissures 
            to escape winter and lay dead

in concentric circles. 

                         There’s no way back
            out between the cracks.  

To catch earwigs, 

                         create a dark space 
            for them to crawl into 

or encourage birds.  

                         The basement is full 
            of boxes with pinholes.  Upstairs, 

the cat has scattered 
  
                         imprints of his nose 
            along the window, inches

from where the feeder swayed.

                         He meows, but I    
            can’t hear him among the collapse

 and shatter.  Still, I believe 

                         he’s there.  Better 
            to stay under and believe, 

than to emerge 

                         and discover the baby 
            on your front porch, delivered
  
breathless and limp by the wind.

a white squirrel, a birch tree.  you of lips,
of snow adrift in streetlights.  all the pasts 
that recreate a lifetime but you

                       *  

whispered.  stark, the maple limbs quivered
as if to say, too, of white:  it’s spectral,
the way your finger hushes my lips

                       *  

and you to me of a dull ax.  all the lifetimes
that recreate a past.  the tall grasses and ditches,
wheels collected to collapse

                       *   

being unbodied, come, settle 
between your high and low, your lap, 
a manic love to fold my wasted bones upon

                       *  

find nothing.  there are whistles so pitched
to be white.  an open mouth in winter, 
a goat is, as I to you, the air

If all the cages have keys, the throats
            of birds pinned to the wall.

The truck idles for days 
            at the curb in front of the house.

A window, the painted face of a dancer
            vanishes.  If the cup holds.

A slow leak, a full tub.
            If the saucer is flying

across the room, unexplained.
            If December

wakes in a white room 
            without windows.

If we cannot keep its eyes
            clean by tearing phlox

from its roots.  If not the dirt, 
            the sun, the snow, the floods

will open us.  If blood carries 
            histories of creatures walking 

with wings.  Then a bleeding 
            tongue, then a whipped 

horse, then a muzzle.

Hollow driftwood tilts up,
looking like the folded hands 
of the oldest surf rat in all California.

Standing in the reverse shadow
of La Conchita’s canyoned mudslide mountain—
one man fishes, waist deep—

horses kick up dust in rectangular pens
across the highway, predict a storm,
and the sky agrees.

Under that thumb-smear across canvas,
the fisherman’s line heads out straight,
measures the radius of the world—

hooks a dead octopus, floating 
from the countless remoras
that lift its tentacles.

The bulb of its body aligns 
with the hidden sun, its rays in eight directions
behind the wet fur of anxious clouds.

The fisherman drifts away in a perfect angle,
out of the horses’ waning sight,
speaking aloud as salt water pulls his body—

the ocean is my ink,
the ocean is my geometry,
the ocean is the chest of the world.

The only words worth saying
need to be spoken
so you feel my mouth on your ear.

Come closer.
I didn’t realize when touching you
that my fingerprints each hid a face.

Pulling my hand away,
I have left a tattoo
of their demon mouths

on your bare arm,
and on my fingers,
no prints but tear-shaped moons.

This dull firm 
of grace tends 
to lack integrity. 

Tends to be what we are 
at photos in a trip of where 

what is discussed
is the wall doing most of the talking.

I can’t take dissolved food like I used to.

I eat these birds.
I be the ribs being gathered.

Now is how we steal from the bloated.

We go fast
to hunger how we used 

to speak. I keep forgetting 
all the bramble inside is a normal 
forgotten effigy.

A burning tombstone’s dull grace

From you, I inherited double vision.
I have two school bus stops. 
Two Christmas stockings. 
Two spots at two dinner tables. 

You walked into my band concert 
with a woman on either side of you,
but I don’t have two moms.
You had a wife. Now you have a wife.
You have women. 

Music seeps under your bedroom door. 
You grab each instrument you own 
like it’s your favorite. 
I have one guitar. I marvel at you,
pressing down six strings with just one finger. 
I have your hands. 

My mother sleeps in a half-empty bed,
bakes spiced bread to suffocate the smell 
of the unfamiliar sweet you dragged home.
I have my mother’s eyes, 
but I have your hands to cover them with. 
Maybe I’ll have women. 

I have two sisters. 
You have two daughters. 
We teach by example. They will learn 
to be someone’s women.

You have a room full of guitars.
Now I have two. I forget about the second 
because of how much I love the first,
but it will always be there, waiting for me to play.

When I do,
I hold it by the neck 
with your hands.

cease.

           cease the velvet fantastic abound;
your anguish sun, your dervish call,
    
           cease the speaking. she sang you easy,
                              that welcome delta spray

           sang you easy, down in the river hole
where you knew her. oh flesh hands 

                      where you knew her;

           she came bearing dragonflies and skin-sweet
meniscus and the steady gasp of mangroves

                      and your name.

           (afterwards they would say
           that sharp fist rhythm was nothing more
           than tides, they would say those pipes 
           were just hope blown over the ear of God—
           afterwards, only fishbones would collect
           for you under the ocean, and those cold.)

           they would never see the silt-ridden daughter 
hanging low over the streams, the daytaster 
  
           in the flush, the vivid river hand;
                       they would never name the delta second

           to home. never beat to the loam and tide,
never make sustenance a drum. over

           and over where rivers fail, they would never
see her cease.
                        and cease—

Night’s a sea: of chanced things

like fish, nervy silver
dart in thin light,

like clouds.    —siphoning, your form loaded with stars,
                                magic of failed desire—here—

doorway
between your body and the radiator

    —limb in, thigh over thigh, so much body
    touching body that my body becomes—

dawn creases
lines in the wash of black cold

your toes curled like a
diver’s      and stilled, as if broken. A sea

When I cradle the softest part of you in my palm,
in the rolling weight I feel the stirring of verbs restless for conjugation.

Will leave.  Is leaving.  Has left.

Already it is May, and from the bridge the skyline
lists like crooked teeth in the loose jaw of the river.

Already the days bend over and into themselves.
Dog-eared pages of a book I’ve read and reread.

O barn swallow, o low-slung eaves!  Red whip of wind.
The clutch of featherless bodies flung like fistfuls of apricots

in the surf of the summer’s surge,  the weathered boards 
that give like a body loved to the point of breaking.

So much of me has been made a mountain,
but I have never aspired to more than these sloping hills

and valleys of pencil shavings,  these rivers of sap.
Hold your breath and press forward.  Don’t embarrass yourself.

I had one thing on my mind. God was said to cross
a mustard field and I planted my dress in his tracks. 

Bees were crawling like cysts from the too-yellow 
flowers, talking their trash where my legs worked 

their nakedness into the ground. Fistful of hair I tore 
from my head and buried it too. A congregation of ants 

performed rites at my ankle. Failed Brutes I knighted 
them with the head of my trowel, and like this they died

as I sweated into the dirt. I heard the bees call me obscene. 
The sky, however big, a brute too. The light left the dirt

left my skin left the flowers the bees until we all looked 
more or less interchangeable. I took a mouthful of soil.

I called this washing the field in myself, wading 
backwards into pilgrim’s feet. I plant them for a thief.  

When I saw your father, before your birth,
I saw a boulder, its broad chest teetering 

on a slope, awkward as his skin stretched 
and cracked, losing its old self.

I saw him weigh each decision carefully,
his life mission sharpened like a pencil.

I saw him testing father on his tongue, rolling it  
in his mouth like hot liquid and squinting at its burn.

As you stretched your mother’s stomach,
so he stretched. He shed parts to prepare.

I saw a man naked and unsure, rolling daddy
around his tongue, preparing like a raw trumpeter

stretching abstract notes, creating jazz.

I’m sorry I don’t
know why I like
grape soda or how
my hair got like this

I couldn’t tell you
where the watermelon
thing came from

I’m what
you don’t swallow
the glossy   dark

I read somewhere
my folks used to be princes
Their earrings were
pulled out
in their sleep

Then one day
they woke up

eyes red and blue
craving chicken
and gold teeth

*

If you are quiet
for long enough
you can hear

my stomach
fill with color

chariots and rivers
in a language
you will never
understand

what got buried
under Kentucky bluegrass
slit open

like the side of a hog
or whose backs
swelled up

became the red
of my gums

*

It happened that I became
the same as
shoe polish    low-grade fever
you can catch

staring too long
at the moon
or falling asleep
to Etta James

your body
can’t be a cure

let me
spoon feed you
acrylic nails
jukeboxes
while you sweat

let me press
my cold tongue
to your head

*

I read somewhere
my blood is gin
and OJ from the carton

My people were once
just words
in damp soil

One day they got
scuffed onto
a wooden block

melted into tar
and troubled
water

Then someone
leaned back
on a plastic-covered
sofa     lit

a menthol    I was
discovered  red-
lipped impression  
circling the filter

On first reporting the strange light over                   A gate swung open and a giant spoon- 
Truro, I replied to 911: "Blah! You’re just                butt alien came out of a spaceship 
a dishfaced mud fence anyway!"                               wearing an outfit not unlike my red 
                                                                               and black frock.

A stunted forked-tongue suburbanite                      I was clothed in everything but a 
popped into an Amtrak train, naked as                    woman’s despair as I hopped onto 
Popeye’s lust, and ordered me to step                      my own insanity, trying to outsmart 
along.                                                                      all the planets at once.

Every dumb thing on Earth gave up,                        I waited to run into the real life hippo- 
myself included. It was time to walk madly              potamus of another existence, where 
into Nostradamus’ dream.                                       I just knew rain would be solid and 
                                                                               my heart, a small test tube.

Another time I dangled from a cliff, my                  Perfectly calm, Brahms calm, andante, 
rubbery arms stretching, my heart beating               intermezzo calm, I murdered every good- 
a rumba, a boogie, a jittery jitterbug.                       girl instinct anyone ever put inside 
                                                                              me.

It was like the time I saved a crazed devil-               I shed my white boa, kept perfectly still, 
woman against my will—she wore a red                  thinking what an Anglophile I’d become, 
butterfly mask and spoke in languages                    and suddenly: Bluto/Brutus/Whatever- 
other than English.                                                 His-Name-Was stood seductively before 
                                                                              me.

All the small beautiful boys whose names              Once I’d made up my mind to never 
I knew by heart vanished into rescue-less               watch another quiz show, to let my looks 
mode, preening and forgetting I was even               go, to just not care anymore—they came 
there, never mind in jeopardy.                                running, too little too late, a twisted bag 
                                                                             of thwarted yang and simpering 
                                                                             machismo.

Swee’pea’s spit-up was the color                           The veins in my breasts resembled blue 
of salmon, a small dot smearing my red                webs or interstate highways taking me 
bodice.                                                                 miles from motherhood.

I traveled globes! I was as close to                        I knew, but then forgot, how to use a 
evil as I ever got when I thought about                 breast pump—a single mom’s nightmare! 
throwing the baby out the window,                      —even my friends with size Cs had to 
every mother’s fantasy I learned later,                   labor for one measly ounce of blue milk. 
but at the time I didn’t know.

Everyone heard me snoozing after                        I’d wake up, insert my finger between 
I drank a whole bottle of beer—                           my nipple and Swee’pea’s sleepy mouth 
I never snored until I started nursing!                  —disconnecting him, letting him go.

I didn’t get breasts until World War II,                Sometimes I just poked around the 
breasts and a poofy new hairdo and pumps—       bottom of rubble. It was unfair—I felt 
then they pinned me to the tip of a bomb,           like a b-movie actress—and most of all I 
just like Rita Hayworth.                                       hated those Minnie Mouse shoes, the 
                                                                           way I kept twisting my ankles this way 
                                                                           and that.

That Daisy Duck ribbon in my                            I demanded a chauffeur and a limo, laid 
bouffant hair pissed me off too. How                  down the law and took out tissues that 
could they expect me to drive a tank                    filled out my bra, tossing them out of the 
in that get-up?                                                     window where they fluttered like little 
                                                                           pink ghosts in the breeze of Route 66.

There were live babies everywhere—                     Where the turnips tasted like bacon. I 
I dreamed I ran an orphanage in                           used to get this brute craving for potato 
Elizabeth, New Jersey, where the                          chips, salt and vinegar—I’d keep a bag of 
turnpike smelled like pig farms and                      them on my nightstand, the sea outside 
oil refineries.                                                        my seaside cottage churning.  

1

Perhaps there is nothing whole in any city.

Push your fingers into the soil—

                                              shattered spoil, sharp spurs, a razored edge,

consumption’s get and awful ornament.
                                  Heineken and Rolling Rock
pitched at a gibbous moon.

                                 (See the moon’s stained shoulder.)
                                 (See the broken bottleneck glinting under the streetlight.)


2

A glass shard driven through a child’s thigh.

Dark-eyed juncos, ruby-crowned kinglets, white-throated sparrows break
against plated glass:

                      glitter, feathered tesserae,
                                 bright cullet.

The crack in a glass pane travels at 3,000 mph.

Like windows in a burning house, another city shatters.


3

This is the century of glass,
silicon, fiber-optics.

The hidden lens captures the baton’s swing
and the body struggling to get up.

Glass mortared to a brick ledge,
two-way mirrors, beveled peep-holes, the drone’s eye,
broken glass, and riot gear.

Where are the 24,000,000,000 bottles manufactured in 1964?
How many are broken?

An old woman walks head first into a glass door,
the unexpected similarity between one space and another.

Glass weeps—so imagine the sorrow in a tinted window,
in a satellite lens adrift, a rifle scope, a rosary,
in Stein’s carafe, that blind glass,
and in the glass eye turned inward.

When the time comes, I will lift a sprig of hair
beside her brow and smoothly braid the strands.
I will wrap and tie the braid: tight against the scalp
and tight around its ragged end, securing the strands
so that they will not unravel or slip their bonds.

I will draw the plaited hair upward and snip it
from her scalp: a small sound, as if I’d rubbed one palm
against the other or sighed or said, in a low voice, stay.

Hearing the scissors snip and close, she will turn her head
to me and, knowing how what we would keep falls away,
ask if I’ve tied the hair tight enough. I will show her
the severed braid, a whip of grey no longer than a finger,
a leaf stem, or the wick of a votive candle. The weight

of her hair will lie against my palm, dry as winter grass.
I will wrap it in tissue and bear it home to tuck
into a snuff tin with the hair of the women who belong
to me. She did the same herself, and so did her mother,

and from the dull tin I will lift each plait, coiled, curled,
and spiraled round, calling the names, some gone ninety
years or more, and draw each tendril—brown, black,
gray, red as flame, this one snarled with naps, that one soft
as down—and hold them against a cupped palm, small switches,
delicate calligraphies, moth tongues whispering remember.

He was reading. Then                   Desire, he thought,                         Then he spends himself 
the shadow of the pine tree           as the shadow of her hair                on the shadow of her hair 
brushed across the page.               spills across his thigh.                    upon the white page

He set the book down                  Reading in the nude,                      “White clouds, white stones.” Then 
when the shadow of her hair         the shadow of his wife’s hair          the shadow of his wife’s hair 
brushed across the page                bloomed upon his page.                 spills across the words.

Is it her shadow                            His wife’s hair’s shadow                To touch the fine words 
or the shadow of the pine              spread across the open book         as the shadow of her hair 
that darkens his page?                   in his hardened lap.                       spills across his page

Is he holding Proust?                   Oh, forget the book:                      On page 56, 
Will the shadow of her hair            The shadow of his wife’s hair           the shadow of his wife’s hair— 
brush across Swann’s Way?           brushed his naked thigh.                   A revelation.

Did he pine for her                       No shadows, no book—                Words will mean nothing 
as the shadow of the pine             just his dull pencil drawing             once the shadow of her hair 
spread across the page?                 her charcoal-black hair.                   sweeps across this page  

I. Willi Ninja, Mother of the House of Ninja
              (1961—2006)

Bitch, give me a body
and I will show you how it works.

Break it down
like the math of my hands—

have you seen my hands?—
first, a blade, then a compact,

now, a mirror. What you see
is a legend on the map.

One day I will show you the world
is one big ass ball—

a house run by mothers.


II. Transit of Venus, Daughter in the House of Xtravaganza
              (           —1988)

I made me a sister out of this body.
I am my own mother now. There are two
of us in this one body—petite enough to fit 

in any man’s hands. Small
enough to run through them like our steady
rain of blond hair. We want the door-less 
tower—the white body of the white girl

trapped in our mind. This body still
a tenement building towering over
nothing. They say in twenty years

you can see Venus in broad daylight
as a small speck, a mole on the face of a
big star. We’ve never wanted to be a 

big star. Just give us a house, the picket
fence, the yellow square of butter melting
on her husband’s toast. We’ll be there flattening

a red and white checkered apron
like a road map across the lap.


III. Tommye, Son Outside of the House
             (1979—       )

Outside the house, I lift one hand
to my heart, over the inside coat pocket,

to make sure she is still there—
the little doll. But it isn’t just any doll,

but my cousin’s Hawaiian Fun Barbie. I am eight.
A boy. And I should know better. It’s

a big house, she’ll be looking for days.
I got caught once before—cross-legged

on my cousin’s bedroom floor, my tongue jutting out
like a pink ribbon. When no one was looking

I braided the doll’s head the way I saw
my sister braid her hair. It was my father,

my mother long gone, who yanked me up
in one heave by the arm, in the way

boys should handle dolls, in the way fathers
should not handle daughters.

It is amazing each year 
I spend I get smaller 
among trees that daily 
grow tall and then taller
this is something 
I know but will never notice
the space too small
between my eyes and
cerebral cortex
to have any idea 
what my body is doing 
half the time it is doing it

I will sleep most likely
half my life in a space
the size of your change pocket 
but someday if I wake 
big as a forest 
giant as the hairs
on the back of your hand
who then shall I live with
and where shall I walk 
fitting nowhere everywhere

and what then

My imagination is broken
I haven’t eaten in years

haven’t seen a face 
a face like my mother’s 

in years maybe more

This is a life my friends 
of negative thinking 

defined by what I do not
get around to doing

Such is the church
and the street when it’s raining 

The street making faces
at all the parked cars

and in one of the cars
there is a baby 

This distracts me 
from what I was thinking 

thinking will I ever fit inside this
I mean my own body 

and a crowd forms
surrounding the baby 
 
tapping the glass 
speaking baby language 

but the baby does not listen
soft in its harnessed cradle

it knows something about me
I am afraid to know 

What is it I ask What 
is it 

And someone from the crowd answers Mister 
it is a baby

Once when I was miraculous
I too walked the plank
of clouds and snuggled 
under the wings of rebel airplanes
but then I found a xylophone
and this xylophone made me happy
being happy I played the 
Star-Spangled Banner
until I knew everyone was listening
Admit it I said to the stars 
this music is beautiful but
No no said the stars We are math-
ematicians We’d rather die
than hear your music
Well so be it I said and I kept playing
playing new songs 
songs with solos songs with 
contrapuntal noise
Give up I said to the stars
and the stars were writhing 
Can’t you hear this music 
is pretty much the best thing
we’ve got going
But there was silence 
and in that silence 
I waited a very long time
the wind sharpened the air
an airplane flew off in disappointment
I’m sorry I yelled out to them
this xylophone means nothing
to me It’s just something to do
But already I could see the stars leaping
plummeting from their ledges 
extinguishing in the deep
and silent wet void
And the clouds just floated onward
full-sail and empty
like cloud-ships
missing their families

And what I remember of
Gary Indiana is only part true

highways and sand dunes
powerlines would they save us

or just provide a new way of
divvying up heaven

a La-Z-Boy chair 
stranded in a field of soy 

All that year we 
remembered Michael 

saw his birthplace a ghost town 
in the desert by the sea

and at the sea that strange old feeling 
of a single leaf rattling

high up in a cupboard 
out of view 

this was what we felt 
when death came moonwalking 

said that’s not an ocean 
that’s a lake

To the sensate lawns at the perimeter of a lot beyond the boatyard, 

the bending in blue dresses to touch something there

and gone, the sod, 

wild chicory and golden rod withstanding 
most of what is said to follow 

the last gingham on the line and everything after that

which New England knows well how to cast

in other colors, as if the fear she will never come back is unfounded.

From the moon whose many deaths meant only to console us

a faint promise whose absence is no fault of the weather.  Outside of this 
window a new psalm and therefore a tanager

              which does not belong here

and has, after all the archetypal traumas and then some, 

thought of settling in whereabouts vague 
and untranslatable, yet never settled, 

              hardly ever resting on this branch 

beginning to build itself a home out of what we know 

to call kindling in the cicatrix of a crepe myrtle which
from time to time will flourish

              so completely, the fact of its own 

withering is lost among the boughs’ pomp and color.

The incidental music — a long in dying bell 
whose mirth one associates with few things 
besides abandon like the plume of a blue and yellow 
handkerchief at the end of a pistol used 
to demarcate time which is a chorus with deer-like faces 
altogether too innocent to know if or how loudly 
to question the order of things as they now stand, 
given the luck of another narrow escape 
singing is obvious tribute to.

No, not smell that honeysuckle!
or what a refreshing Coke!
or you solved the equation for oxygen!
As the only plants that manufactured
air outsourced to Singapore,
our breath burst, swarmed, burned,
turned every vowel plosive,
laughed a feral mongrel’s cough.
When it vented verbs skyward,
we exhaled jet fuel and ozone holes.
When it ran low at grocery stores, 
the choice was paper or plastic bags 
for our faces. Autoerotic asphyxiation
became a requirement for citizenship.
Smoker’s rattle became a choir.
Tracheotomies became a crime
also known as doctors’ neckties.
Children who heard curses
like holy alveoli learned the meaning
of double standard for repeating them. 
When bellows no longer sang 
names in lockup, the hacks pumped
our lungs. We held our breath
prisoner under shark-tank water,
but it escaped, the feds said
in the wind. We couldn’t sucker it
with a hundred hundred vacuums.
It phoned from inside the house
to pant and moan, to taunt us,
and we couldn’t utter goodbye
without the voice it dangled.
We couldn’t catch our breath again
no matter how many strangular traps
hangmen strung up in the rafters.
Our last gasp wasn’t enough.
Our last words were enough
and rope, we all screamed.

I perk to the tune of 2 brown men breaking
a sweat, 97° & the antique a/c’s wheezing 
on the downtown express. it’s Sal & Mookie redux, 
a borough up, a shade down. it’s: My Dude, 
how you just gon squeeze me out my seat? 
it’s: Looks like you got plenty of room to me.
they fold their bodies in: But listen, but listen—
eyes rolling, sighing, heated.
 
but that’s not what I’m saying, though.
I’ve been that close to strangers,
shared the sweaty air with one I’d love,
then soon forget. when I look up,
it’s you—already at the door, shaking your head:
But that’s not it at all. That’s not what I meant, at all.

Judith’s fruited mouth purses as if to kiss, aslant,
the concept of Holofernes dying. She is more arrow
than bone, and better for it. Above her kill, a grant
of red. What does it mean to be transfixed if only narrowly
alive?— Holofernes watches the fabric as Judith unhinges
his neck with a heave, as she rightly wounds him. But out
of where does he watch the red bunting? He is at the fringe
of his life, he is almost completely detached. Still, devout,
he stares, as intent as the maid with her sackcloth. Think
hunger: the pomegranates the maid carried in her bag not
hours ago, the bruising cherries, blood oranges. When
Judith finishes her work, the head will stain within
the burlap and stare terribly at what? The maid will knot
through the night with her goods, like a ship bound to sink.

Dear blind prophets, dear halos drawn around Byzantine saints, dear apologies, dear methods, dear sacrifices on bed frame, on dining table, on the wall the light touches last, dear shallowest parts of the river, dear wanderers of bright complicit dangers, dear sable nights, dear atoms of us, dear foals bearing their first lung in the old wood, dear parents, dear brother and sister dear to the broken parents, dear what-got-us-here, dear what-makes-us-remain, dear— I had to sit up for this— dear leaving, I had to waste every future where we  were  still  a family in the fire with which I love, dear phones ringing around the smoke-cleared room, dear sighs at the ends of messages meaning I don’t know what I did, dear deeper, dear instinct somewhere, dear sick willow dropping each yellow leaf to the same wind, dear caller, you have what I want, dear islands in anchor-blue water, dear lion at the resurrection, dear not-giving-up, though we are so far away from each other, though what we had wasn’t a love but a trick the eye plays on strangers. Though we danced we found the music hard. What I cannot say is how before the sighs come I can tell they will come, like the one errant hoof the horse makes a show of when shaking off the flies. Dear flies in every version of hell, dear rope around my waist holding me to the mast, dear fly-dark storm I can tell you approach, dear approach, be done with it— I shouted along the deck for all the sails to be drawn, I took down the laundry of me from where you might hit first, and now I am waiting. Now I wait axed as ever.

I who tossed with refuse, with the willow-weed

He who, turned away from himself, would transform
his dark experience fine as a split-open dove folded in the hem of him

I who went along so sideswiped, darkling, who felt like when the night reaches its fullness

He would be stonewalled, final, marshalled,
he would pivot, encircle

I was his double and asked him, who could not spare the favor of body for the kind strangers?
                       when it seemed it could help them? when they eye it like an art?

He could be threatening about this: he who had a blade and anarchy
who took the man’s black hat off and threw it into the street, who made him humble to pick it up

The night was a meridian, I diverged from him reddish and hated

He in the watchtower with the Great Dane, he who sowed such loss in the ones who came
fallible with touch     and the knowledge of what he did     the regal pleasure he took

The condition of the psyche means I had to return to him

He of cleft and briar     paralysis, bestial
He of censure

I followed his edict      in it he said, lacerate this one in love      then— he swayed— leave him

As an illness is lived with. As the night comes on
and won’t release until. And then another sudden return.
The ill dark fit to the lung of the sky, the sun a deep cough.
I have something to tell you.
Impossibly, I was sick again. I was virus and trouble.
There were shadows my ear would cast on your voice
when you finally said, enough. That word was a shadow
on a shadow. I should tell you.
Imagine what the night would be if it got sick. If it fevered.
The hour when it all does a downward move to desertion,
torched. And we’d be long in light, knowing it was wrong,
not caring. Who cares for the sick
when what makes them sick brings, to the ones touched
by this wrong, a sort of joy
a radiance not unlike suns foreign in the sky.

Before my grandmother is admitted to the nursing home, she wanders a house in Alabama, pinching the small, slick levers hidden on the walls. It is possible to move a lever and initiate night, nightgown blustery. Sometimes, in one of the rooms, a young woman appears wearing curly hair and a mark on her hand from human teeth. My grandmother finds night levers in every room. Sometimes, in some of the rooms, day comes then swiftly dissolves. The carpet swamped with darkness sloshes at her feet. What is the purpose of this room where a luminous platform draped with sheets drifts in black waters? This strange woman behind her, reaching? She is tired. Her ankles are thin. If she lies down, she cannot be sure whether this boat will cast her, irretrievably, even farther from home.

At the Magnolia Place boarding home, my grandmother is wheeled into the living room and joins a circle of women staring at the oriental rug. I have seen a picture of my grandmother’s brain. A frozen lake breaking apart at the end of winter, a garden pillaged of its bulbs. When I was a child, we found a mother cat circling a trail of kittens outside my grandmother’s garage. My grandmother stood on the porch, pocking the grass rug with her high heels. An ashen snowfall flicked to the bushes below. It is quiet in the living room. Someone has cut my grandmother’s hair short and jagged with scissors. Nearby, someone is mopping beneath the kitchen table. When I was a child, there was a row of evergreen trees along the driveway to her house. Each time we left her, we waved and waved from the car. Her slim figure flashed between the trees until the gravel gave way to road, and we could not see her anymore.

In this death, a house my grandmother never lived in. Someone at her bedside who isn’t anyone. Someone weeping who is either my grandmother or someone she does not know. A book slides from a shelf. A young woman in high heels is holding an apple, wind in her scarf, black hair of youth. In the final moments, she does not know herself. The bed dislodges from the tile and wheels across the oriental rug. Tassels flutter in the breeze her passing body makes. Where are you going and when you get there will you recognize its face? A Christmas tree in every room. And the sound of a train blazing the tightrope strung across the Susquehanna to the other side, just like that, smooth as can be.

* 
 
This morning I woke hungry 
for money. 
The columbine 
glowed like a photo 
of a child glows 
on a touchscreen. 
I tried explaining 
a fragment of Heraclitus 
to a glass egg. I tried 
to convince the tenement 
it wasn’t a retrospective. 
As one of the usually 
unamazed, I believe 
some flowers should be 
available at a discount. 
I believe inside 
the blood’s some stolen 
perfume & more blood. 
Set a plastic bottle 
on the sidewalk & drop 
a match inside: 
that’s currency. 
What I leave behind 
never stays 
where I leave it. 





* 
 
Nobody’s not 
mistaken about 
the essentials. Music 
doesn’t come from 
pain. A whole river 
landed in the middle 
of the city, after 
the fact of your beige 
towel moved past the window. 
Calm down, said the real 
students, having recently 
returned to their grass. 
Calm down. 
The new thinking’s 
dying while you drag 
the chopstick across 
your plate. I 
hate this city 
less than you think. 
A little water 
at a fair clip 
then it’s over. 
A bus full of good enough 
people’s a church. 
Do I have to fake 
disgust for a cigarette 
somebody else 
is loving, because 
the heat does make crowded 
the park with running 
children? A gull 
moves on. 
I don’t await 
with nervous anticipation 
the departure of such afternoons
from this my corner 
of the world. Calm 
down, you were saying, 
& the pool 
rippled quietly, 
just wishing for some 
rougher contact. 




* 
 
This morning the people 
are walking. 
Something seems 
about to happen, 
then it does: I make 
these beautiful eggs. 
Your good eye 
becomes a small 
luminous bird 
in my hand. 
I could go on 
joking, but when the river 
looked tired that night 
I told you 
I was tired 
& I meant it. 
After all, there’s 
architecture, & then 
there’s architecture. 
No one actually 
earns their money. 
It appears spontaneously 
in people’s hands 
& then they’re just 
killing each other 
to spend it. I 
wish my mind were my 
bank account, so 
the pure cash of these 
hills could get 
greener in me. 
Your water boils. 
I don’t miss anybody. 
I mean it.

jump to movie theater scene: 
sho’nuff
the shogun of harlem
tiger print cape
shoulder length wet 
n wavy extensions 
(oh flamboyant villain!) 
makes an entrance 
with his crew
interrupts bruce lee onscreen
hurtin up a white dude 
challenges anyone 
who wants him to sit down 
and shut up. 

what i’m gettin to is 
the diva-blonde butch queen 
in drag
red rib of stretch
polyester, boobs 
a wee heavy 
on the stuffing
who jumps up durin 
the fight, screamin 
(in her grown man voice) 
jack ‘im up baby! 
don’t hurt that face baby! 

which brings me to this: 
shonuff
warns bruce leroy 
(the hero-heartthrob) 
that he’s back on the scene 
and i always wondered 
where does a black man 
come back from. 

i asked my father
a black man
who said meditation practice. 

i asked uncle junebug
busboy-turned-junkie
where does a black man 
come back from. 
he said vietnam. 

uncle neville 
said a knife fight 
like the choreographed 
rumble in west side story 
with real beef 
real blood
real motherfuckers 
doing real time. 

i asked my brother
a new jack israelite
where does a black man 
come back from. 
he said chillin with a girl 
from the pink houses
neither pink nor houses 
but projects
snappin up niggas 
like sharks 
stalkin schools of fish—
then fallin victim 
to some white boy’s 
need 
to wear 
their teeth.

God of Flame, of Wick; God of Whatever Breaks Us Quickest —
I confess to dreaming of The End. How not to? The shuttered
shacks, the horror ads. Confess, too, to making lists of who to save
and leave behind. This is not a flattering admission. I confess

I have studied the jellyfish — how they swallow themselves:
lips transformed to limbs, eyes to teeth, whole genomes
re-transcribed; and the small man parsing iotas in a Petri Dish,
his loving tweezers feeding each amoebic mouth — 

beneath I-Beam and overpass, in culverts and cul-de-sacs,
our small forevers march on. Amaranth and milkweed, coiled
as children playing at the foundry, its smokestack mushrooms 
thick enough to blot the sun — and inside, men forged 

on iron, on anvil — this is what we cling to. Just this.

The stars, inscrutable as jellyfish, flicker overhead. 
I place my faith in God, or flame. Whatever breaks 
or makes us more than just a song-starved jukebox
holding breath as though someone means to steal it.

Every day: one hand extended to say welcome, another — halt. 
My energy — disowned — this engine of desire, and so
I ripple the air with my own, small wish:
To consolidate this loneliness, that space left between

myself and myself where the circuit has broken open.
I want to be equal to the fire, lit with my own life.
You see what a man’s light can do to him?
It howls at the mention of your name, damp 

and fighting to break from the tongue’s back row.
But who knows what this age will bring. What growth.

My hair was some sort of nervous cross between steel wool and overwound guitar strings. As I clawed at it it occurred to me that that was where “high-strung” came from, the instrument so tense that as the frantic pop singer manically strummed it the G then the E and then three four and five strings snapped and confounded her quest for a melody no one had heard with a flavor like maple cuz see in my sleepiness somehow the glaze on a two-day-old doughnut seemed pertinent. She had tried to go high. Where do the strings go that snap and slash eyes? Do they exist? Is it true? Do singers lose face parts? I sped up my scratching. The metal hair spat violet sparks and I set a small fire and cackled like this—this was the real world, this was no dream. This was the real world, no dream.

“Insidious!” hisses the antiquarian,
spotting a Lesser Fanged Woodworm,
“will eat up my heirlooms
            over the shorter term
will spell my doom
            over the longer! Being

what, in a nightmare, I knew
was hatching deep
in the oaken stew
of an 1890s bureau—
The kind you keep for keeps!
The kind you rub a lemoned cloth into

and murmur sweet sweet declarations
if a furniture fetish is your inclination!”
He seizes up a metal-tipped
and violent-looking cane
and, thrusting, bites his lip
as he stabs the worm again and again.

In sociology, we say mapping, 
we say cartography instead

of understanding. To profess
to understand, you see, is hubris.

I am a professional digger. I
should say excavation or archeology

instead of digging for the truth, 
which is uncouth. Which is emotional.

And, again, hubris. We should never say 
truth. What is the truth, anyway? Instead,

we should say subjectivity, as in: To what
are we subjected? Or: What is the subject

of the story of your life? To name it, 
I say loss, I say yearn, I say tell me. 

What else can I say? In fall, before 
the surgery, we walked, the sky the color 

of pigeons. I listened to you breathe, the soft
wheezing. I listened to the sound of your shoes

shuffling, crunching dead leaves into the ground.
I thought I would lose you. How could I betray

you by mapping these cities so far away: 
Paris, Prague, Vienna, Kiev? How could

they hurt us? These faint cartographies 
drawn in traces of my DNA, and names,

the names escaping me over time and sea  
poetically in slant, half, off, and straight

rhymes. I could never escape you. Before
us, our name stands constant, and the City stands

constantly shifting, like truth. Like words and meaning,
making meaningless the crude facts of my making.

Will rain fall we don’t know
only a few drops seem willing to answer.

High clouds the hulls of unseen ships
parked their dented blue enamel over our heads

each rib of cloud an arched gunnel 
longer than the highway we drove on

the family car no larger beneath 
than a splinter of steel. Will it rain we don’t know

why this dark lowering its metal around us
brightens suddenly the veins of leaves almost

lifting into air. Ten years old from the passenger seat
I watch fields darkening low trunks and leaves

rinsed in a chemical glow as my mother 
explains Purkinje Shift the loss of light the eye 

finding brightness in the lowering storm. Will it rain
we’re not sure are there even ships above those hulls

can we ever know their rigging how their sails fill
with the breath of the dead? As she 

who has long been a passenger on that voyage
continues to coast down the same highway

across years she names what I cannot each tree
glowing in the encroaching dark each leaf

a memory lifting in silence to speak to me—
maple tulip hemlock cypress ash.

Sculpting cherry blossoms reminds her of home,

threading copper wire through rose quartz, twisting.
Her hands burn with the memory of spring,
flowers storming the Tidal Basin,

dragons perched along the riverbank shedding
pastel scales. Valentines. Ghosts dissolving
on an outstretched tongue.

what we call the dead black girl

the dead black girl is a daffodil on the table 
            wrapped in newsprint
 
the daffodil is dead also, decomposing in a black
            trash bag
 
the dead black girl is abandoned on the curb
            we put her there
 
even you — who tells the legend
            one black girl whispers
 
to another to prevent
            our own vanishing

I draw my shades with crayon: listen, me, 
you’ve been thinking. We shouldn’t see 
each other, anymore. That gash below 
your nose keeps double-dribbling, and 
when you picture my liver you always slip

into second person. Tarred quips, stiff
sheets drawn in ball-point: my stippled 
soul fills up on stories before your holy
goose is cooked. Listen, I looked back
and now we’re getting some 

wear. Sure, sure, I’ll be salt, and you 
salty: let’s tempt rough tongues,
slough your cells until I am 
sweet, once, again and again.

Since I left everyone’s been busy 
witnessing turnover. My vision is slippery 

with lymph. Swell, blood but 
the wound itself remains 

elusive. Ruins speckle the man-
made landscape; the noble erection

of each abandoned chimney
proclaims its lonesome 

dignity. Since I left, I get it: 
these bits of Sisyphus. Every day 

I heft myself up to get a better look, but crumble 
back to the body in parts: limbic-distend. Maybe later, 

honey. The live oaks still amble 
to the feet of San Gorgonio. Parallel, 

but sinuous.   I’ve been busy connecting
the dots: this other side of the planet

also blisters with cat-song. The fluid human
bellies up to new bars, while the sun rumbles

from you to me to you again. You wouldn’t believe 
what a quiet thing I have become.

Slip me a loop to throw me for. Boomerang of think fast.
                        In bladdery 
            tiara, I suckle melon rind thick 
 
enough to sleep on. I spray from the flower on my chest. 
                        Think fast.
            Think of noun constellated in ruby 
 
schmaltz. Not of shell—but of shellshock. Shotgun-length
                        red shoes 
            tiptoeing. Down your neck, without 
 
scent, runs a talisman of juices. Without source. You palm me
                        a wall
            to back against. Hibernated pain 
 
pulsing behind my eyelids. Let’s say, the loveseat gives out.
                        Do you
            take to it with oddball pills? Cherries
 
mugshot the coins you lose. Their pits—sag of your breasts.
                        Cautious. Balletic.  
            What a cowlick plays mast for
 
is in my step. Figure-eighted flight of a white vulture. Come
                        to me
            in the same breath as you unroll.

Set up shop in hightail. Like bones-circling. Face paint on
                        a vulture.
            Think fast. Pass for no self—for taste
                        
behind eyelids. Feast your this or that on this: You, then 
                        I, then
            you again, piling from a car on stage.

He puts on a clean 
shirt to shower. Does 
as he always. Dries 
off with another.
 
He wears a clean 
shirt to the hotel 
bar & asks for tapwater 
& drinks alone. 
 
He takes the elevator
to his paid-for window.
The view he has 
is everything as honeycomb. 
 
The view he has
arrived in is the one
he feels the need 
to look away from. 
 
Downtown of towers
on haunches, straining.
Thrombosed.
He looks away.
 
He calls the front desk 
& asks for water—says
the water in his room tastes 
funny & he will pay.
 
The water-bearing girl
who floats to his door
is chandelier-austerity.
She smiles a shard

of glass he has paid for.
He tips her picked-at hands.
But doesn’t touch her. Locks 
then unlocks the door behind her.
 
Drinks, but spits when he does.
Removes his still-clean shirt.
Spits, but nothing comes.
Spits sky-clear curls in his sink.

No one showed you how to plant the peas
deep in the soil—it must have been something

you slept through—but your helping hand wedged
the chicken wire around the perimeter to fend off

deer and critters eager to stain their teeth
and fill their bellies. You watched them grow

from the back porch, their purple hulls
you could almost spot from your bedroom window

and if curiosity overcame you, your flashlight’s
beam seemed to make them more majestic

at midnight, right before sunrise, moments
in between. When it came time to pluck them,

there were too many to carry on your own.
The neighbor girl saw you struggling, so

she hopped the fence and grabbed a spare basket,
started picking peas herself. Mother never was

home, so the shucking you normally performed
alone. Neighbor girl, her name was Danielle,

sat next to you on the floor dying her hands
just like yours, pulling pea after pea from its pod

and tossing shell after shell into an old wood bucket.
Her skin smelled like dandelions, her hair like

a fistfull of honeysuckle. You wanted to touch it, you
wanted to drink from a strand and see if some sweet

scent stuck to your tongue. When you thumbed
through shells for stray peas she knew you were stalling.

When she traced her name on your neck you knew
she wasn’t leaving. Your carpet burns itched

for days, your jaw ached from kissing until dawn,
your arms and legs and stomach and shoulders and everywhere

turned purple from her hard-working hands. It was
the only summer she haunted the garden, your body,

before she moved off and became a myth.   So many
rows of corn, armfuls of tomatoes, enough squash

to fill a wheelbarrow but she only harvested the peas.
Maybe she wanted something to stain you.

Years later and you can’t touch the slender
pod without remembering, you can’t scrub the purple

residue from your hands without first wanting to rub
your neck raw with it—leaving a blurred lilac bruise—

or wanting to write her name someplace no one
would ever see.

Jesus turned the water into wine and all the alcoholics’
kids turned out just fine, we think. We drink moonshine,
muscadine wine, nickel beer that’s been laying lazy
in the back of someone’s banged up truck and turned
skunk weeks ago. We shotgun beers at noon and our only
fear is we’ll run out by noon-thirty. We guzzle until
we’ve no muzzle, telling everybody’s business and tales
that grow ten feet taller every time they’re retold. It never
gets old. This town’s motto is drink now, repent later. Let he
who has a free hand, cast the first beer. He who’s the most
sober can go lasso that loose steer some ole boy in town keeps
hollerin’ about. We don’t doubt that somebody’s watching
over us as we barrel down the highway, flirting with the guard-
rail, but coming up empty-handed every night. We don’t
forget to ask forgiveness. We just can’t quite remember
what for.

Your rooftop and dreams are no different than mine
Birds with shapely legs dance the can-can
One retarded seagull sings its bent can’t-can’t
A dog’s hind leg is a machine just like a steam press
Your cock is a pulley and a lever which makes lust easy
On the couch, I remember my past as an empty burger wrapper
Silver, insulated, stained
I want to take enough drugs to make a boyfriend out of waistbands and book spines
He will love the parts of me that belong in the compost
God loves the parts of me that have no crayon color to match them
When I sit on the toilet, God sits on my lap
I hold him around the waist like a flotation device
We can drown in an inch of water and not say Miracle!
Soaking our feet is a hazard so is boiling the water to cook beans
Under my attic’s roof is the best place to worship gravity
We could be floating towards the sun in our best sweater
The dry cleaner would never get the burn smell out
I wait for god at the bus stop but only see four bums and a mother
When they come up to me and start eating my hair I know it is really Him
God hungers for what is long and dead
He does not choke because his throat it a set of hands
They untangle and updo 
They keep unclasped just enough to breathe or let a scream through

A man holds a picture frame around his face.
He calls it Still Life with No Future.  
The way ghosts can turn lights on and off
without being seen is how we try to love
invisibly.  Tomorrow, I will start to disappear
from the feet up.  This is biblical
the way sodomy is biblical.  This is my penance
for letting a child hold my rifle without telling him
what Massacre means.  A bird photobombs
a picture of my mouth as I say God it all hurts. 
If you’re a halfwit, the bird is a symbol of paradise.
If you are made of booze and razor blades
the bird is a symbol of every soul you shit on
since 1984.  I can hate five new people every day. 
I’d send them to the cement museum in Spain.
After an hour they’d say I can no longer live
in this colorful world and a giant weight would lift
from my shoulders.  I can draw three things: cupcakes, 
slow animals, hearts.  Try and tell me you are not
madly in love with me when I’m going through a blue
phase, when every painting I leave in your bathtub
is called The Elephant and I Will Never Forget You.  

Balance has nothing to do with scales.  
It is never this week’s supermarket sale.  
I ask the store manager for a rain check.  
She spanks me and says When will you learn 
the outcome is not yours alone.  
A teenaged boy shows his balls 
to a teenaged girl.  Somewhere a barren 
woman cannot get to sleep without listing 
baby names.  I am that woman.  I am 
that boy, that girl.  My balls are not universes.  
They are soft meat.  We are all soft meat 
waiting to be sopped up with God’s bread- 
hands.  God hangs in the balance between 
hero and trash man.  Eden is anywhere 
painted green.  Plant a tree in a cripple’s nub 
and you’ll practically hear Adam beg 
for the copyright to Eve’s cunt.  Life 
and death is the difference between a cake 
that does or doesn’t rise — a slightly off 
temperature, a sloppy measurement.  Athena 
and a rabbit seesaw on the playground.  
When Athena points a gun at the rabbit, 
the rabbit wishes for happiness 
on its own foot.  The seesaw becomes 
a horizontal line.  I sign my name 
on it, handing over my misfortune 
to children who can easily express their feelings 
on an Etch-a-Sketch.  Night comes 
and color is still not an invention.  
The stars stack themselves like poker chips 
on one side of the sky.  In the morning, 
you are still the same loser you were 
when the dinosaurs ate each other alive.  
When God limps, you understand 
why emptiness can be explained 
by a simple machine.

Your always-hoarse voice touts about town
its out loud frowns. Its lovely little shriek

an in head beat, muffled and humming
itself to undone sleep, slums numb peace.

Take it miles down the road with your
smokes punching holes in the smooth

of a note. Make your hazy attic crazy
with cranberry juice and vodka. Sip sip some

air, some glare of blue neon. Soak the red 
electricity that be on your brass. Gulp spiced rum

and sliced rhythm of squeezed up heat, flared
out with flair. Blare now full and bare-naked. 

Is it a mouth, your eye’s dilating pit?
You hear from one side a whispering 

and spit out your spout a shimmering 
shout-like translation. You break the elation 

of lungs heaving a secret’s gasket. Sound
the subversive speak and bruised

underground. Jump from the fire 
escape. Like sign, mime, and double-speak

you’re the go-between, between-going
for cries holed up in foot-taps and belly laps.

The cavern below a stomach
where history curls up, 

hibernates for the long haul. Going between 
the pit’s bottom and rim-bound rescuers 

you punch Morse messages up the line 
out the mouth of an earthy hole. From the trenches 

punch out a backup call. You’ve always been trusted 
shrill enough to remind fighters why they came 

to the front—rush between the knife and a lover’s
scream. Stream your pitch, warm and gold

as the rich soil of hills. Cool as a cavern wall,
slick as the whirring light-gas, reflect reflect

refract the sound.

Same old verdict
Same ol’ war tug
Same old same old

Same old sucker punch
SAMO© hoodie
Same name shame

Same, oh it’s the same
Same excuse and abuse
Same 

Same ol’ fire tearing up
Same old fire eye, fire fist
Some old world shit

Same back and forth spitting
Same old blowtorching
The human code

Same old same old same
O, same old broke down
Minds, busted hearts

Bloodied on the sidewalk
Jumped by history’s street
Corner knowledge

Corner pocket of a cotton
Mogul’s suit, pocket square
Turning out centuries

Of major and minorities
Beneath fractions 
The dirty hive mind hum

Some SAMO© for your coffee
Same-o in your sweet tea
Same old shit for the same old fee

Same ol’ scratched record
Hopping grooves in the statehouse
Same old volley across the aisle

Same old division within parties
In movements in ideologies
Same old SAMO©

SAMO© IS DEAD
SAMO© is risen SAMO© 
Will come again lives on

A child is born with no state of mind.
I was born with a blank tongue,
blind to the ways of mankind

and running fresh as a new clock’s rhyme.
Tock tick fresh, with tip top lungs
a child is born. With no state of mind

I grew into white, such a tight clock-wind. 
Howled and whooped through youth, strung
blind. To the ways of mankind

I found myself stiff and resigned. 
But the beat and blues, thought and heart slung
me. A child was born to a new state of mind

when my step fell out of time. Behind
or off-beat in clock speak, flung
blind to the ways of white men’s kind.

A clock’s arms swing from its heart, so fine.
I lived so fast and died so young, son.
A child is born with no state of mind, blind 
to the ways of mankind, of beats and binds.

The first time you see me, there will be gunfire.
Then sunlight breaks like glass

over unoccupied space.
So I am born from the mouth of a bullet hole,

and Lebanon’s burnt shell offerings
roll away.

Nothing grows from me except the dead
who knuckle through the street, 

scraping through shrapnel,
the broken vertebrae of a country.

I carry their wounds for miles, 
a thin, green sail:

the rigid trunk of a soldier,
branches sprouting where rifles once

rose, leaves shuddering
like white flags.

This stand of trees like a cesarean scar.
This dust-blown shade of division.

Wait the seventeen years of your life.
                      Work your video store job, 
weld your voice to a recording before locking up.
           Wear the beret that means you are brave.
                      Don’t wince when the car door slams. 
Weigh your foot against the Peugeot’s pedal,  
           feel through its liquid chamber
                      the ticking heart. 
    
Watch the palm leaves fanning your path,
                      waving you to Jezzine 
where knives are made of gold and waterfalls kneel 
           over mountains like women, long rivers of them. 
                      Wind through the ridge-cut road 
whittling past the wind-wrought pines,
           wracked branches green-washing
                      the wrist of valley below.

Welcome the stubbled Israeli convoys ahead. 
                      Whatever happens, don’t waver.
Wade the car up to them, your hair
           wisping out the open window, 
                      a veil of gas fumes and exhaust. 
When they come like birds to salt the trees,   
           wrench the brake lever. 

The road whispers heat. Your body wrung of its river,
                      wet red leaves spraying down. 
Where your bones ornament the pines,    
           the quiet village keeps you 
                      like a secret.The five o’clock shadow wears white overalls

and nervously smiles toward me in the crowded 
grocery store. His cart full of delicate cookies 
and bright red fruit. He doesn’t know that 
I have already left this moment, even when 
it is happening, I am as anonymous as the smooth purple city, 
the brown hat squeezing the small head of a boy. 
Everything up to now is a secret 
with teeth and bones 
trying to climb onto an old table 
just to pull the switch on 
my body, to light it up 
like a yellow leaf.

can an ugly child do equations?
in middle school i was round
and dark as a punctuation mark.
they wouldn’t let me be

other things: nobody listened. was it worse 
than suddenly being mexican? igualmente,
nigger. what is the arabic word for struggle?

because some people are just born
unsettled and i have dreamed
of train tracks folding me worthless
as a penny against the dive of sky.

you do not get to judge my salt water
taffy when i do not say myself. my tongue 
is riveted to a tree like the pink

of a catfish being curled from its skin.
when i think of suicide
bombs i focus on the smile of the brown 

finger against the finally red.

Note on Arabic 

It is difficult.            

            The Publishers do not pretend  
            to have solved the problem.

            
1: INTRODUCING THE SUDAN 
            
Above all, the story of Sudan 
is the record of a fight against 
nature.
            Travelers saw it as hell on earth.
            
                                 Dimensions      
Boundaries are natural
                                 , ruled lines pronounce ownership
    
        
2: PROVINCES AND TOWNS
            
                                  Darfur
            
Darfur used to be the most isolated. 
It took a month by camel to reach.
          
                                  Northern Province            
The Sahara         
                       cuts a vast swathe
                                                        across Africa
                                                                                     from the Atlantic to the Red Sea.
                                  Suakin
Suakin is different.
           In Suakin, a wealth of windows seek the cool
                       of the Red Sea evening breezes.

                       The houses are built of coral, cut from beneath the sea.
            

                                   Khartoum

Gordon was dead, his severed head at the Mahdi’s camp. 
                                  Khartoum, damaged by siege and sack.
                                  Amidst the rubble, the desert took over once more, 
                                  as corpses mummified in the dry summer heat.          
        
        
3: THE RIVERS: 

    givers of life
          
        
4: FROM 250,000 B.C....
                                  ; history is more a matter of chance remarks 
                                  by early travelers.
          
        
5: MEN WHO HAVE SHAPED THE SUDAN
            
                                  Mohammed Ahmed el Mahdi (1848-1885)
            
The son of a boat-builder.
            
                                  Major-General Charles George Gordon (1833-85)
          
Only the Gordon Music Hall remains, inappropriate reminder
                                  of a man who was no lover of dancing girls.
          
                                  Field Marshal Horatio Herbert Kitchener, Earl of Khartoum and Broome (1850-1916)  

Kitchener earned disapproval by destroying the tomb of the Mahdi and throwing the bones
                                  into the Nile              sending the skull to London.

khartoum in the eighties,
my mother with ribbons in her hair 
dress fanning about her nutmeg calves
            
my father
(who i hear
was so lively and handsome
that only bad magic could have emptied that 
and filled him with smoke)
            
the borrowed record player
the generation that would leave          
to make nostalgia of these very nights 
to hyphenate their children
and grow gnarled by diaspora’s
every winter
            
but tonight, motown crackling 
into the hot twilight, 
mosquitoes swaying
in the velvet dusk,          
my parents dance 
without ever touching.

Hornets buzzing out from under branches.
            The sound of a circular saw.

The lake. A plane over the lake.
            Breath like a wave of cicadas.

From the porch I watch my mother’s lips
            trying as I can to read her ghost talk.

In the morning, flood, the base of the hill.
            We gather at the river’s edge. 

Sandbags, a pile of them,
            stacked like rocks along the water.

I look to see where the river ends,
            I look to see my brother.

When the rain hits, still I’m not asleep.
            Low thunder on the open grass.

A slow bird beats its wings against my belly.
            I dream a burning house.

I speak to the body as if it’s not dead. I speak

My way to the throat. The eyes are bronze 

Coins smoothed of their embossing. I toss them 

Into a well. The song starts up and I can’t

Remember the rhythm. My voice floats into the apse 

Like an orange cloud. There’s a buzzing in my ear

And I’m not sure if it’s a hummingbird or a bee. 

Pearls roll around the vacant 
 
                                                   Drawer of my head.

Dead of winter 
half the self remains

circulating like phosphor 
in the blind distance.

Wind runs over 
the black acres,

frost studded 
with the upshoot of saplings. 

Streets mowed-over 
like a desert dream, receding.

Constellations over the plain 
are wound syntax. 

Tree limbs are shot veins.
Eyes lost 

before the clarity of dawn 
scan the prairie 

for knowing
for air.

Defiant as the brilliance of the Christ 
And his technicolor halo in a velvet print 
Covering the wall behind the choirstand, 
My sister, ramrod straight and stone still, 
Keeps flawless vigil on a blood red pew. 

Mourners move around her in procession.
My kid brother sprawls, sleeping, across her lap. 
She is Mary: placid. Her veil: cascade of curls.
Her radiance: mink eyelashes; my mother’s nose
A Byzantine roof topping her upturned face. 

She is most beautiful this instant, in the mask
We all carry, one she whispers through 
In waiting rooms to grieving families, dons 
In hospice halls, ICU—Nightingale’s lamp
A silver bullet perched on a pin in her scrubs. 

There’s no wonder where she gets it from; the awe
Is that she never takes it off; even the women
Who bequeathed it can crumble; but she, newest breed
Is bionic: will never bow to wind, or dust,  
To the hands of mortals, as doting as mouths of moths. 

Last Madonna—no need for others. Immaculate mother 
To end all mothering with this: Savior or kin, 
Supplicant, self—once you’ve fallen, she’ll draw 
The sheet, close your eyes from others’ view, 
Her own head turned; a screen of hair (and you might 

Imagine) a fluttering lash. So be it. She’s done 
Bearing the body. She need not behold the face.

She slopes across a Peconic boat. She weeps. No girder. No gown, except for the body of he who bears her name. No name. She cannot sleep with the silence of what should have been a valerian earpiece. She cannot sleep even when I send her countless sheep to stream their shanks into the geodesy. Nothing to sound but slit bangles to slave into black water. She holds well her wild off, for his body is blue-green, gray and Quiet as a boy who lost manhandling the night swamp despite she as moon-woman. Despite she in this moment She who is birdess churning up air as She gets to wear the death of puccoons in her hair hoary and ornery with an ostrich eye She unhinges mushroom like the crude toss of a duvet bent between her legs. Man onto woman Water on water Ice for ice See for the seed has dropped as fruit found to be wormed rotten, but we kiss her up to God, as she kissed him up to dead-blue arms of Kali. Pulse is a rain dance. Justice is a secret king in the wings. There is a Storm coming She waits fisted for and for the thrown sub rosa, yes, there is a storm she waits for, like a wolf monstering up, sheer red ballyhoo.

When We Were 13, Jeff’s Father Left The Needle Down On A Journey Record Before Leaving The House One Morning And Never Coming Back

and this is why none of us sing along to “Don’t Stop Believin’” when we are being driven by Jeff’s mom, four boys packed in the backseat tight like the tobacco in them cigarettes Jeff’s mom got riding 

shotgun with us around I-270 in a powder blue Ford Taurus where four years later Jeff will lose his virginity to a girl behind the East High School football field then later that night his keys and pants in the school pool so that he has to run 

home crying to his mother with an oversized shirt and no pants, like a cartoon bear, and the next day when I hear this story, I will think about what it means for someone to become naked two times in one night to rush into the warmth of two 

women, once becoming a man and once becoming a boy all over again but right now it is just us in this car with Jeff’s mother, that cigarette smoke dancing from her lips until it catches the breeze 

from the cracked front window and glides back towards us a vagabond, searching for a throat to move into and cripple while Neal Schon’s guitar rides out the speakers and I don’t know how many open windows a man has to climb out of in the middle of the night in order to have hands that can make anything scream like that.

nothing knows the sound of abandonment like a highway does, not even God.

in the 1980’s, everyone wrote songs about someone leaving except for this one cuz it’s about how the morning explodes over two people in one bed who didn’t know each other the night before when alone 

was the only other option and their homes had too many mirrors for all that shit and so it is possible that this is the only song written in the 1980’s about how fear turns into promise 
I think I know this because there is so much piano spilling 

all over our laps that we can’t help but to smile since we still black and know nothing can ransack sorrow like a piano. 

Jeff’s mother’s hand trembles and still wears a wedding ring so she pulls over to the side of the highway and turns the volume up so loud after the second guitar solo when the keys kick in again that we can barely hear the cocktail 

of laughter and crying consuming the front seat until the song fades away and the radio is low again and the ring once on Jeff’s mother’s hand is on the side of the highway beneath us, a sacrifice

and so maybe this is why grandma said a piano can coax even the most vicious of ghosts out of a body.


and so maybe this is why my father would stare at the empty spaces my mother once occupied, sit me down at a baby grand and whisper play me something, child.

“…and anyway, we ain’t all grow up the SAME kinda poor. I know them country boys out here wanna act like the blunt be some vice for the uncivilized but don’t we all feel better settin’ fire to some shit when we with the homies? ain’t that how so many white crosses made the fields dry and empty after the black families moved too close to town? God knows I be of a complexion responsible for so many empty harvests. so many hungry daughters, and we still don’t know what to do with all this violence but put one of them big gold frames around it and pray it might sell a million copies or somethin so our mothers can get up out them homes with the leaning bricks, that is if they still breathing. don’t nobody out here know what that is. fields out here might just need a good song, ‘least that’s what the end of a good whip used to whisper into the backs of my great-great-great ancestors. last week, heard your moms say the dairy queen off route 36 was “ghetto” and I figured that meant it been sandwiched between a juke that only played Sam Cooke and a grandmotherly sort who never stops swaying when the wind calls, just trynna stay alive since she don’t know what’s next cuz she stopped believing in heaven when all her children caught them bullets for wearing red or blue or the night on their skin, but it turns out the dairy queen was just out of vanilla soft serve. the men out in the fields here be letting the sun cook their skin bright pink, chewin’ on those big cigars like “why can’t they just get back to the good old days when a fistfight could solve it all?” but trayvon and jordan and ‘em still dead, and we still only know the way to fill something empty be with these songs or some other shit loud and covered in smoke”

No one understands the pit bull
you make of morning, the tender felony
of waking up in a shared bed not shared
with you. No one knows that you dream 
of me in my own dreams & witness
my struggle not to lull this sleeping corpse,
or shoe that lifeless horse. I tried again

to chart my departure: bridge or bus or gunfire
out the back of a pickup, the exits passing
like endless escape routes in this wasted race 
to do what it takes to stay without staying. 

You have my permission not to love me — 
you, who have gone where it is always winter
& returned with the salt of stars in your mouth,
your fists full of falling. You can steal me away
instead, a lullaby at the speed of sound. Please:
swing low, Supernova, & come to carry me home.

The blood 
unravels
from that body
like a murmured
rumor passed
from one ear
to another, 
its sense
a dropped call
in a game 
of telephone. 
That body,
it quivers—
& as a hair
unsettles
in a mare’s
tidal mane
or a feather
slips free
from the belly
of a wading
duck,
some day 
deep within
the coming 
spring 
shakes loose.

If I get there before you, don’t look. Don’t jump. Turn
your back to my afterimage, 
                                              as you have on each shared
morning when my bones tire of being bones & instead drag
this swan song from bed into sidewalk trot or hallway pace in hopes
of becoming something else, 
                                              & go. Trust that mirage 
will resolve itself in the pre-dawn blur or the weight of a body
on the mattress behind you. 
                                              For the falling, yes, there is always panic. 
Or calm. Even as my chest fills with a strange new air, don’t think
of the way hooves become powerless against gravity, pawing for earth. 
Don’t ask what it means to be 
                                               a creature built for disassemblage. 
Lover, there are so many things I forgot to tell you: I was the one 
who bedded the tulip bulbs
                                               despite the frost; it was the year
you taught the succulents to finally surrender to overwatering. 
I planted my promise like a pit beneath your flank, curling hard
& growing quick like cowlicks
                                               behind my ears. Think of me
when you are unbuttoning your blouse & the darkness starts to spin;
turn the pages until you find
                                               where I abandoned the foxgloves 
pressed & bleeding between haven & hazard. Beloved, grow that stone
fruit whole. If it’s true that in Hebrew the word for awe & terror 
is the same, give her a name 
                                                that means Amen. Build her
a stable from the wood of your womb, just as your galloping
approaches the city’s uncertain
                                                rim. Beloved, we are decoys
of wither & loin, sorrel & speed. When they try to tell you
I never happened, believe them. Let the surprise of us be even
better the second time.

You can’t uncremate your grandmother.
You can’t think of regret as a town
you move to when grief snores too loud
in every room. You can’t siphon her dust
back into your arms, and if you could 
she’d still be gone, still be the coat of grey
settling on the windowsill. Be grateful 
for the first child who dug a hole 
and thought mother. Be grateful that we bury
our dead and not leave them where they died: 
bodies flooding over highway medians; the bed you shared 
and will continue to share with your grandmother; 
North Minneapolis, a sea of leather 
ruined by heat. In death we belong to everyone 
who can pass our names through their warm mouths,
who can smell the rotten air without flinching,
who can tilt their noses up into the sky and think family.

Father breathes himself into a yard, breathes himself larger at the edge of my tongue, breathes himself into a bang in the muzzle of a six-gun. Such is the world. Flash. Recoil. Quiet. He then sleeps and sleeps on the lawn, his body an exit wound in the world. I breath, I silence, open up the wound with sticks, find a soft fugue and other still life, push it all through until there’s nothing but a hollow and an astrolabe in blaze. My father once told me that the thoughts of youth are slender, no, a misshapen hazard, no, they’re the disguise of prayer where we mean to make love, son, no, where we mean to make ourselves empty. No, the thoughts of youth are where we follow each other until we glisten with failure, no, they’re as sharp as the double-helixed concertina wire he buried deep in my mother, no, it’s the rope that pulled her tiny life into that muted dark. This mouthless thing, this unnoise where I daily bottle my father’s ashes and hang them from a tree for the magpies to trouble against; where I sit at the always-emptying edge of his bedside (such is the nature of remember), press my head against the shape of my mother as she stands above me, disrobed of life. I breast her with my hands. I kiss and kiss soft the new spaces in two red blooms.

It is nothing. It is everything.
The heart leaking in its socket.
The garden incandescent, bent 
By feet of light. This air in which your hand
Lingers toward me. Thirty miles 
Away a choir’s voice slides over 
The rafters and this, my hip
On the bed, pivoting the world on its wing,
Your fingers in a white font of linen.
God out there, wandering his deserts,
Jealous in the walls of his nuclei. Killing a man.
Love, when you leave me you take a hundred 
June acres I walk like a plank and all life 
I pass through in your name: the cream rose clung
To the wall, the dog’s bark on the bell curve
Of a rain drop, the dusky silk inside
A suitcase inside a dream. Even as you touch me 
I am dreaming of old wars, the deep evening solitude of men 
Among men, to fall 
On the sword for a lock of a hair. 
Do you understand? I am not falling
But filling the space our bodies make with apples. 
Time is a soft shoulder, I know. It dies the way a star dies:
Imperceptible, a bright black absence. 
Let us lie down under its end. 
I call you and my voice rests in a field, my open palm. Listen 
To the rose leaf brittle, the dog faintly barking. Listen as the gods 
Walk back into my body.

I do not want to be calm.
I understand what it means to turn 
Back into stone,
The elephant’s huge eye closing…

I wanted to be the first breath on the first skin,
The air wild there.
A china cup on the motorway.
New blood striding out of my heart. 

Look at me when you say that. 
Look at me. One wet red petal in a marble bowl,
O the fate of my name sliding
In your throat.

I kept looking for you
The way a sky looks

For you. The way a widow 
Looks for you. I climbed stone, wild 
 
& stunned as rose. I was a revolution 
At midnight, I went man to man lighting towns 
 
On fire. I let them come 
With their engines, their declarations. 
 
I went inland with spices 
In my hair. I gave up like a tide. I built
 
Boats for the children, animals, 
The telegraph machine, the cinemas,
 
The sidewalks. I sent them all away so I could finally be
Alone, a tree in a field burning 
 
Through its ringed wet heart.
It rained forever the day 
 
You arrived. How the spade twisted down, down,
And I, like a country, began.

Once inside, I see with the blue
            eyes of my mother—a nest

of September cicadas on the wall 
            humming their family chorus. 

Meanwhile, the female’s body molts, carried 
            through the night like a reluctant soldier.

Outside, a man with tucked wings
            walks down a blue-bricked road,

consumed by the hollowed wife he has lifted
            onto his shoulders. This is the moment

I lose something I used to love but could
            never understand, and I wake.

My father is in the right
           corner with a corona
of boysenberry stems. I am 

not taking the picture, instead
           developing the hard
yellow sheer, the bristled lines

slow but determined in their swim 
           across his skin. On the back, 
I have written passion in a green so near

black I feel sure it is from the underbelly
           of the stream. There is no date, 
but—if I tilt my head 

and focus—I think he 
           could be right. I think
there could be a cat.

Children have chained their families
            with the stalks, learned departures
as mother-petals, father-scents.

Children have caught the newest
            blossoms between their fingers—
petals scattered, fathers smelling the centers

of their wives. Mothers tell their children
            that God sleeps in the faded
mouths of simple creatures. Children,

quiet as cream, praying
            to feel the bones of another
animal in their teeth.

Last month I wanted 
a pair of pants tapered 
two inches at the legs, 
so I gave the dry cleaners 
a shot, too lazy to travel far.
When I gave my demands
they looked at me 
as if I miscalculated 
my body. I told them 
to cut & take in 
with such fluency
my voice must’ve been native 
to a country of narrow economy, 
a place where flags were made 
with thoughts rather than thread 
to preserve fabric. I left 
the shop assuming 
it would be done, to return 
to a pant with pen-sleek fit. 
They called me in a day before,
a small dark-skinned woman 
approached me with chalk 
dusting the pant, 
the entire night stitched into it. 
She said it wouldn’t work, 
two inches; the hem would be 
too small to get my ankle 
through. I thought to challenge 
her in a do-as-I’ve-paid style 
of negotiation, but there’s nothing 
as measured as the warning 
of a seamstress. In one night 
she learned more of my body than 
I knew of it. One & a half, I humbled, 
careful not to squeeze myself 
into a schedule of trimming, 
an unfinished man.

O Superman of Broadway, 
capeless, your superpowered scrunch, 
the suit-sweat, the billions, no trillions of footprints 
past now inhabitants of the grit on your once-blue 
belly, O the longest miles in the almost 
decade of concrete delivering the pain 
your joints tell in the cooperative 
story, O the way body and mind, coupled machine, 
witness ruin, skin to the bone through 
blood, concept as viscera lite, O homemade heroism 
both false and true, O metaphor man, O vehicle

I had barely broken open, just a cracked bone 
In lower extremities 

And indifference loomed. I turned scientific—
Rejection has a fault. The replay happens 

Because nothing replaces the loop. Not a connection 
Too soon on too flimsy a thread, no honorary laughter 

Interrupting, saying that seafoam isn’t the right green.
Star of scratches already 

A transparent sheet over linocut. I could find
Anything to wind around a wound—

My own private pain generator inside:
What temperature. What control.

Maryland’s bare back is a canvas for propaganda: flanked in showy goldenrod, studded with French mulberries; Chesapeake sweetwater, satin for soil. Funk from the field’s choke and wild petunias collected in jars make the quarters feel lived in even when no one’s been there for hours. Raccoons whistle through switchgrass tapping tiny holes in the dark. All the muscle from the day’s work stretches into song and string, one wide open drum with hands muting its mouth. Voices kindle a half mile from the big house, hidden from the light of the moon; just eyes, and teeth curved into grins, then only the night on their skin.

i am not
in the quietest quarters
of that hospital where the specialists swarm
at every red light, their hands an insistent alarm
rousing drowsy organs from sleep.
the day is not a surreal
cerulean—cloudless
a few birds chatting through noon’s mild air.
the doctor is not a rooster
a cock’s sagged jowls and tiny onyx eyes.
he is not making the tremulous call
not squawking brain-dead, not sucking
his beak as he suggests an end to revivals
as if the defibrillator grows
from his own pocket of feathers.
outside, a few drivers are not calling strangers
to their cabs, not misting classics
from static-clogged radios
enlivening the air with their sugary sound.
i am not watching the ruckus in his chest
believing it is breath, believing
there is something left in him
but poisons, weak swimmers crashing
off the boat of his ribs.
the nurses are not enjoying each other’s
flimsy fables over lunch
in the cafeteria downstairs; they are not
laughing just to fill the busy room
with a bright sound, their smiles
a little like small slices
of key lime pie.
 i am not standing behind my mother
when she arrives later, i am not
 watching her heaving back
at the completely still bedside
of her brother whom she followed first
out of the womb then
to this blue city almost forty years ago.
i am not embracing her as she is not
 embracing him; we are not a trinity of sad
 more sad and saddest thing,
our longing for one less ghost
is not seated in the room
like an asterisk

to be hungered after

to be taken inside another’s warm mouth

to alter his atlas of desire

I don’t know what to do
with the sunlit steps 
or the man striking his dog
outside the old synagogue.
Help me find a use
for the catcall and keening
woman I can’t understand
outside the depot. My hands
feel fake. My pride in finding
places to sleep in foreign
languages pales by the coffers
of my inability to save
one caterpillar on a cucumber.
Though the fly, the fly
I saved. Tell me it’s okay.
Just look at that castle.
I want to bring you the way
the throne room smelled. I loved
the sound of my brown shoes
on the inlaid floor. There are
other rooms in which breath
makes itself small, smaller
than a coin, and escapes into
tapestries whose season
is always summer. We sigh.
We know what it is 
to be covered with cordovan. 
The day’s blue cape can’t 
save us all. But listen: 
the ghosts are in 
their seashells. I love 
how mushrooms cook
the same in every country.

White duck and white duck
reflection. Umber cow

in a green field. This is
a grey sky, this is a train

window. I’ve created
a spreadsheet for lovely

days not in this room.
You are coming, I tell

myself, an unreliable
narrator. I’m a breeze

in a blue curtain. The trees
will try to stop you, they 

will crank up the tinder
to send the egg thief

home. The old story —
I threw down my mirror,

it became a migration.
Lifted the edge

of my battlefield only
to find your uniform’s

stars and the way
the waters kept rising.

A baby animal is good
as any fresh start. Start

with a series of circles. 
Triangles to chicks as words

to girls. I never saw you
coming and by then 

it was mutiny all over
again. My circumference

spent opening and closing 
your voice. The only 

thing left to say: 
I imagine you happy 

just before morning,
feet barely visible and 

an unplanted flag wrapped 
in elliptical space.

write about the moon. write about how it pulls at every liquid on earth including the blood churning through your hands as you write about the moon. write about your hands, how they can be stone and still sweat, how when he let go of them you jettisoned around him in a permanent orbit and grew perfectly round. write about how lonely it is reflecting everyone else’s bright shining life, how you are pocked and hollow down to your chalk white bones, how you only appear to glow. write about the men who’ve wormed their feet in you since, how this makes the first one’s departure less arduous, so many trails punched into your dusty hips you can’t trace back the first to its origin. write about how the first man planted his flag in you wrong, how it fell limp to the side while he experimented with his boys and left you without language, how that ruined you. the only warmth he left behind were the marks scorched into your pretty face. write how every flag forced inside you since turns white and that empty space looks like your name. write about being made to look down at his house every night, how he takes a woman out into the dark field and points up to laugh at your ugly, the noises you made, what you were willing to do just for him. write about how you can’t stop turning in bed, how it feels like you are alone in a great expanse of darkness. write about carbon: hand and pen, the lunar surface of the page, the ink and its cartridge, his cartilage, how they are all composed of the same elements, how little solace this brings, how your core is molten and spilling over, how you wish you could turn your back.

the good enough
ain’t 

either never
good

or never
enough—

the over ain’t
ever

over either lingering 
loves

or love
lingers no one

ever leaves
or believes truly

in over nor
never ain’t

as infinite
or final as no

thing either
nothing ever

does enough
anything ain’t any 

thing good
enough love 

ain’t ever enough
love no

thing ain’t
ever is—

clouds so I can’t float off
into the hymns beyond 
be thou my vision
oh glory gone 
remembered all
wrong I used to slump 
in church in the valley
of the shadow my parents 
cast they sing still 
conjoined in chairs somewhere 
in the risen air coaxing 
me along as a child 
beckons a goat

Fact of the matter,
blue and black go together.
When ion affects or,
Create’s a leaky face,

no defect or correct,
for

Every soldier irreplaceable,
birth places rights,
thoughts pockets
of fetal formations

facing equally borne and sworn,
the blames raining random
miss-happy, hit-mourn,

None so as though,
the skin helmet
conceived months before
the war, due to crown
Matter of Fact,
blue goes with black.

Not the way you think, but when you walk outside
you can feel its fingers tap your lungs.

My parents tell me they used the building
for triage, but it looks the same.

All the little old women wear surgical masks
in the street and we wonder why 

men with bleating wands
move mute throughout our classrooms.

I’m just happy to be back from Brooklyn.
Basketball season has started. Sometimes I cough 

when we run suicides during practice.
No one talks about what happened

but I’ve heard some kids are in therapy
some kids saw the planes 

and bodies
and think they’re still falling.

You want in this city
somewhere to return 

not knowing where 
to hinge the door 

a string of wooden
animals round my neck

the absence of a job
you need a little more

space to store markers 
and the heads of dolls

thrown in the dear 
city where I eat 

to grow my hair. 

*

There are the things 
people leave in their

books and this dream
I have where I go 

through the tunnels
the wrong way you

know the work was
slow until it wasn’t

pressed to the edge 
of that stage there’s 

everything you don’t 
need to know and 

the crowd growing.

Fire burnt on a cold morning: 
he screamed "E mi o mo nkankan
I’m innocent" until his voice was 

swallowed by the ravenous fire. 
The woman arrived at the scene 
to see her love had become ashes;
she poured tears before a broken 
statue of Oshun.
I and my two siblings stood, staring —

our skins, veiled by Akure’s harmattan.
Police sirens were a muezzin’s voice
that slashed through the morning for solat; 

the vigilantes, who made the fire
that that melted the life of their thief
without proof he was thief,

dispersed into our bewilderment.
Guns and truncheons lay 
on the road, casualties in a war —  
torn country —
police led the new widow to a van — 
I and my two siblings stood, staring —

The fire died.

First, remove your Mary. Take the chains from her neck.
then smack out the candles with a pillow. Stack the books

            under Paul in boxes. Lift up 
            the snakes. uncover the faces. Take

                       the incense dust in both hands and cross Barbara.
                       Unhinge Jesus carefully, at each panel. Move

                                   the Angels by their buttocks, not their wings.
                                   Unplug Magdalene. Take away the black gauze

                                               from the face of Judas. Pull the river foam
                                               below the roses, lay it under both Moses. 

                                                          Wrap Adam and Eve
                                                          in light citrus and borax. Make a clay paste

                                                                      to preserve the face of God. Bury the
                                                                      cigarettes. the apple peels. the meat.

eventually the reproductive rate of windows turning to mirrors replicates. everyone’s story about how they came to the book of records ends with a cabin in the canyon box. beside the river, I’ve named every imaginable chameleon that’s flotsam’ed by. been stung any number of times. founded an athenaeum in the memory of myself and looked to each appropriate article within it when pronunciation resembled the movements of myself. names of family trees escaped as the weather pressed on through. or, eventually: all I have to write on is the memory of myself where occasionally you enter

if you address any of your names to the affixed constellations and wave the anchor to the world may seem to wobble while passing on. according to the moon the ingenuity of seasons falling directly into one another is where the geologist party cast about in groves along the dust until they found their ancients’ home by air. does everything the eremitic does become serendipitous? or does it merely does? so much time has passed inside the grammar it’s getting hard to tell. the fourth wall to the wall of records did not require participation from the previously hidden whereas the waves have been doing their thing for just a while. salt was added so much later in the crinkle of leaves beside the river

none of which is to say I’ve spoken a word of the canary colony to anyone. instead, I’ve used my credentials to gain access to the city which passes with a comet through the night at such a speed the buildings in the city each shine gold. twenty-nine stories underground the warehouse walls of the city’s intestine throb with a crayola yellow and all the PA speakers effuse chalky bird dust. sunflower seeds and icy breath, the bones of the forest in a plaza of the city we’d been trained to forget had been its capitol. we breathed the dust enough to be transfixed and then stood around in our sleepwear, waiting in purgatorial lines for more channels to comatose to. once I got so happy I couldn’t smile any harder. I was the only one in the restless club while the constant heather glare of the place sold a lot of umbrellas. some of the older patients adapted a beach club named the sungrazers while I’d been conspiring to break free. building capacity to pass through warehouse layers without being gassed. sliding past elevator guards in the melting gravity like dropping from the high dive. holding my air. by the time I reached the surface I was so lightheaded I began to name the constellations whirling throughout the comet’s golden turrets and capitol buildings. the gutted linen shops and bank lights falling over darkened alleys and recently broken glass reflecting back to space the image of itself I can’t remember if I couldn’t breathe or not. it wasn’t that I couldn’t not recall whose bones I’d breathed in the speakers’ dust, but that the nomenclature for any comet is both the first and last in its fate of events. I had been forced to breathe the names in the dust and that had been reason enough for escape. and the outside lights above the city were just so very clean

and all I know are the seventy manes
found in autumn’s good graces:

chestnut, auburn, coal, ash.
And all the tiny hairs fall

on my jeans and collarbone. 
I arrange them on a pillow.

Still, I hear only hooves.
Still, I am disappointed

with how I weave his body
back into this bed. Never again

shall I gather oleander and wool
with crochet hooks. Never tie

nettles with corn silk and soak
the mixture in wax and milk.

The heart tumbles until it splits
from yes. It is lonely

in this body, and I need
to find the best way out.

          He saw me with cassette ribbons
laced around my fingers in the hay field.
          Don’t ask what put me there
fifteen years ago. Ask the wolves on the border. 
          Ask the hunter why moonshine
raised his aim high to my heart.
          My sweater—left behind. My parents pried
carrion beetles so forensics could steal
          a swatch of blood. I’m also
the shoe, laceless in the corn field.
          When I think of everything I’ve lost,
I rejoice—no soap to scrub the devil
          from my tongue, no belt to bruise
my wrists over a broken dish. 
          My parents think the day they buried me,
they laid two ghosts to rest—
          mine choked in a casket, the killer’s
to rot. To grieve is to
          pound a knife along the mason
jar, already opened. Face it—
          nobody wants to wake cruel.
There are always killings in the quiet
          line of trees. Trust in this:
wings sprouted from my shoulder blades—
          I glide on water.

I

They must have hunted us 
in sleep —

great silent owls 
trading places in the oaks 
above our homes

Tracked us through wind
sweetgum sweat
trace phosphorous 
bone-glow

As children, they renamed us 
with shepherding words:

watch-box
sheared-one
crookit-horn
greener-than

and we 
to their gloved hands came 
downy things and careful


II

With the moon drawn slow 
they led us 

through halloween mazes 
of their stately homes

Basements laced
with heating ducts
blind pipes

perimeters flowering 
with ruderals

No one living there
exactly

No face to run our hands across

but a woman or a horse
heard kicking in the walls

There must have been a passage there


III

It must have been quite early
we learned dreaming on our backs

They wrote us into ledgers
with the weather —
             great lakes pulling sheets over the town

Said 
whosoever lives on land
will die on land

as all things born
beneath the ground
will stay there

Those words we learned
from birds of prey:

gauntlet
haggard
hood block
lure

and raptor from rapere
which is to seize 
or take by force

They wrote us into ledgers
with the costs we incurred

             one body worth 
a thin blue yard of lace

In dark, we gathered every 
claw-shaped leaf that fell

The moon rose high 
above us anyway

equal in size 
to the eye of a cask


IV

They must have hunted us 
in sleep

swept us into oak trees
where the branches caught 
our overcoats

Renamed us after ruins: 

Amathus
Elea 
Aptera
Cyrene

                         ancient cities
made beautiful by words

And we hung
shivering and silver

happy as bells 
in the trees

the way that children 
in the sky 
will remain fixed there

as if fastened to the heavens 
with nails

We must have learned quite early
about dreaming on our backs

Learned that a man will gnaw
into a heart
the way a beast might

In Boston today the trains wait 

          on tracks. Trucks push piles of snow 

up piles of snow. No one’s getting in 

           or going out. Hours of coffee 

and cable news, a folding table 

          forms the space a jigsaw puzzle 

frames and fills, the picture taking 

           shape as every figure outside’s 

slowly rounded, mounded under 

          a daylong fade to white. 

I wait for night to come without 

          its dark, for flakes to taper off 

and clouds to pull apart, for stars 

          and the day’s accumulated 

falling to reflect their light, luster 

          offered up by streets I knew 

till now, each house a ghost against 

          the sky. I hold my breath. Tonight 

I will not shut my eyes.

