Take the most abstract
Forms you can imagine.
Now break them down
Into tiny people,

Wrestling at arm's length
For some soup. The 
Heaviness of the day
Was taken with us,

Lost as we are in 
Imagination's tirade.
The partial wind blows
Over the fields. I mark

My freedom to its end,
Dance with the long-
Legged lemurs, the consonance
Astounds me! No more

Crying in this landscape,
Kiss goodbye to the flowers.
The coldness is something
I must express, as we 

Go on like this for ages.
Gold covers us, no, it wrecks
Us, and we own nothing.
Call it love, call it non-

Being, call it anything,
But what it is, a scrape on
The foot of a god. Without
This joy, what can anyone

Tell us? The tiny people
Are united in song, the
Tennis courts jump with
Ample pleasure. If I were

To fly out of my body
Into some other realm,
Would I be able to buy
What I need in terms

Of my latent sense of smell?
With the heaviness of shadows,
Spring will return, will not be included
In books we know

About. A kiss will be
The last thing we think of
When we join the ruptures
And the upturns

Of the present phase of
The moon. Slippery as
The night is, we still want it,
So as to balance out the days

Where we were colder
Than the lunar knife that
Sliced us. Drama is something
We think about, but then

Merely dismiss through
The disgruntled music
Of our broken hands.
We have already won,

Will sluice through
The never-ending portals
Of another time and place.
Reading the dictionary

At fifteen is one thing,
But it is quite another to
Express the gone-ness of
A peasant's breath. And

What will you do, if you
See a monster under your
Bed, and it turns out to
Be a headlong dive into

Life's golden trials? We
Are generally happy that
We exist, and we write
Poems to celebrate sometimes.

But I can tell you, this
Exquisite solitude is shared.
Some go on to the prancing
Air alone. The piano thrums

In the background. Nothing
Costs anything anymore
Where the other one is.
Bare-breasted I write,

And I give it all to you,
Sweet nothingness, a golden
Circle around tape that marked
Where you lay. The music

Thrums harder now, and I can't
Hear my own rhythms,
But that's okay, the life
Flows through me like a sea.

Resentments fly away like
Ornate gold birds. We will
Never reach the themes that
Have their grip on us. The day

Is darkening now, and words
Cannot express it. I will make
Some tea for you and me. But
Who is you? Dear reader,

I am oppressed by your thoughts,
By your reading into it all.
Without help, it is too much
For us. And so I will help you,

I will tie your shoe, in the last
Breath of darkened air. Go
Where you will. I give you
Something to take with you

On your trail into the forest.
We have mated in a way,
And now we walk separately
Into the flashing air.

Static on the television makes rain
on the roof
after the jerk and swaddle of morning
we peck at our notebooks
consider the ditch dug
up the middle of our lawn
$4000 gone       down the sidewalk
two krishnas swell in saffron robes
great horned owls sing in alley
are you awake too?
only the rich burn candles
not a question of greed but a system
like capitalism or the avant garde
or a child who wants to keep moving
I nurse, wait for sun, click refresh
I rub my daughter’s knee
both of us want to feel
bigger after I write this

A gunshot then. Stop your bikes and let them wobble in mechanism

Then a gun watchman, hithered on the imaginary end of a macabre

lipping telescope, broke my hero into speeches.


It had to be masculine this many occasions consecutively and also diminutive from a hugeness I could not collect enough pipes and wizards on the
trumpet trigger to build a trumpet or remorse or capitulate or boost my chest into order, for a basicness distortion gives, gives exegesis     Pedals
coiling and scuffing the earth dust trusting lungs to come out in funicular or jigback. If I could just look to the minimalists, suss a sleek black
wrist gathering the handles or clutching stacks of hourglass glasses to his grappling ribs at this one endless shop.    We looted 

Metronomic thwack
of windshield wipers keeping
the streets aligned
and mesmerizing the cat
into porcelain energy on the sill
it was the last weekend
before our resurrection
as fragments of infinite tone
replacing the cell set
like sloughing
a long scarlet glove
it was erotic
in ways unforeseeably jeweled
by syntactic fieldwork done on hush
I was partly human partly
waves breaking quiet
on wide tarmacs of conversation
that surged or dimmed
thwack thwack
retuning the neighborhood solemn
each tree nodding
off before jolting into readiness
I was holding my neighbors
like deep green
swaths of virgin grain
holding the neighborhood
undiminished
by fear
of whatever new malevolence
might be thwack
I was peeling my enemies
off like face cards
thwack thwack
in the dark protuberant dusk
when the film began
a film about the neighborhood
and how it survived
endless hours of parking
to explode like an ancient firearm
whose only ammunition
was a rare and musky fungus
a fungus that covered the brain
in strands of erotic convergence
our beautiful erotic neighborhood
underneath the streetlamps
which fizzle orange
in the long erotic future
our long orange erotic neighborhood
of the future 

We want to think in shapes but we end up thinking instead in language.

A cricket so close smells like fire.

What it is to roll over into another person’s dream.

Before death my father’s eyes and my dog’s eyes were the same—hollow and desperate.

Rains a supermarket and everything falls down into hard chatter.

Hand perfumed by a stranger.

Kneeling is graceless. To strip one’s self of grace. Doing away with excesses, drunk with it. This is the body in prayer. This is the body shuddering amidst light.

As if sleeping through a door.

The I worries with some relief/release later.

Signs unreadable. Proportionate frames emerge approximating a message. 

Took shower, made bed, walked across campus to barn.

Presidium in effect, powers of description rest with the intermediary body.
I remember the places we’ve yet to go, all those little bites.
In my book, someone wrote, “Language comes from the dead.”

Salt of years alone.
Salt of memory.
Sucked under & birthed
by death from
high places.

A bitten child
hidden in
the honeycomb.

A candle in Denver.

A little life
given to dark.

Sparks followed
by flame punked
in the salt pits.

In the end Guston painted THE STREET
Later, 
He left the abstract land

We were beginning to
Always, in the beginning

He began and I too
Wanted to begin

Neither claiming nor calming your pronouns
Or prefixes or portholes or starwells 

Or the blue stairwells
Where skinny, it’s always fall

The autumn of beginning brightly
Among the ends of the party

The parrots, the parity, the purity
Of the untouched, that where
God is not cast down

Where the leg and the calve
Begin sleeping
Together

And repeating our distances
The ice star, the well, the parrot

The man who doesn’t love you, the woman who 
Wants to rip your face off, the little boy biting your ankle

The demons, the orangish light, the handmade paper lantern
The word lantern, your tiny scars, your tiny hips
All in pink and orange and black

And stupidity and semen
And his superior taste in nudes and beiges

And the time
In which you realized
His nihilism

And your
You
Turned to fiction

To the flesh

A thousand heads rolling
And with them, a thousand eyes
But pay no mind

Every nameless body one could name wanted justice
And if this were to be, then

I the streets 
Who is always coming

From some grave something
Some somewhere

Some ancient summer’s
Flowery guts

With the unwanted, the news 
Of my violent love

If this were to be then

That street
Where the dead eat their cakes

That street
Become fine through each fire, unread, and misread
And risen and red and dumb and decayed
In orange and black and pink and nude
Pure as hell

That street
Universal weakness

Would have entered 
You

  my sword: what for⎯                         K
                                                                                                           ♠ 
my shield: what’s left⎯ 

                                   because I’ve chewed your death

                                                  back and forth in my smile
                                                  and walked up and down in your dirt

     Desquamation By Exhilation!

                                    [because] where the photograph meets the burn
                                    I’ve learned to revivify: plumbum to

                                                       plumbum, earth to

earth. O Pure Ponderous Lust! O Tower of Stone!
I shall rise and go to a grave-green lake,
     [where] by parkfire
I’ll fix your blood to philosophical flowers


     [What the Heresiarch Remembered about the Sun]

                                    [Part 9♥]

     Because I’d taken it, under cover of darkness,
     when it was not there I’d taken it
     and placed it in a lovely ditch. The ditch
     I’d built out of nothing, out of the picture of things⎯
     I’d knelt down and blindly gashed the ground
     as evening fell and the declensions of animals began.
     A hum swept through the brighter leaves, hung awhile,
     then broke against the deeper lawns.
     Finally, or so it seemed, shadows
     clotted beneath a lack of trees
     until the shadows were the things themselves.

One led the humming another matched. Their ambushed breath was doubled. The story walked until the distant, papery sound they were made from veered. Outside it they thought, One blue word removed from the sky is what is noisy in the sky’s return, then, What is saliva? What is milk?

One formed a house from another’s mouth. Another felt the silent sky. The air overhead wore two huge hands. This was a condition of their contract with disguise. One burnt a tarp to fan another’s sparks. It hurt. One said, It hurts. This heat was the most evolved form of curing. One cursed when it hurt. Who wouldn’t?

One further unpacked another’s mouth. A sheep in a crow in an anthill. Each open animal exerted a pressure inside the air around it. That heap or that cow. Those castings. Full of pulp, they let their urns dry. They were drained. They did not know to float. One put a one below one’s name. Another dried to rescind a twin.

A light hum in my right ear. Circumscribed
world. As the climate changes the soil mantle
strips away. We pave over this. We take
a week by the sea the stitching long since

ripped. Betula—betulla—we say semida
when talking secret names. Metallic ribbon
wound round branches that no longer leaf. 
Revealing bones of bedrock underneath

you return to silver rind canoes pushed
into the arctic. Viewed in time lapse only
the surface diminishes, crows in each frame
as tribes come and go. Herds come and go

acid groundwater penetrating along jointed
plains. As if through bracken we might find
a small pale land. The problem of the house
fatigues with moths pinned and spread, granite

to gravel, a series of birches and a vacant lot. 
And then just one birch, scar tissue encaustic
as the low tones of a trombone push through
the gap. The shadow of birds flood out

a dark territory for the sea did not answer
the question of the bureau’s mirror eye. 
Its inability to detect in weathering a conception
of dwelling without elegy. A mouthful of moths. 

Red was a bad little person down by the sea
But he came to me and I to me
With the soft edge and also the rough

Red hands and red fingers
Red eyes and toes
A red seething, in a shell

Red was just a small fish soaked in crimson
But then the ocean fell and swayed
And when it did, so did he

To the other place, two fins into whiskers
The seapeople coming and going
Red, as well, before the murders

Red, a turtle, part family to wateranimals
And the fishing boats came and took the family
And Red saw much of his family go

So in place of his loss became a poison
That Red made an aching strawberry
A cherry so full of evil it split the sides

The day, a sunset down the edge of sand
A rosy unearthly glow of light
That is when Red learned to strike

The unsuspecting people, their hands in their food
A red slush, the tomato paste in fries
A red suit and nail, the sunglasses in brackish shade

All to die as quickly as they came
Red himself became the poison
The awful noise, a clanging steam

And where you see a rose, you must see Red
An evil and bad force go with nature
As does the simple happiness of red with white

The color scheme of forgotten wedding
The time of loss, when things are gone forever
Because Red will kill you kill you

He will kiss and kill you
He’s a bad little person
That’s what I said

Our world could not be more up-to-the-minute
I would’ve put it on mouth as mouth: see sound whole
The clock exhausts its knocking decision
A finger’s echo on my chest after the cough chimes down
The stakes, airier than scare to material
Lesion struck moon, impossible to sight or arouse
Sunbathers leisure out, cloaked
My incessant need to tear static without knowing what is

Next, the predatory fin floats without floating
We fumble to get our hands in place
Even the victim’s stroke, a truck packed with color
I can’t help but watch my bodies leap from the chariot
Every seat in the odd upkeep and joust
Move over again for what is obsolete
What shaky hearse of rehearsed preoccupations
A bag’s imprint across my breast
Acknowledges that place we flee
Spoils what each territory demands
All that crap in my chest
Abides the unattended rotunda at my hips
Veneer over vision baiting
The fooled precession our world is
Or, we enter into identity lugging risks
That we are not reentering it
Snakes are disgusting, I think
About the white flowers as negatives of
The running woman’s blank eye-sockets

On a small piece of paper
I keep your words in ink
as between blue and purple

with me I keep such paper
with words the color of ink
between pale blue and purple

morning, a piece of paper
with your words, your ink
brings me toward blue, purple

from a small piece of paper
to keep your words such ink
exchanges blue with purple

such a small piece of paper
so keeps your words in ink
that stands both blue and purple. 

How she brings odd cousins together, ties ends
in loose knots and evaporates the scene is a magic
I wish for children in hard rain. 
She is as cavalier as a broom handle
holds up a skirt that juts from the back of a wood 
panel station wagon, a flag to all who follow at leaner speeds. 
She is a dream hailing helm to wheel. 
Just as wood turns to stone, so do gods petrify 
down fast roads. Give us direction, spell out the recipe
for regions we need to breathe. She is not Georgia, 
Leonora, Remedios Varo; I am no self. 
Our names are mere symptoms. 
And though private globules circulate, making the rounds, 
the man-made engine of age overtakes every leader. 
Her metal hip clangs, energy and time come together, 
discussing the terms of the weather. 
What does weather offer? What does weather want? 
We who make ships move, we who locomote with legs 
and arms, who work rudders and conflate engines 
with progress, as if one will surely follow another, 
we suspect otherwise, and look harder. We were written on 
the eve of Art, on the eaves of Art, and bake our community 
cakes as follow up. It’s funny, the way we keep nature 
outdoors like an envelope between us we mean 
to open down the road. With a hiccup of light in a pasture
her recipes gather, words stay with us on loan, 
invisible as the oasis one hopes for beyond death’s lapel. 
In a hummingbird’s heartbeat, as lean unseen conditions, 
the world itself remains a mask. We thus play turrets, 
ornaments, rivulets and sequins on the face 
of something we dub God or universe, and hope 
to be pierced by the crossroads, at least. Such is the role
she plays in the last lap, the one with an offer you may resist.

Against alveoli
against glue
against glue one another
against the soft one another

Cactus! 
Flames of blackness
impetuous
dagger mothers
battle roots shooting through the plain

Race that rolls
crawling that boils
unity that swarms
lump that dances

One defenestrated flies off
one torn apart from bottom to top
one torn apart throughout
one torn apart never again retied

Man buttressed
man bounding
man rushing down
man for the lightning operation
for the tempest operation
for the assegai operation
for the harpoon operation
for the shark operation
for the shatter operation

Man not according to the flesh
but by the void and evil and intestinal torches
and gusts and nervous discharges
and reversals
and returns
and rage
and quartering
and tangling
and taking off in sparks

Man not by the abdomen and gluteal plates or vertebrae
     but by his currents, his feebleness which straightens up under shock, his starts
man according to the moon and burning powder and the kermess in himself of the
     movement of others
and the squall and the rising wind and the never orderly chaos
Man all flags flapping, clapping in the wind whispering from his pulsions
man who thrashes a parrot
who has no articulations
who breeds nothing
goat-man
crested man 
spined
abridged
tufted man, galvanizing his rags, 
man with secret props, spreading far from his degrading life

Desire barking in the dark is the multiform form of this being
Impulses scissored
forked 
impulses radiating 
impulses around the whole compass dial

In noise
in roaring, if one gave it a body!... 
In the sounds of the balafon and in the ear-splitting drill
in throbbing adolescents who don’t yet know
what their breasts want which is as if they’re going to burst
in jolts, in rumblings, in outpourings
in blood tides in arteries suddenly switching direction
in thirst
in thirst above all
in thirst never quenched
if one gave it a body!... 

Soul of the lasso
of seaweed
of the jack, of the grapnel and of the wave that swells
of the sparrow-hawk, of the gnu, of the sea-elephant
the triple soul
the eccentric soul
the energumen soul
soul of electrified larva coming to bite at the surface
soul of blows and of teeth grindings
soul always out of plumb toward a new straightening

The abstractness of all weight
of all languor
of all geometry
of all architecture
abstraction realized: SPEED! 
Movements of quartering and of inner exasperation more than the movements of 
     walking
movements of explosions, of refusal, of stretching every which way
of unhealthy attractions, of impossible desires
of the sating of flesh struck on the nape
headless movements
What good is a head when one is overwhelmed? 
Movements of folding and coiling up on oneself while expecting better
movements of inner shields
movements of multiple spurts
residual movements 
movements in place of other movements that one cannot display but which dwell on the 
     mind
of dust
of stars
of erosion
of crumblings
of vain latencies…

Feast of stains, gamut of arms
movements
one jumps into “nothing” 
efforts turning
being alone, one is a crowd
What incalculable number is advancing
increasing itself, extending itself, extending itself! 
Goodbye fatigue
goodbye economical biped at the bridge abutment station
the scabbard torn off, one is somebody else
any somebody else
no longer to pay tribute
a corolla opens, bottomless dive…

The stride henceforth has the length of hope
the leap has the length of thought
one has eight paws if one must run
one has ten arms if one must stand fast
one is deeply rooted, when its necessary to hold on
never beaten
always returning 
the new revenant
while appeased the master of the keyboard feigns sleep! 

Stains
stains to obnubilate
to reject
to unshelter
to destabilize
to be reborn
to scratch out
to make memory shut up 
to restart

Crazy baton
boomerang ceaselessly returning
returning torrentially 
through others
to take off again…

Gestures
gestures of the ignored life 
of the impulsive life
and happy to squander itself
of the jerky, spasmodic, erectile life
of perfunctory life, of life no matter how
of life
Gestures of defiance and of retort
and of escaping from bottlenecks

Gestures of excess
of excess
especially of excess

Gestures one feels, but which one cannot identify
(pre-gestures inside oneself, much grander than the visible and practical
     gesture to follow) 

Tanglings
attacks that resemble dives
swims that resemble excavations
arms that resemble trunks

Joy of the motor life
that saps meditating on evil
one does not know to what kingdom belongs
the bewitching ovenful that leaps out
animal or human
immediate, without pausing
already off again
the next one already coming
instantaneous
as in thousands and thousands of vertiginous seconds
a slow day completes itself
Solitude practices scales
the desert, the arabesques
the multiplication
the indefinitely reiterated

Signs
signs not of a roof, of a tunic or of a palace
not of archives and of the dictionary of knowledge
but of torsion, of violence, of jostling
of kinetic envy

Signs of the rout, of pursuit and of transport
of thrusts antagonistic, aberrant, dissymetrical 
signs non-critical, but deviating with the deviation and racing with the race
signs not for a zoology
but for the figure of unbridled demons
accompanists of our acts and contradictors of our reserve

Signs of ten thousand ways to be in balance in this moving world that laughs
     at adaptation
signs above all to snatch one’s being from the trap of others’ tongues
set to beat you, like a carefully adjusted roulette 
which allows you only a few happy rolls
and ruin and defeat in the end
inscribed from the start
for you, for everyone

Signs not for a backward return
but to better “cross the line” each instant
signs not like one reconsiders
but like one pilots
or, as may occur in dense congestion
when an unconscious automaton, one feels as if piloted

Signs, not for being complete
but for being faithful to its transience
not for conjugating
but for regaining the gift of tongues
one’s own at least, for, if not oneself, who will utter it? 

Direct writing finally for the unwindment
for the alleviation of forms
for the decongestion of images
of which the brain-public square in these times is especially glutted

Lacking aura, at least scatter its emanations. 

I lean on a white salmon & cream-colored Arachne sending out her lasso over
   the bright patio of La Pescalerie. 

On Whitman’s keelson, the backbone of Osiris indicated along the bottom of
   the coffin against which the mummy’s spine pressed. 

On the Sheela-na-gigs, like tots in a green glade, dancing the Formorian jig. 

On my bottle of one-thousand-proof uterine grog. 

On every angel’s insectile feelers. 

On the Abbé Breuil—unlike Ezekiel lying in dung to raise man to a vision of
   the infinite—on his back below the ceiling of Combarelles tracing the silex
   sortilege. 

On “the vast ventriloquism of sleep’s faded papier-mâché.” 

On the breath-favorable Sabbath moment in every hour. 

I lean as well on the slave-strewn harpsichord I discovered in my mother’s womb, 
on the Lima “barriadas” when I was an apolitical American seeking some truth, 
   February 1966, right after Matthew was born, 
on my walks up those awful hills of waterless poverty, 
on my fantasy that I was following some new Stations of the Cross…

Absence as the unacknowledged genuflection in every breath—
I bow to you, O primary presence for billions of years. 
Bow back to me, gaseous nebulae, so beautiful, so null. 

Beyond memory and experience to hear a mole orchestra knocking out Beethoven. 
To hear in that clangor the women cut up into breasts being knotted into incendiary 
   grenades. 

I lean on the necessity and the madness of pulling those pins. 

Picture how sound say the last
bars of a Faure track or a plane flying out
enters silence without simile without 
entering silence like an arm diving in
to a sleeve where it then disappears if you could
picture sound, as though you were deaf
that sound becoming not is not
the silence it says after itself that you hear nor
a sound that has been listened to
then erased by comprehension as it is 
to one who never could have heard it, 
when it’s gone, it would be as if somewhere
you would have to imagine if you wish to
imagine that reading, just reading, 
or writing poems for a life like anywhere
takes you somewhere a place 
where if someone should want to find you
in the same world you could be found. 

Land flayed the one green the only living grey. Into the small sky a line of bare

Trees etched clean a line of windmills counting that count on. Wind off a west 

Wall gone off some somewhere else open a plain of bitter sun. Came in a bit in wind. 







Sun down harsh, one small town, one farm gone, down, hammer on and a single

House standing in the sun, standing warm. A tree or two of hands. A factory oddly 

Fond. More windmills keeping time. Time to road. Road to grey where sky breaks 

Down. A tiny white car all green in its private time. 







Church spire amid windmills shelter. Cattle under. The farm offing windward. And longly

Seven horses, herded. Is not the same nor the same number are seven horses are turned 

To trees. Makes a forest you can see through a forest light in names. Bends down the sun

Down on cutting a river swimming with horses all taken for wind. 







Six or seven buildings and their six or seven bare trees. Falling in and into the falling distance: effect 

Of noon, an odd speed under winter air rushing green; cows in place as the green rushes past. Several

Flat ponds separated only by their banks and their trees seemed blue. Even the edges; the edges 

Are even, even precise. All water is necessarily precise. And as awake as any may come, one against

Its sharpened state. Mistletoe crowding the emptiness of the empty branches of emptied trees. Slicing

Evenly the thin light shredding the ribbons of thin light to strings. 

what have you done revision. pinkie ring finger. maroon, not purple. 

am I beautiful. am I dizzy. am I sweating from the jolt. am I bent over in some new
method. am I something you could have and home. 

I keep forgetting what day it is. or times I thought I’d remember to do things. or the hour 
when I’m supposed to start counting the hours. 

if I put on some chiffon. some pink. a backless dress. ducked under the garlands and 
paper chains. my debut. would you recognize me as the debutant I am then. something 
of your very own. something you could have and hold. 

yes, revision, amendment of my definitions. I woke myself. I am waking. in the 
bathroom I throw some water on my face. when I get back into the other room I find you 
still there. I steal looks for idle hours while tonight’s debate pulses a muscle, a shrieker 
free, dialer a down, a moan, a groan, my mouth on your chest. we pull taut, unyielding, 
surely this is what you’re like and if not, what are you waiting for.

A father throws a baby into the air. Beside him an old desk dries on a mat of wet
paper. Soon the father will begin a second coat of midnight. He thinks of how children
draw fish against backdrops of blue light, as if water reflected only cloudless noons,
the carp arcing up no different than the pelican splashing through. The father’s aquarium
is yellow and muddied. The minnows, dead. In the stream where he found them, they wasted
their lives fighting currents. His baby, too, lived months in dark fluid. When the father
paints he wonders not what thoughts his son will one day write nor whose photos he’ll set
here, framed beside some pencil case, but which color shall come next, after midnight has
chipped off and his no longer airborn heir wets his own brush. 

I sat in the safety of my age
All the blanks in front of it
Flashed far enough away
I tried to love at least her
She was better than her beauty and she woke
Face-down, arms astray, a wreck
Haunted by what she had divulged
I saw I was inside
The brutal black lace of each tree the night held
I saw my character would always watch me 

No different from the collective

hurtling past suns, one

at the end, another at the junction,

a third implying anthems insufficiently

arranged, as if in a haze of leaves


a door within the forest shut.

People whisper. A people’s music

whispers, an obsolescence emptier

than melody. “Together we

see this skeleton displayed like an X?”

Yes, these were their teeth, some notes.

There was thick bracken lining the trail.
We heard vocalizations in the darkness all around, hiss-like coughs and barks we feared came from inside us.

Wet sedgeland and buttongrass plains were a most exciting surrogate.
Ultimately, it’s worth remembering that many trees were clearfelled for what we took as progress.

Marsupial wolf or Tasmanian tiger. I would have loved you even had you not died out.
Some part of me is always misnamed, trapped by feckless ignorance, hemmed in by creepers, eucalyptus, and giant trees of stupidity.

So it was that not just mammals but plants found domestication in Mesopotamia around 8000 BCE.
So it was that across the great ocean, Tasmania became cut off from the world.

The starving convicts fed pigs the scraps from passing whale boats.
The pork, they say, began to taste of seawater and lamp oil.

So it was that the marsupial wolf—the thylacine—got blamed for the thousands of dead sheep.
So to have a placenta among the King Billy pines, beech, and sassafras was thought to grant access to the Darwinian throne.

I have been down on my knees far too long, searching for the crisp of my lost tongue.
If I had a pouch. If I had four tiny embryos clinging inside. If I felt their suck at my milk and their vulnerable hiding from the world.

Limb by limb we grow, even in sleep, twitching ourselves into a minute nervous system.
Replete with the disease of so many former lives, we once again enter the world.

Have I come this time with a predilection for vascular tissue, hunger for the hibernating pygmy possum, the terrestrial mountain shrimp? A taste for the internal organs of the spiritually soaked?
This coughing bark. This thick and bracken and trail. This certain uncertain coming unto the world.

Everything grapples
with the decision to go
on. My work not done.
Blue skies stretch
before me, slight
breeze shakes trees.
My first Georgia
spring learning
what dogwood is.
I said it’s easy to write
a poem about something
other than yourself
but still I turn to this.
Yes, it’s 2012 & nothing
has really changed
since last year.
I don’t want to make
pronouncements
about American history.
I only want to love
my neighbor & do
no harm.

I go to sleep after a late
morning burial the fog lifts
its wet tongue with milk
foam and purple reeds
not entirely opaque
scenes of sibling rivalry
a plastic knife
thrust in the bay
window of an old sandstone
the tide is wearing
your clothes
wearing away
at your breasts now
tangled in turnip greens
we are born
at once selfish
birth is
letting loose
blind children
traversing
cedar chip trails

I’ll be your Louisiana, you’ll be my Mississippi.
You’ll be my Henri Michaux, & I your
Unica

Zurn?
— Star says No.

Stars with issues are streaking all
over this nightshade…And I have hooligan
factions inside my chess. Hear them
squabbling: then they change sides.
The evening?

Sorry, this mirror reflects only
the colors of the morning.
I led my horses through the prism of oil.

You’re an idiot if you think
the text can’t do the job… I heard a small sound
just now! Is it — my destiny? No,
just a pile of bricks

stumbled in the corner. And all I’d asked for was:
refuse everything
except me. But your refusal was
exclusive. A void grey broadside
with a smattering of asterisks. And even
after your death

the only blue I was allowed was the skin
of my flip flops…
Why didn’t I fight for you in that museum?

Fuck.
You had only the width of a butterfly to protect you.

Because I am coming for you with my voice.

Because my voice is two hands taking hold of you.

Because I am taking down all other voices when I speak, because this
is my declaring hymn.

 Because I have been too long without you, because I no longer
want to be without you, because there is something I still need to tell you, because I would
risk whatever horror would occur to have you with me again.

Because the labor of speaking is enough to speak and proclaim against
whatever stands in my way.

Because, Christ, you are in my way, I am coming for you
with my voice.

After years of mild illness
I found the cause:

A hag on my chest.
This is good. I can keep

eating eggs. My legs
will become spheres.

I’ll keep them tucked
in bed. Vanity must

have pushed the first man
into a cave. Some point later

he looked at the opening
and said mouth.

Everywhere the sound of brass tongues breaking against bells and the delicate scent of frangipani. Women with cheeks like acrid moons smeared with yellow paste. Every house shadowed by the heavy gold of the pagoda whose spires spindle into blue. The oily glare of the stupa spreads. A series of unmarked buildings built without windows to make a point of the walls. Inside are women who brush each other’s hair to a fine gloss. Around the front gathers a group of foreigners trying to make a border. Facing the one-way glass they see only their reflection mirrored both ways. Who is behind the door. Possibly they are chained to a bed or being beaten. Possibly they are bent over a washbasin wringing out their hair. In their nostrils lingers the smell of devil’s dung or stinking gum. Fear lengthens to a hallway with no doors. An impossible black that absorbs all light. Looking into its lustrous glaze our likeness warps as though pushed through heavy water. In protest we cross the country. At the border we create an edge and apply a distant pressure. Upon arriving the women’s arms are pinned above their heads like insect specimens on display. Their arches lift through the pretense of cut glass spread across the floor. If the back is a bridge there must be a way to cross it. Arranged in unnatural configurations the body evokes what some call desire and travel long distances to satisfy. Hello you like girls is both a question and a statement. Am I part of this. If this is my body then are these its parts. A bottle breaks on a distant counter making a jagged edge.

O you, brandishing your whip into my
heart, brandishing your whip into

jazz. With my hand I pass over your
ear and your neck, into the dune.

The flat-foot eats small leaves of grass,
and pulls them apart.

Giants were hiding behind bricks.
I’m glued together out of

a belly, pieces of meat and soul.
I’m cute. When a nothing,

a steamboat, picks up a jacket,
it doesn’t exist. Your

mouth? My mouth? The sun needs
a cave to shove off.

I keep deer in my heart
forgive the ancient fold
I keep the woods there too
o altar that wanders away
from prayer keep nothing
blank in this highest praise
deer drink water out
their hooves cloven print

Born below a second time.

The shade of the first cast across and down.

Never shakes it off.
Her mouth.

“Don’t smile. It’s ugly. You’ll get lines.”

The shade symbolizes an object in front of the sun:
a blotted person
and subversion.

Her hand over her eyes indicates she herself is blocking the light.

Never the best.

The best has good taste and self-preservation, pride in property.

What will we do with the others?

She grows very little without light but stays weak
(and hangs at the apartment window
lacking attention doesn’t adapt)

Why do you move around so much?

She’s the smallest creature a midget in a mighty nation.
An eclipse of the face.
What could be the value of being shaded?
Hiddenness. Plots.
She opens a secret door into the yard:

White mud.

Is the land strange because my brain holds a template of the familiar?

Yes and I am speaking for everyone.

How did I recognize or accept what was given.

(Every line was a reiteration even in the beginning.)

Born to death, to prayer.
Angels, egun, mother
Huddled-over glass box

 rubber sealing circles, plastic
 hands smooth comfort, wither-skin

I prissily eat this air
Coating, color of artificial sun,
bored with repetitious day,

 asks me: What’s night like?
 We need to be reminded,

brief was our stay. Recall
warm, though. Deep brown,
Aerodynamic gas, white light blazing through

 glaze of unready lids, rays’
 promises of multi-hues, shapes, shade.

Who is who here?
teeny tubes tie me to:
fists, little nails extend/curl.

 Globes, pustules, bubbles, sphere
 here. All convections of heaven.

We found that language
could reproduce the sense
of forward motion
to which we were accustomed
but only if
words
could be grouped,
made to

 *

Red brown
(rust) cloud
(suit)
of eucalyptus
beside (with)
which a spiral
crook (crank) (shunt)
of roadway
is out
 flung

 *

And God said,

“Wait here
while I take

the shapes
I’ve mastered.”

You write out receipts
& chances. you means ‘you.’
I mean you. Such an opaque place. What
holds the arms, legs, phalanges?
Please don’t say spitting vitals, vittles spitting,
raw elbows, your arms not saying
‘chore wheel,’ ‘battle for yr enduring heart.’
The best thing about you best thing
is that I don’t have to Google anything & just ask you
instead. That’s not the best thing.
We’re not candles guttering, not anymore, not since
the light went out & switched back on.
Yr breakfast awaits you tilling the soul.
Meant to say ‘soil’ but got soul.
Meant to properly renew. Got renew.
marginal. anecdote.
So we get there & there is here later & we
chew up some lasagna. seldom could
tell us all we need. get layered.
Love poems that are very distrustful of love.
Of ‘you look at my eyes devoid of my eyes.’
Or ‘where are you my eyes answer no questions.’
Here my pupils rest on this plate of selves.
The new paint brightens.
We are all day.

Beauty and the beast of it—the best of
the beast, the rest of the beast being S.
The dram or drip of it, the slovenly
bod, caprice or nod yes, no, yes.Good

F it. Had it—strung profit
and make the burst of it. Pardon the X.
Spit logic and totally full of it—
—like it or knot. Get on it. Abet

set deficit—spit habit out of sheer—
intuit but not that into it—er—
make a bed of it—

er—I meant it—
R, so be it, R,
damn sobriquet—brick it. Break.

We heard truth in the word, tearing. Banknotes, flags and passports could be torn but the hard material of coins, screens and credit cards could not. We followed glass, a material that cannot be torn, to its beginning with geometry. We secured rectangular windows versus the complexity of leaves, which can be torn. We heard the end of the poetic line as it turns relentlessly, whether cutting, breaking or tearing. We read The Ear of the Other. In any case the proper name is the only thing that does not change in translation, said Jacques Derrida. Even numbers may change. We read an essay by Norma Cole about Samuel Beckett who turns the ten nights of Le Bateau Ivre into nine in translation. We heard green tear in the word, ephemeral. Vertebrae of spring cast their shadows on the place name. We can follow this spine where the flesh of the greater body is ephemeral. We can follow the ephemeral and describe it from a point of view created by the place name. There is no more pattern in any torn fabrication. We can follow the hoax, be taken in, swindled. To be green, to be gullible, to be young. I heard the subway passing beneath the building six stories down. I heard the insistence of near and distant memories. Interest shuttled past rapidly. I gave my attention to credit. I inscribed my signature on the screen with my bare finger. I credited my senses with the accumulation of fluctuating reflections. Released cellularly, memory is sensuous, more exaggerated and rawer. I gave my attention to participating as a spectator. Credit erected a temporary structure over memory.

 10:28 AM:
top of the Tower: the antenna spire
begins to descend before any movement occurs in the exterior walls
(suggesting the Tower’s collapse begins with the destruction of
what supports the antenna: the building’s fireproof core columns)

How could the debris crush 96 steel and concrete floors
while surging earthward at the speed of gravity?
Each floor shattered before the debris above it made contact
i.e., the debris never collided with any floors.

Most of the jet fuel was gone in the initial fire ball.
Black smoke = oxygen starved fires suffocating.
Jet fuel cannot melt steel or iron—
molten steel needs 2750°F to melt.

1,434 peopled murdered

Over a hundred fell or jumped to their obliteration

The first departure occurred 4 minutes after the first plane hit, from the 149th window of the 93rd floor on the north face of the building. The “cascade” began 7 minutes later, with 13 falls in 2 minutes.

People hugging or holding hands as they fell together.

Did Eddie Torres jump?

Terminal velocity 120 MPH, up to 200 MPH if the person fell with the body straight

Karen Juday identified by her husband in a photograph wearing the familiar bandana she always put on at work, standing in a window frame, holding on, with flames behind her.

Edna Citron seen waving from a deep gash in the north tower, smoke and flames behind her.

“I think most of the ‘jumpers’ actually lost their grip while gasping for air and were eventually burned out of the building by all the searing smoke, burning up their hands, burning up their backs.”

“It was raining bodies. They were jumping now, one, two, three, four, smashing like eggs on the ground.”

Man in a white waiter’s jacket, black pants, black high-tops, photographed by Richard Drew, frozen in a head-first dive, came to be known as The Falling Man.

Norberto Hernandez?

Jonathan Briley?

“Little people falling like fairies.”

“Some tried parachuting until the force generated by the fall ripped the drapes, the tablecloth, the desperately-gathered fabric, from their hands.”

“They were like big ketchup stains with clothing on top.”

*

21,300 windows
300,000 square feet of glass
100,000 tons of structured steel
2,500,000,000 square feet of gypsum
3 acres of marble
212,000 cubic feet of concrete become

horror dumps of pulverized debris,
molten metal flowing down into the rubble piles,
large salmon-yellow pools of molten metal in the post-collapse basement—
the end products of a radio-computer-initiated firing from Building 7
 using super-thermite matches?

Unspent aluminothermic explosives and matching residues
 were found in the Tower’s dust

 Karen Juday’s jawbone

along with Adolf Rumsfeld’s turned-off cell phone.


Two gifts in the trees you were thinking
mood ring, spoon ring, kite string, winter boot
A place to put everything
the branch shook


Begin message:

From: S

Subject: I go off to trees the skylight only leads the vagrants to me under my skin the kernels of variety the toes of sickles or treats this is the room they took us to the varieties of violet the symptoms of bloat they would hold us here a vision of his face held here these four held here these troubles held here these volitions of cork my family

Date: July 31 6:42:25 AM MST

To: L

The skylight leads the vagrants to me under my skin the kernels of sediment the toes of sickles or treats this is the room they took us to the varieties of violet the symptoms of bloat volitions of cork I go off to trees

Whenever I see something, I have to think about its name. I have to think, “There is a blue bird with a blue head.” I have to think, “Two painted metal doors each with one pane of glass.” I have to do this. I have to think, “Chrissie is staring like her eyes hurt. She is at the desk closest to the wall. I cannot see her hands. Her socks are folded, white.”

In real life, I never do anything. I let things happen. I watch. On television there is a commercial for a psychic. A live rabbit twitches near a push-button phone. I close the cabinet doors over the screen.

I mostly do what anyone I like tells me. I don’t know how to discover fate. I see a phrase, “glancing blows.” It’s in a description of a revolution in a textbook, and I have to make a note. I have to say it to myself ten times before I sleep. “Glancing blows.” It is an expression. It is perfect. I gather it up.

Do you see who spits into your eyes? Their hollow smiles
 Hang with sour faces on the wind
Wolf-howl on the alter, their leaning heads, night-effect—
 Odilon! I dream of you! Returning from Tahiti I strangle you
 I wrestle you from my skull a talisman

I am leaving Europe
  Europe! Stinking with carcasses and trades I am slave to
your rooms, your lamplight, the mille-fleur flat silk of wall
I cannot leave you! I am drunk
I am shot in the heart
I am Baudelaire
Rimbaud
 I am Odilon
 Zip myself into the flower-suit blow smoke into the sky

In 864, the Council of Worms decreed that some bees which
had killed a man by stinging, should be suffocated in their hives

Sentence pronounced condemning a pig
to be hanged and strangled for infanticide committed on
the fee-farm of Clermont-lez-Montcornet

Fined 18 francs for negligence, because
the child was their fosterling
minutest details of the proceedings, ending with
execution of the pig

In the year 1565 the people in the town of Arles in Provence indicted
some grasshoppers
for injury done the fruits of the field

Competency as witnesses

As not to know the nature and quality of the act

At Falaise, in 1386, a sow was sentenced by the commune
to be mangled in the face and maimed in the forelegs
It had torn the face and arms of a child
a kind of iron cage or pillory set up in the marketplace
tormented by flies

A cock finds a precious stone in a dunghill
He leaves the jewel in the dunghill:

“no thynge have I to do with thē”

Reported to have laid eggs
a chicken passing for a rooster
Laid an egg and was prosecuted by law
But contended that the laying of the egg
in this particular case
had been entirely unpremeditated and involuntary

The cock is a fool for the stone is wisdom

The cock was condemned and was burned at the stake

In 1456 two pigs were thus punished at Oppenheim on the Rhine
for killing a child
And bestrode his body like a fretful mother cow

The church had the right, by its anathema
to compel the insects to stop ravaging but also
that the insects had the legal right to live

since his clients had been created, they
were justified in eating what was necessary for their welfare

Until finally, as a sort of compromise,
the authorities set apart a plot of ground outside the village

for the sole use and benefit of the weevils in perpetuity

Against the noxious host, which creeping secretly in the earth
Allegation, replication, and judgment in the process against
field-mice
at Stelvio in 1519
And wantonly destroyed the barley of that province

to quit the aforesaid fields and withdraw to the place assigned them

But also all cattle after their kind

Letters patent, by which
Philip the Bold, Duke of Burgundy, on Sept. 12, 1379
pardoned two herds of swine

The peasants of the Electorate of Mayence brought a complaint
against some Spanish flies
appointed attorneys
lest they should remain defenseless:

Gentlemen, inasmuch as you have chosen me to defend these little beasts
Where this element is wanting, there is no culpability

By being read officially before the hills of the termites
the said summons had been duly issued

That they should seek their food
in wild and wooded places and cease
from ravaging cultivated grounds

Five copies of same posted each on a tree in the five forests of the territory

than they all came out
Iniquitous

Some rats were brought to trial before the bishop’s vicar
He argued that
Made his reputation as counsel for some rats
Of serving a writ of ejectment on rats

for having eaten and wantonly destroyed some barley crops in that district

The note expresses an interest in their welfare, but asks them to leave

Messrs. Rats & Co.,
In regard to your winter quarters
Seeing as you have pitched your winter quarters
As a patch of waste-ground, on your own land

Their eyes shine and flash in the dark

Again in 1541, a cloud of locusts fell on Lombardy
The People versus Locusts
As legal persons
who spare neither corn nor vines

Having buried in the earth two pigs, which had torn a little child

Or if a horse kick a keeper and kill him

That the bull had met with its deserts
and had been justly put to death
Buried up to his neck
And to have his head plowed off with a new plow

To nail the dead hawk to his barn-door

A man named Gilles Garnier, who ran on all fours in the forest
Where is he? Why doesn’t he move? Is he dead?

Buried in a hole with the filthy straw of the cage

We read of a he-goat being exiled to Siberia

Whether the object of it should be retributive or preventive?

In the year 1565 at Montpellier a man and a mule
were burnt alive for this offence

For the barren tree, cumberer of the orchard
As a condemnation and punishment of the tree
for its delinquencies

A shuddering of fear may have run through all the leaves of the tree

So far as his own person is concerned
So far as

A monkey often takes delight in doing what is wrong
When a dog does wrong, he knows that he is doing wrong

And then only whistle, to make him return

To make him return for the execution

Two wolves in brogans hanging on the gallows
As accomplices

He that will bite must expects be bitten

In 1394 a pig was hanged at Mortaigne

In 1457 at Lavegny, a sow and her litter were charged with
having partially devoured a child
The sow condemned to death but her piglets
released because of their tender age

Because their mother had set them a bad example

Willing to bear witness the mare in word and deed and
in all her habits of life
a most honest creature

Condemning a sow with a black snout
to be hanged for her cruelty and ferocity in murdering a girl of four months,
March 27, 1567, Senlis

But will not have the slightest effect in preventing other pigs?

The sow was found guilty and sentenced to death by hanging

The dog is found guilty and sentenced to the gallows

Hoping thereby to find some loophole
To what extent the will of the accused was

And then only whistle, to make him return

Some kind of circular or other closed running course is needed; a course can be improvised by marking it with chairs, lawn ornament deer, homemade spears, samovars, discarded tires, or other obstacles, or even with the shirts of inactive players. The runners are stationed at equal distances around the course, each with his own starting line. There is, owing perhaps to the general absence of a sound eschatological vision on the part of the players, no finish line. Jack aims himself, legs pumping machine-like, toward something he cannot see, but that fact in no way diminishes his determination. Failure has long hounded him, worked its way into the smallest corners of his life. He’ll drop a dish, cut himself zipping his jacket, climax too soon, sign his name where he should have printed it. Barely noticeable misses and mistakes, yet noticeable to him; he keeps track, he knows the cumulative score. During idle moments in line for coffee or in the shower, he closes his eyes to see a long list of checkmarks in bold, black ink scroll by. Demerits they were called in high school. Merit minus. Always less than. The whistle blows and all begin running at once, and each runner tries to overtake and tag the runner in front of him, while also avoiding being tagged from behind. Jack finds himself, then, twixt. Catching up yet almost caught. Pivoting to his left at one of the deer, to his right to skip past the lawn chair, its aluminum frame fluorescent in the sunlight, his breath comes in bursts. Jack lunges at the player who has stumbled just in front of him. Of course, he stumbles too, tripping over her legs, his outstretched arm skidding into the turf. Just behind him another runner brushes his shoulder, “Tagged!” The game continues, round and round the course, until only one player remains. One of the deer looks directly at Jack, or at least that’s how Jack sees it. Jack bears down and squarely meets the reproving gaze of the durable polyresin replica. Buoyant voices chatter away around him. The sun inhales and in doing so swells larger on his brow alone.

You are trying to remember how
it happened      You are trying to
remember these events in a sensible
order      The narrator you think met
the old woman on a train
She had been to war or
at least you think you recall
reading that she said she had
The story started on the train
The narrator in this case was
mostly incidental      The narrator in this
case was made to listen patiently
and account for       The woman’s tale
you recall was too strange to
be told straight      You needed to
hear it from a distance       From
another mouth or source      The narrator
met the woman on a train
She had been to war      The
story was about the woman and
her experiences at war or more
precisely in it as a victim
and a corpse and someone who
was marched straight to and through
the brink of death—who gazed
deep into death’s vile and wintry
irises—before saving the crowd
of innocent people she had been
marching with       They were on the
side of the road      You remember
this detail      They were on a
dusty black road being marched to
death and you know this because
the narrator is delivering this information
within a story via another story—
a story told by the old
woman who may or may not
have existed whom he may or
may not have met on a
train who may or may not
but most likely was a part
of the war       She was not
a hero       She must have been
a hero you think for having
protected all of those people for
sacrificing her own soul her own
hands her own fragile sense of
self and yet there are no
heroes here       Not the patient
narrator       Not you for trying to
remember       Not even the woman who
told the story for war knows
no heroes and makes a fool
of every witness which—right now—
through memory—is both you and
this incidental narrator and whomever you
are telling the story to      You
are trying to remember how it
happened       There was a woman on
a train       This woman told a
story not to you but you
read the story that she told
from the narrator’s point of view
and now you know it       How
she abandoned her own consciousness to
swap bodies with the officer      She
parted with her own old heart
She left her mind behind      She
became a monster and a master
and through this brave and magical
transformation was able to save a
small population of souls or so
she said that day to the
one you know as her train mate

His body wasn’t terribly abused.

More like a copy of a used book
bought online with very minimal

marginalia scrawled in pencil

by its previous owner who lost
interest after the first few pages—

something one can easily erase.

A bee died on the carpet. A bee died
and I vacuumed him up, a whole body gone.
Though it’s just an apparatus, a plastic wand,
it’s a privilege for the sucker to suck.

On the hardwood floor, there’s a wink
you’re not supposed to notice; there’s a wink
that shouldn’t even be there. A button
not doing its job, a button cut from a cuff.

Or it’s a button lost from an open blouse.
The wink’s not doing its job; its job is to keep
secret things closed. When it fails there’s a flaw
in the eye; a wing and a buzz, a gap in discretion.

When discretion opens, a lily unlocks its jaw,
the Venus catches a fly. The green lip sucks it up.
Down the plush stairs, I scour every step’s brim
and draw out the dirt. I polish the floor of scum

but in the gut’s where I gnaw, where the bee body
molders and the button lives for years.
You might as well leave it in the rug. The pin’s
the pincushion’s pleasure; let it settle in.

There in the field:
the olives.
·

Warm yourself they say no leave us to our pits
·

& the sky she’s trying to slug herself

into the orchard

with her beard of bright crumbs

·

There in the delta:

the mallards.
·

It’s the end of a few gods there’s washing of flanks
·

Your breath wools.
·

Your breath wools.
·

We find ourselves guilty of our pits
·

& now the family turns south

the warbirds

their long feathers that dig out
the furrows

& trail the dismay

Expect death. In every line,
Death is a metaphor that stands
For nothing, represents itself,
No goods for sale. It enters
Whether or not your house
Is dirty. Whether or not
You are clean, you arrive late
Because you don’t believe
Her when, sobbing as usual,
She calls to say if you don’t stop
Your brother, she will kill him
This time. Why rush? By now,
You think she likes it, his hands
Slapping her seven shades of red.
Besides, your brother is much
Bigger than you—once you tried
Pulling him off the woman he loves
And lost a tooth. Expect to lose
Again as you stand for nothing
Over his body, witness or
Reporter, murderer or kin.

*

releasing mouth-sounds
confronted with breath so closely
god has wonderful dreams
they ventriloquise – what
I don’t know
other, more gods
“the whole is familiar with itself”
a place for nervous tongues to rest
holes, outhole
and you can’t find anything, after
I dare not think it out
to conclusion

Spring obliges
my imagination
of return

then
it annihilates it

What is death
but reason
in flawless submission
to itself

No
not reason

something stonier

No, subtle sub-
stance does not tend to settle—

A
rest to wrest image & eye, mage
of the stage of the stage of reason.

Cast origin, joker—

A law allows a lawless All
to shame measure & mentation.

Never & again, the given.
Paren-
Thesis of ru(i)ne—

of poorest
Rest our power—

Violence seeks to escape the Law, yet
it is an Imposition of the Law.

Each to each, touch
unchooses.
Rachet &
rachet of real time.

Earth’s reverse spin, love loveless but
birdlike.

Real inside the spyglass:
a single egret, sin-glow, regret.

Nature in its own Chase
—the alter of the altar of

No offering, the fairest
Rest of fear.

we are the field, we are selfsame, we are batched so small
 radio-eyed, othered, lost out
shame I missed this generation, cut me, it growls on a good system
 that song does

still want that dark strobe smoke
ab chic acrid square in the wall

what a goose bumper heart heard it and got shutters

  the singing kind of reminds me of
  has choir of women a bit like in love or winter water song with the man that
 despises it and a sentence hi speaking my brain sun hadn’t broken yet, pure class all
analogue driving acid lines  there’s the o

we’re the riffling of dusk and the equation of dusk, its whereabouts
we’re a weathervane of faith/unfaith/faith

 mixed-up and gone old
and autre don’t give me a shortcut thing
like brick, war and battery by the stack
 see our blood—the snow as rose-pink or the carpet black

When the zero in the parking lot
is the grocer tossing
human hands into the dumpster
Vera touches lit
candles to her throat but instead of birds
Nonny appears

drops a pig at Vera’s feet
slinks off into the cave Gilded
Squalor where Vera finds her days
later rumming by the fire
Acts ensue deliberate and fierce
In the morning

the grocer arrives with a crazed
look on his face
Beside him his son is choking on a bone
Vera massages the candles
over his throat, clearing it
The grocer flees

as Nonny acts on the boy
his gorgeous youth, and so it goes
Suke or Sacha, it mattered once
the arbor life turned
inside out by holy dolls
holy moths

flickering windows at the Adlon
Hotel where the day’s
shape does not match
Vera’s particular arrangement
of candles greeting hoppers
pushing stainless

trolleys filled with bowls
of pork, concealer to hide the scars
that mark the skin a rib came through
sugar orbs and other
charms she stuffs in her mouth
till the choking cough

reveals the human warmth it takes
to exchange amber for injury
incurred when citrus
is less in the room than her
and the two halves of the halved
pig flanking

her shoulders like wings, white disease
blossoming in her cheeks
like daisies erupting in reverse
tight knobs she lacerates to ease
the strain, arms thrashing
involuntarily against

the difficulty of choosing what to bless
as if conditions could be
changed if only impulse could
keep her safe from carnation
skin events, dark fruits
throats cannot reject

SIXTH WORLD TRAVELLER
I lay still as long as I could till my back hurt. I lay still willing the bench to turn into giant, squishy ears. Then I sneaked to the window. There, by sharp moonlight, I saw a deserted junkyard. Ext. Junkyard – Night. An environment where pins could be shortchanged for coins. Ten year old rickshaws and twenty seven year old cars embellished the world. Engines. Coke bottle caps. Canisters. Cabinets. Computer parts. Extra clothing. Catfood. In the foreground, a Maruti 800, 2003 model

Frame rusted, windows smashed. Cats crawling all over the car and

Inside, behind the windshield, two women holding hands. The breeze brought in a strong whiff of engine oil & grease & rotting things, and I staggered backwards [pricked by sudden conscience].

These immortal lovers needed a chronicler, I thought. These important lovers needed a raconteur, I thought. And here I was, still just learning to make chalk marks

On the blackboard. I almost walked out in the moonlight and declared myself to the lovers, almost pleaded for forgiveness. But something held me back. Later, ribbons appeared at my feet securing them in place. So this time it wasn’t that.

FOURTH WORLD TRAVELLER
At the beginning there was, love.

SIXTH WORLD TRAVELLER
I heard much, much later that Sameshape & Othershape stayed together till riceflakes fell off their eyes. At the time, of course

My chauffeur
and my bodyguard were trading puns

like a couple of zombies.
And for a second

I forgot that doors have door handles
and walls exist for a reason.

Tiger stirred a mill of noon prayers.

The way you got of doing
sugar better stop that.

Because I have called
and you refused.

I ain't gonna tell nobody
the way you do.

I learn the word missive only
after impersonating
a stranger. If I move around
inside a voice. If
I put both hands cleanly
through an arm-hole.
Who is anyone if not usually
incorrect? Which is
to say I reject the idea
of unmovable lines.

This is a hill.
The jaundiced face of a friend,
and the car smells of Lysol.
This is a hill.
The earth is spreading.
Fault blocks rise.
Slow orogeny.
Every day you can make
a funeral of yourself.
You can be held as earth.

In the slang and the slur
The call-me-tomorrow
You call me a name—

I haven’t heard it
Since the wars started

Hollow your voice
Holler in the shower

Fingers train pressing
Strings trigger blood
Lips whiskey licked
Lipstick traces glimmer
Dead epigones in sling

Your ears ring since no
One can get in the way
Of countdowns to quiet

And the lights come on

Dust rises into inhales
Repeats rise into song

One of the four Royal Stars is watching over me. Yeah, I’m blessed in these times of nervous weather. The leaves chill in a bundle then scatter like police, off to the next doorstep. They don’t step, they don’t faze me. These jeans could hold three men. But it’s just one of me, girl. Only Son. Only Sound. Only Seer. All this green to gold to red to orange is just theater. I’m the Real. Keep your eyes on the Navigator of Snow and Infinite Gray. I rock these boots all year. What a storm got to do with me? Who knows the number of strolls to heaven? Not that I’m thinking on it. The Heavens know my real name.  But you can call me Q. Quicker than Q. But, anyway.  Certain things a man keeps to himself. Jesus wept. So I don’t. The past is for people who like to play things over and over. Me, I’m on to the next song. Listen to my own Head Symphony, to the Royal Stars. The colors, they thrill me, they fuel these legs.

Hi Gregory,

When asked what really trips his trigger, Mike West said that’s there just something about a man in a well-tailored crisp new suit that really gets him hot. And it also feeds into a full-on job interview fantasy. Exploring this new type of scene, we put Benjamin Bradley in a really handsome suit and tie and it fit him perfectly. Mike and Benjamin start out with a normal everyday job interview and it soon gets way out of hand. Watching the two of them going at it with the suits and slowly stripping out of them, you can definitely see how someone could develop an interest in them. This video is so intense, you’ll start hanging out around the business district on your lunch breaks.

When William Penn was convinced of the principles of Friends and became a frequent attendant at their meetings, he did not immediately relinquish his gay apparel. It is even said that he wore a sword as was then customary among men of rank and fashion. Being one day in company with George Fox, he asked his advice concerning it, saying that he might perhaps appear singular among Friends but his sword had once been the means of saving his life without injuring his antagonist and moreover that Christ has said, “he that hath no sword, let him sell his garment and buy one.” George Fox answered, “I advise thee to wear it as long as thou canst.” Not long after this, they met again when William had no sword and George said to him, “William, where is thy sword?” “Oh,” said he, “I have taken thy advice. I wore it as long as I could.”

Bared all, or barred all
Depending on depth.

Sky a rerun of
yesterday's mixed sky.

But these days I take
what I can get, if

the getting was good.
Like a pure mirror

periodically
draped, could read/could not

read, would reveal/would
not, leaving with We're

a lot alike, meaning: O love, a love
I loved, and the lot I liked.

Poetic communion, something like that, while everyone else is taking care of
business, at 2:49 pm my day has already been longer than most people have been
alive. Whatever we’re trading would be fine enough if I could just stop crying long
enough to say I’ve had enough of this constant leaving. It is not like I haven’t proven
I am chronically alone. There’s nothing particularly special about that. All these
adjectives you keep telling me I use too often, as if I didn’t already understand how
clearly my vocabulary is so impoverished. You’re smarter than me I suppose. We are
not the science of money, architecture of an emotional life, or balance of
sensibilities. We are something simpler. At least that’s what I’ve been told. For more
accuracy I look at my daughter’s drawing on the desk, which she has titled “A
butterfly in 100 blades of grass.” That’s action on the calendar. A glass of milk. A
sedative. Even she knows well the productive use of longing.

I love a map for its inaccuracies,
a certain pearl for its certain pearl-ness.
I wouldn’t hurt a fly, but I’d kill one,

a way of life that keeps me asleep nights,
as if adrift in a niche of big oil.
Symmetry is more or less more

and less bunk—another hole, another
doily; the phrase “Be that as it may”;
the fucking Milky Way by any other name . . .

A touch horrific is the green with which
the ground will tear the winter. I write this
as a florist muscles daisies into place.

I saw a figure from a distance and thought it was me. I drank from the opposite side of a glass. If you can’t describe how you feel to yourself, you can’t be sure what you’re feeling, or that you feel at all. Consciousness as unreliable narrator. I spoke with conviction; my friend called it “trolling.” The self is a play that you watch from the audience – you affect it, but you can’t control it.

*

Men say infuriating things, and the fury has nowhere to go. The fury becomes ingrown. Your personality is a choice, so why are you half little-girl and unlike yourself? You don’t change, exactly, but the wave amplifies. The world is your ulcer. Love turns blood-brown. Be careful what you say, in that it tells you what you think.

Students say Say-in
when they read Paradise Lost
White girls from Catholic schools
forever long to be cool

The Lord of Darkness needs a hard T
whichever way he flies
I long to meet that blank verse
but his daughter, Deborah,
forced scribe, gets in my way

He turned her out & the lame sister too
for his third wife, Happiness
at last, after the divorce tracts
two wives in the blood-soaked
childbed & Civil War, failures

Blind Milton, or Mil-in, worked
his great poem in a green suit
and sword, leg hooked over a chair
made his daughters milk him
in ten languages, they sold
some of his books

Milton’s grand ambivalence
gets in my way, my dreams
long for no tyrant on a cloud-ship

I want the plastic red apple
despite everything
in this lower world

1

Would you like the world
to end now

(in your lifetime)

so you don't miss
anything?

Would you like the world
to go on

so that someone
later

might feel as
you once did?

Did you feel anxious
when alone?

Did you feel restless
at parties?

2

If clear yellow petals
are enough

like sails,
I'll be well

away.

I'll be on my way
to this

late summer dusk

The pluperfect forms of summer
are wrong—slits of light like wheat.
It is the world that doesn’t speak,
the throat in its chambers
that drones for us. And constellations?
They are smaller flowers that burn
their way into the refrain above me.
My grandchildren, fragrant
with the smoke of their gardens,
speak for me, stand next to me
as I receive this message.
A hall is not methodical,
it is a dark thread.
The stars are those remoter forms
whose eyes are green and pink—
I am unable to see them.
To be a boy again in Switzerland.

if you stand
still long enough,
all the animals
will come to you:

a wakefulness
inside architecture:

ductile perineum:

plenary pulpit:

one vagrant order:
unshepherding:

to trace each
raphe, fingered
sthenosphere:

birds fly through:

it could be, the
poor move around
inside our hearts

like sleepwalkers:
weld or suture:

if Earth enough:

Abide with me,
ludic abreaction:

The bike shop owner’s wife’s bike
was the palest blue, a blue that
infringed upon white, that walked
the finest line beside it, and she
straddled this at the crosswalk,
talking into the wind at me,
with a flap of her silk scarf blowing
up into her face.

*

Teapot’s metal lid vibrates slightly
as I move across the room with it.
Like an earthquake scene from some film
where the camera moves in close
to take a good look at something.
Something that is beginning to vibrate.

I am examining a small crumb on the table.
A crumb so small I would never have noticed it
had not this fly come along to walk all around it,
to regurgitate on and before it,
to compulsively wash his hands busily beside it.

When abruptly teapot’s lid is popped
there comes an unsheathing sound
like that of a sword pulled from its scabbard.

When teapot’s lid is popped back down
teapot coughs a single steam ring
from its spout that lifts
beautifully, widening as it rises.

*

The bike shop owner’s wife talked
into the wind (I watched her feed
some day-old oolong to the shop plants once—
it somehow seemed obscene to me)
with a flap of her silk scarf snapping
her mouth as she spoke.

The garden turned cold with our garb
Its long lovely lines
Simple words fashion a bra, a scarf
The sequence of huts
“In which they bury their fruit trees in winter”
Someone wears it, thick like a proverb
A tumbler of black wine
Tipped out and retaining its shape
That was my freak code, “the frosts
So bitter at the mouth”

THE GULL

She’s stuck on her legs, sticking to her legs, and ducked down is how she carries her head, tucked into her feathers, turns her beak, a kind of needle, toware the wind. Thus compressed she sits firmly fixed in herself in the snow, seems to know no irritation except for the wind, no goal beyond the direction of her beak.
Then she stretches, cranes her neck and spreads her wings into a gull in flight, follows her beak, leaves behind a cry and small lozenge traces in the snow.
SNOW

Seen from outside, that is, from inside the house, its flurries correspond to the random drift of thoughts in their scatter and clumping, when they haven’t yet enough weight to fall as words, steadily.
Nothing obliges our perception, as long as the snow hasn’t taken it over, to guess in its gestures and blurrings already a kind of narration.
Only despair meets it perhaps halfways as it makes me empathize with its drifts and search the drifts for empathy in turn.
No sooner outside in the snow, however, than all distinctions blur in favor of the pleasure and fury of its piling on curbs, blowing over crossroads, making the city into its desert.
At the same time it penetrates and turns storyteller, settles on the cornices of facades, whirls around streetcars, muffling both their silences and their roar, in a city become foreign to me.
At first suddenly, then more slowly and quietly coming to terms with it, I soon walk as a Russian might on narrow paths, around heaps, along snowed-in vehicles.
Not even the removal crews that shovel it onto carts, scrape if off the asphalt, are equal to its power; it turns them too into quotations.
Which, by the way, they have been all along, displaced to foreign parts from foreign parts or homeless and down at the heel, at best put into fluorescent orange jackets.
In the end, it turns the streets into mud, and I hear the madness no longer the snow’s, the howl of motors and wheels spinning, revving.
THE ASHTREE

Dispenses with reasons for preserving itself through its way of appearing.
Hung with ash-brown wings, its fruit, until spring.
Then from soot-rusty buds sprouts blossoms on threads, without leaves.
In bunches, before the leaves, before those could protect them, unpaired, pinnate.
Or now lies sawed into limbs, has made way for its loss.

Begin message:

From: S

Subject: What plane of high coral and trash would we sing across the oceans riled with virgins and big white boats?

Date: December 14 5:46:36 PM MST

To: L

Dribbling down his face  dribbling in buttons in shovels and redwings why would you know the grasses at Cedar Point or the blue farms at Mayfield Cemetery so hidden with hazards and play?

A crisis current

Begin message:

From: L

Subject: A crisis current a cunning zip of trash the end of lists I have them all in a basket and pour them into the stream to be taken to the end of the field where I fall into a ditch a courtesy sent a loud reminder of solar events

Date: December 27 9:25:43 AM MST

To: S

The basket’s full
no room
to sound alarm
the basket’s
poured
taken and broke
the louder
they yell

 
the events
so big
they explode
the court
the faker
the trash
the trifling
of boys

as you incarnate relations, I,
a mere corpse,
	was dumped in the parquet, all
evacuate of value therefore
	sodden with the negative fact, a
	  form of realia lacking place within
        the lifeworld that fits
          on the back of your hand, your
	touchscreen the simple syntagms that
inverted meet your glaze.

	exe exe exe, it
Comes from latin for skulls, you are
	my only sunshine.

River’s broken pavilion, furtive campaign of dirty water,
water displaced by greedy air, I say, coveting the surge
of ghosts, garbage with a thousand faces, I repeat, as if observed
by no one, a thousand faces downriver, rubber tires forming a false
bank, plastic bottles carried along, a thread traversing the gush,
river of things, where was it going, one language sets you apart, another draws you in,
water plunged into total contradiction, arcane water postulated
as a state of mind, there being so many disguises, a thousand faces are a single face,
my brother arrives and tries on the face of evil, I refuse, the first effigy
broken, I saw only shapes, not the sediment they sometimes came to rest in,
tell me, I ask again, was there grass in the place where shadows grew,
grass in the grotto, thistle in the mouth, the one I bite, where
do the sentences stunted by their own beauty begin, my brother spoke a few,
sea’s limpid filament between the eyes, watching the first day,
defunct lamp, object simply snuffed out, bare bulb
in the cloudless sky, naïve brother, pessimistic from lack of cunning,
turn your luck around, tell me your story, fortunate maps of a city block,
a different cobblestone for each indecisive foot, catchphrase of an ubiquitous
childhood, tell it like you believe it, its inverted pathway breeds
a delicate garden, almost a song, paradise written not lost, turning inward,
brother enemy, the idol is the grass, or else is joy, singing and telling lies,
on that borderline where the voice waters as soon as the facts
slip in, the asker as corrupt as the giver, corrupt in diminishment
or abundance, it’s all one then, abusing the image of those depths,
the river’s thousand faces resume their sequel, I bite back what I know, facts
are your wall are my wheel are your stream are my street, house of a different dust,
a different stanza, channeled, dwindling ditch, metal scraping
skin, corrupted rust, a moment of transcendent sepia,
self-suffused, brother embeds, intuits my formula of rivers made to order,
pavilions of wind or breeze sifted by cloth, invents a truth
that rings, cynically taking the form of the noise heard just before silence,
hearing’s paradox, plain truth, tempers its relative water
from one end to the other, a nobody by trade, brother would have to pass
from retreating consciousness into action, crisply,
cross through if not that space of stubborn prosody, then at least
the band of light that occurs and the world within it,
even if I lie and say that the challenge disappears as soon as
this cycle of hell winds down, my leisure hours degenerate
into efficiency, a single face with a thousand faces, judge of mine,
judge of yours, sentencing me to paraphrase, antecedents of the most austere faith,
let there be litany, lethargy circling, straitening at least the circumstance
of this unproblematic identity, water’s water, it was my idea
and I felt it before I thought it.

o

to reinvent this mode of speaking. or to construct a new language. here on the wrong side we dance posed to death. we the corpse they won’t pronounce dead. they bury under dead oak. make no graves. you’d think I’m made of this. of condescension culled from responsibility. what a series of movements restates: to be honest I’m not where we began. halfway to morphology, underwater of principles to set us in motion all. livid in a negativity—I’m life to supplant loathing with a better kind of noise. bastardize my bubble.

o

said won’t forget and did. only recall chased by helicopters—waking—is that a helicopter outside. of course a head was found in the dump. they all went to breakfast and came back in a great burst of light. give sustaining—who’s an angel? vinegar. a people learned to live from all people. named for mounds of things. my hand will only make long curved lines—a scallop shell, a wine glass, a mason jar. we were all so angry. so full to be lucky.

o

men or church towers make the fourth. we love a war zone. on the 13th, we talk windows. fever dream to healthcare on the worst beach—I hallucinated ancestors. sleeping through the 4th from a gap in rocks and water because the planets. a garden is not of this earth. it incites conversation, makes rows. not for gates—the garden’s permission the made thing. conversant as the fences. our broken window a conversation. in my dream, I fell from the bridge because the bridge can’t be walked. for days now we have stood on the bridges. on the news above my roof we break more than we have actually built. yes, the man was the child. we expect him. in the hills a home is built from underground and in the heart a cluster buries us. a minor heart our big tombs. in two years from the 10th I didn’t sleep. our airspace now a bright and hurt awake.

o

red or green or black or black. the division in reading what we did. a throat cut. the poor live in the long hallway. tied on top the train to the hospital. white hallway, blue carpet. live in trash and steel. I can’t stop feeding. hospital you have to come in—I can’t—the family feeds. green is not enough no time to live on. we pile soil on top of soil there is no soil. window the throat cut. go home. go home. no home.

As with headshift the whole gamut of imaginary delights
and trills blooms digital in epiphany, and little data bits
leak into the hearts of domain names like upset bins
into streets. There is so much garbage in the veins of cables
and continuing in the nightmare of anonymous sender
who has moved the axis of dance across the SPAM filter.
The predatory packets attack unknown like echovirus.
Protocols for robots flash through the innards of
the silicon forest and noise, noise, noise appears in
exercise clothes ready to sweat through the login
of the system. And the rubbish runneth over into phones.

The drivel slops over containment and scatters into lives
that remark on it or use it the next conversation sculpture.
The faces of Lego people grow angrier with each successive
rollout. Particles of thought float like silica dust at
the glass plant as they wander through the onion router—
information chromatography that trickles down the
nodes: buzzcoil, CodeGnome, Goobchop, CumChucker,
hamcave, smokemeakipper, Rubberella. They assemble
to proxify, to hide from authenticator, to push across the
platforms, to spike in traffic the great murmur on the Deep Web
where spies and counterspies linger amid the spillage.

Watch the bouncing interface through the relays and you will
dump encrypted onto the secret village heap of screens. There you
can find your hidden service: pedophilia management or
assassination market. The exit sniffers cannot undo
as you climb through wobbly goblin, loosemoose,
hiddeninthemohawk, teflongargoyle, bobothewonderpuppy
to deliver your scrap of payload, to SPAM for commodity or
cause, to post repugnance in the pastebin for everyone to gawk at.
Go ahead and call in that prank SWAT raid. You are strolling
down the boulevard and everyone has blinders on.
Go ahead and tell us now what you wouldn’t do.

This is the rendezvous for wastrels who dare not complain
about the train of debris. They set in motion a confusion
along No Name Road. Those committed to stirring the sludge
of the dregs have a license to spook. Any number of
contaminants can shake the tectonics of electronic commerce.
Whoosh and the elements of purchase scurry away into the
unseen. Coax them on out now like a monkey with a bitcoin.
Let them eat junk traffic in the middle of the day when
the hands on the till are lazing through another transaction.
Send out the refuse anonymous as prayer. The mental arena
has moved to the network; the mind of the browser has changed.

I tore the page

I tore up the page

or personalities become dead

selves

your eyes are made of cash and

going broke—your money, money eyes—

eyes was I,

I was eye—

drill

baby drill

drill

baby drill

borrowed three days from August

dawn breaking earth breathing

the TV

says the TV:

farmers are farmers:

corporations eat them:

“clean coal”

ate

my face

Property is death: they had a body

crammed in a mailbox and it was just

a blue suit with bones sticking out:

I tore the page

I tore up the page

Non-terrestrial window of illuminated dust, otherwise suspected of being prayer,
a motion mistaken technologically as retrievable
words,

misshapen, its foreign language arrives open syllable, an arresting rotunda in full
sunlight, herd of glimpses in the glass magnitude that meaning
shatters

now it is later by hours—forrestrial hours of who, what, where—each clandestine
discovery dirtying the opening which will not be fitted to any
frame,

particles of toxins floating their feather-ish allowance of shifting hues that blur
from one to the next afternoon indistinguishable between then and a
man

in his cowboy hat says it’s vomit, though most people step into
anyway, as opposed to ‘into it anyway’, and go on with
language,

hiding sometimes an entire night from its inquisitions, awakened in the citrus morning
to motes of floating trash, stray gutter jive, and its reciprocal
‘pollution,’

etymologically a desecration of the holy place with urine, feces—but online as
awareness endlessly renewable and too late for any crisis it could
subvert

with fine particles from the deep well of incidental, yet still lovingly chiseled details
spilling outward from a space where customers are
alternative

to everyone being wrong, to anyone ever actually being served, at the bank or ticket
counter or church where long-consonant divinities crooning dawn will mix with a
strain

of grinding metal, otherwise recognizable as the yes, that is my name, corroded faith,
the surface life of one woman so embrittled, her alloy finally
cracks,

spewing venal sins, hoards of saints, Midwest Monsanto corn crawling out from its
shriveled shape, sharp-taloned vulture-beaked future
projections

caged together as if they could be taught to warble in unison, yes, that is my
fingernail down the chalkboard, gramophone needle
scratch.

In canister  culverts  cavities
our words stay and fester
To renounce all, but all of what we do

As we jettison our bones
into the sea, into trenches, into
into the garbage the woman reached into

I get passionate about
the sky, noise, an elderly woman reaching
—gravity—That crazy need to eat

and a part of it coming and going
Make and destroy, the line-up, stacks
delivered and desire oblivious

All that detritus around the budding tree
What does it take to ‘accept the fact’
Damn, what do we leave, in the stream

Stripped in a strong wind,
dispensed with our reach within
—all that stuff to break our within

How can one not see that what goes in
the disposal, at your disposal,
reveals—“you must look things/in the belly”

The idea of a meal hangs itself on 3 or 4 label-less cans
upended onto branches, fire taking the entire hillside
a blackened Griffith Park, balloon rubber in pink and green
their ribbony strings sketching hieroglyphs on the forest floor.
Hidden from view, keep them hidden from view:
a red comb, red shoes, a bush of pretense.
Inside-out the trouser pockets hang tongues like thirsty dogs
an exposure of intimacy as if a body were in full view,

the missing thumbs in the cup handle, the missing dog in the brush full of hair.
the out-of-sight ones behind the stacked mattresses,
coiled fetal into the metal pipes into what’s been swallowed
out of what bottle or syringe out of what brain was it revealed
masterfully to organize the dirt in this particular way.

Friday night dustbin inventory:
Marco’s Italian Deli submarine
sandwich bag, interior wrapper
invoice for N A ENG 7E-IM PA,
debtor’s yellow Post-It: “your
blood money,” alma mater post-
card welcomes new President,
hopelessly torn underwear, foil
from Grandma’s “Homestyle”
(Peter Pan peanut butter) cookie,
LACSA Airlines luggage tags,
yellow Post-It reads: ARK 38,
one half Film Seminar calendar
bears note: “Dryer,” “Get TP”

Strewn with driftwood lapping gently she
strides in with her clothes on water
slapping her big thighs a big
unrecognizable rodent with
“maggots coming out of its butt”
tiny breakable freshwater mussels pink
plastic tampon case because there are
no shipworms, they say, and the water
is so cold, the dark bottom’s
an underwater museum, all shipwrecks,
all leavings perfectly preserved.
Hank builds a long, low mountain ridge,
decorates it with tiny mussels, “Mount Rushmore
before it was Mount Rushmore, when
it belonged to the Indians,” who cause
an avalanche and send the mountain tumbling
onto the white people, so they can’t have it. So
nobody has it. He has dug in vain for Indian
artifacts. The driftwood stays cluttered
at the edge unmoved by tides. The big
limpid eye of water floats above the shore
and can’t be seen all at once.

I washed your father’s pants in the kitchen sink.
That should have been enough to tell you.
I am still convinced there is no difference
between kneeling and falling if you don’t get up.

The head goes down in defeat, but lower in prayer,
and your sister tells me each visit that she has learned
of a new use for her hands.

I’ve seen this from you both: cartwheels through the field
at dawn, toes popping above the corn stalks like fleas
over the heads of lepers. Your scarecrow reminds me

of Jesus, his guilt confused for fear.
The sun doesn’t know; the fog lifts
everything in praise.

A sphinx moth visits the frangipani grove at night. This is why flowers stay open after the sun goes down. A sphinx moth is not a sphinx. The giant hawk moth is not a hawk. Neither is the hummingbird moth — a hawk or a hummingbird. The moths say pupation. Eclosion. In metamorphosis, they grow wings. Mouths. A clothes moth is not about buying clothes. It is about devouring cloth. Moths are insects and not mammals, after all. Moths may sport tawny fur or they may not. Moths may resemble lions or they may not. A moth may unfurl a long thin proboscis to drink nectar from an orchid or not. The bee hawk moth is neither a bee nor a hawk. The elephant hawk moth is neither an elephant nor a hawk. The tiger moth is not a tiger. A luna moth is neither a lunatic nor the moon although it is known as the moon moth.

Nocturnal, it will fly at night but not orbit the moon.

I wanted to finish it
But I died
To go on listening...

I wanted to finish
The ‘makeshift forest of any old leaves
Sheltering soldiers so beautiful to look at
They filled it with peace’

But I died
In the arms of the Brotherhood
In the arms of the past from which water
Was a bubble of laughter breaking in mouths
 filled with clay

A future as if
Dreams its dreams as if
Ghosts were radios in the trees
Delicious with fatigue

Where presence is only in the word
Funereal
In a double mirror

Something proffered in a vapor
You’ve come for—
The thought of coming

Between ink & blood
Venereal
On a pallet laden with limbs & leaves

Leaves its mark
Lush in a brief of dying
So beautiful in its carving

Its craving
In trickster mirror
Where words fly through their wings

Over bodies
Awaiting applause
In miasma’s eternal dominion

Clearing the trees, bones, debris
In order
To scrape the sky yet keep her reward

With eyes trained, petitioning
For sound limbs, a soft cushion
Percht to weep in frantic union

The Brotherhood cannot bear
The edifice of state
Wilting in the lap

Spilling secrets on the ground
Between the graves
Of unfailing idealism

With arms or without arms
With a cause or a saving grace
So beautiful
Their fragility their tendresse.

What cornflower
What word negotiates maps
The living

With smooth stones to suck upon
All you’ve dreamed of
In the caress of a horny hand

Infinite emotions the composition
Of the me of them among the trees
Unmoving...

We the mossy floor of love
In forests where no one is vulgar
Where nothing expresses us

Beyond death
Nor in life can you see touch
We dust of white frost on human faggots

C’est tout—
A card game under the stars
In panto

Death, the fucking copout
But we mean nothing by that
That wants no meaning

Permitted as I am
To complain my weakness with words
A radio is all the meaning you can talk back to

Its chatter & hum exits
These entrances to ghostly sidelines
Of a long-drawn-out procession in need of
 blood in need of commitment in need of youth
 that wants no meaning...

Just an image. A symbol. A screwy something
 waving in the breeze.

Over his covered body
But for his bloodied face
The boys’ palms were cupped to receive him;

He was playing at his family farm
When the air struck—
It was not thunder but a state of terror.

This is grace
But saves no one no thing
Only a will to power

Just an image
In a radiant afterlife
Sweet with desire that no one can fulfill

We pose
Our best to know we exist
To create a memory of ourselves

Condemned to the history we make
We dream with our feet on the ground
In a play of love & death in the lower case

But the poet was wrong—
There is only I
Where everything begins

Love a figment surging
Knows there’s not much else to say
Says everything’s already said

Over & over again does
One more yet unspoken phrase
Make a difference—

Do vampire priests...

Forgive me, for I am distracted
By world
Of ovens & mummies

Come up like breakfast
In a homeland I cannot remember
O absolute enemy

Closing itself off
In a mist of gas & dust
Clamoring for stars

Babies with stupid names
Dogs & cats amok
In parking lots of tears

This Godtalk. This sandbox
Where I lay dying
Among faces I cannot touch

Where’s no weight
Of anything real but what I
Can create in the me of them

Among the trees
A composition in moisture
Or even smoke...

Where I am a gesture inside you
Scratching at some kind of recognition
Reeking with radiance

In a pre-revolutionary dawn
In the humming wide open spaces
In vistas of insidious make-believe

All of it, along with the ants
At the burnt edge
Invisible amidst the silt of words.

‘What in the end is not vain?’
To dwell on beauty
Yet incapable of defining the perverse

The obscene thing it is
Teetering between life & death
Between nostalgia & violence

Rites of passage
On legs without bodies
Where in the congealing blood

Lies all thought
All revolt, all value.

Grey sky in particle matter
press starlight back into stars

but color in trinkets, blue
in the tarp we walk beneath

and listen to, breathing
between double-wide lanes.

The public bus brought me here.
A man with a bled eye searches

for stain-free t-shirts. I sift
through his cart alongside him

for a white size while in the galaxy
meteors drift across our backs. Bird

of light, pushing through fire
meet the earth in his slender hand

breaking change he returns
home, with something for dinner.

If the rain apologizes as
it falls for falling then we are kin.
I drag my grey noise
down the corridor
to my desk and I drag my grey
noise across the page.
A soft applause goes
up, a curtain call of rain
wetting the whistles
of the leaves into green laminate.
When I look up
I think of your chest hair.
The lichen look on.
We both live in a state
of expectancy,
a state of looking out of one
window and then another
which goes to show that
windows are eyes
more patient.
If the snake fears molting
before it molts
then I am like the snake.
And if not, then I remain
nothing like a snake.
I wet my lips,
mnemonic device
of the universe that I am
and read to myself aloud
and getting louder.

Tell me again about the lake of the poem.

The little skiff.

In which you were curled, like an infant in its bed.

The dark canopy of sky rattling above.

Standing at your bedside, we recounted our tale to you.

The regularity of our speech prevented the breezes being so discursive.

You looked out through your eyes at us and blinked to show you heard.

We said we’d little time before the city gates shut.

This revealed to you the error in the doctrine that maintains among the
numerous souls within us one is more aflame.

As we paddled away, to speak and rest among our selves, the wind took up
its chorus.

Straightening your body, you said nothing.

Lord Marpa the translator said “Sons, if you do phowa, do it like this,” then
a sphere of five-colored light the size of an egg ascended into the sky from a
crack at the crown of his head.

Then we were left alone like dwellings unconnected.

Search, confused one, around your shores if any parts of you rejoice in
peace.

The flight path of a bird in the sky, the channel cut by a fish as it glides, the
void of dreams. How difficult it is to remain one person.

A foolish consistency
is the sincerest form of flattery.
Same thing about the English:
Stamps we can get for sixteen of these.
Why don't he and I do something?
How's his French?

And it got dark and
then she's getting through her mind and
then you need to do something, stresses Ed.
Yesterday's kimchi,
soup is gonna discuss it with me.
Insure somebody stole this
at four minutes past the hour.

I too was pleasured by
the standoffish bus stop business.
He made up that new track.
I'm supposed to go watch some commercials
till they get married—it contains its
own anti-cloying agent.

You want to think about it:
Everybody's frantic but Bob.
A tunnel from under
gave him a folded-up photo of Dad.
I'll get you there
and provide you with the little you know
to measure somebody.

I'm not hanging out with you,
generous to a fault.
Buy 'em large, when we talk
about foot sizes.
Somebody said it was about ten.
He didn't say it didn't,
and it would be there
for maybe half an hour.
Do you want it?

There's some type of instructions in
November last year.
In Nerva Scotia people lost one every night,
been out there shaking.
Don't think that you want to get out.

The young man are building a boat.
Definitely a freedom container.
That's what he does.

Ordered some wine.
It was right around here,
replaced by a little kid
come to see what you're gettin' at.
We'll requisition 'em.

There were concerns.
This is unusual, morphs into
these other things, this modern age.
A lot of finishing up to do.
This little man,
the lily blot, Ship Tony,
toss those along
and going and unplugging it,
hanging about, fishes on the surface, failed.

Encoding

Dear Dangerous Mountains, it would never last. You were never thought of as a shock. Realize that you were of necessity. I should be married to a Whole Countryside, well-keeping me from dying. Or wounded less. Keep the knife. Bleeding on the sheets. That is no gift.

The Twilight Language

All this is in me, Dakini, simply terrified of an operation. Your youth and your ambitions. Snap your head. Cool nerve right up to the alone. Open the shower curtains and wild animals jump. She was never. Never. Something. She was throaty, almost a vulgar laugh. The bellowing can bend her. She even slaps her thigh like a comedian. It pulls me down to the sidewalk. Exploded laughing just as the waiter was lowering my milk, or lemon? Man. Lemon, yes. I promise I’ll change, Lemon.

“Wriggle Wriggle Wriggle.”

It’s more like fusing, this whole pointless business. Like emptying a pail and filling it again, everyday. He glances around (cool nerve) right up to the eyes closing. Alone. Opening the shower up there. Looks up, yes, like her name is Throaty and she’s back for seconds. Almost vulgar and pulls me down. Explosively. An exploded laughing, just as the asking sound. Oh, yes. But not a Man Yes. At my age, it dies for a few days.

Spring How

Yes, there was the fusing. The sun, the whole thing housed, after I emptied the pail to throw you away. It can’t be helped. “I warned her,” I said. I said a case of the blunt and ugly and it didn’t stamp. She wanted thousands of exactly all the big day. Wrapped headlessly. The hedon and dolor. On the contrary, she to be dressed as Anne. 20 suns at your mouth.

A stretch Expedition across from the homeless shelter.
Are you kidding. I talk out loud so no one bothers me.
Cops stare back and insist on greeting. Bus lane cameras.
New so more surveille. Higher now. More text on signs,
lanes painted maroon. Get your swerve on or whatever.
Movies named after poems, wrap them up in tissue paper.
If you’re young, they try to toughen you up on the job.
Then he goes home to his wife. A more instructive way.

Yawning beside the watery tomb, I
watched her mind working.

She didn’t hesitate for a moment.

She pressed her head into the spring
to become the revenant spirit of a
human being.

I heard something like bells.

I want you to rest well, beside us with the
dogs.

It was the first time I remember her
speaking to me like an adult.

When I had done, I looked for a bell,
so that I might cover it with the body,
and hide it well.

I take part—as lakes support
our treading in them—and I possess
even the choice that’s made
for me. PLAY

the open field to sketches a street,
forward city around them
fell: a line of awnings,
brick and brown,

garbage flaking where you don’t see,
then you see.
I take to it, what isn’t mine:
I watch its breath.

Its men (two men) dressed as cops.
They enter the museum
after midnight. I want to say I’m three.
Rembrandt’s Storm

is titled on the Sea of Galilee.
I’m late to this art,
that book pile behind me
so much catches up

I’ll never get in place. Too far
afield to find against,
or between. I can tell the time
they caught Whitey Bulger

passes from the paintings
returned does not come.
Speculations settle into
books, film. Against

circles, circles raise
marginal as this F.B.I., and this
I.R.A. Ted Kennedy dead,
and a painting cut is

rolled, unrolled: so the wrong ones
can’t find it, so can’t get saved—
Saint Mark’s remains, smuggled
under pork and cabbage,

a Venetian feast—or rather, the heist
to beat. Providence’s Federal Hill
holds out no mystery
here is a mystery.

Cities on hills. You find a thing of light
in your hand not peaceful—
The Concert, 1658-1660.
On airplanes, in hospitals

the oxygen masks descend into
our hands. We catch their straps
around a path that won’t
complete. I’m at a buzzer,

a finger in the inch, half
an inch, there.
I know the nails on my toes,
my teeth, and all the skin

in between. It is me—
unlike anything I’ve read.
There’s the part we know:
two cops buzz and are

let in, they approach the guard
station, they ask the other guard
to come downstairs. They act
like cops, threatening.

We can assume they were afraid,
the guards as well,
but we know it doesn’t matter.
Taped and bound in

the basement, it doesn’t matter.
That they left no evidence.
That the art can’t sell,
its ruined flakes unfold.

A belilaced cellar hole closes
like a thunderclap—
a dent in Holland—one
turn of gunpowder set on

gunpowder, and then not at all:
A View of Delft—
staggers with white trees—After
the Explosion. This is

Vermeer joins the guild,
then an incompleteness
nowhere particular. Its mist
struck constant like debt.

Like thunderclap. Like out of all
his view too much,
this, edging back,
thins under the scene.

Turbo comes into the room
as we catch the fringe of
what he’s moved to
another subject, sorts

a gangster in Hartford with the bay
of an auto shop, cooking
on Franklin Avenue, the South End
is fringe enough.

What’s dealt as recovery, amnesty
is a check paid out
across a low-rent office park, strip-
mall without stores,

where not enough accumulates again
to meet you on the front steps
with how many days in that
shirt, the blood taste

over your lip—beyond your shoulders:
posts, a set of lawn furniture,
neighbors’ porches, and the next
strewn outward like

a country. Take the book pile
around my bed, the screens
left open, light in the laundry
room, garage light:

out from the focus the focus
recedes. Let’s make everything
two Rembrandts, or a Vermeer
with two paintings hung

beside the open harpsichord, the lid
decorated, painted, I don’t know
the man’s face from the lowered
eyes of his companions.

We don’t assume it’s more than
trivia, good trivia—as the cracks
work in before that acid
feeling, walking ten miles

the sun too pavement to be dangerous,
sought for more than these
Caravaggios in the Atheneum:
Hartford’s loan from Rome

given for the Wadsworth returning
a stolen painting, nothing more
than a summer weekday, walked in
half for water, then black

blast of light—strange and tall before
some death of Christ—the cake
breaks off down the middle of our
back, shoulders rotate out

or feet lifting from it’s repeated, a long
time between when we notice
and when we notice. I’ve shed again,
but my preferences steal right

around me: cool there. “You have to keep
looking”—says the art detective,
his body falling apart
on the platform, a person

out of a book I read faded into a film
I saw, both of them are lost:
we can watch him keep
after all the paintings;

the paintings aren’t even the art
I want to catch up to
where I started from. I take a long way
from lying under

the hammock, a yellow walkman—
these waters and watering place—
with wind off a beach,
into the woods: a muscle

that isn’t there isn’t there to
delight. Inside the house, they’re
casting the bell in Andrei Rublev
on a television with a curve,

crackling speakers. I take apart
myself, and find a box of cords
loosely tied together, then cards,
each assigned a value:

a simple watercolor tree, bare
on a hill, where there aren’t hills,
a fence with shadows we can
follow beyond confusion.

There was nothing I knew but the farm but my brother gone & my father in the field & my sister in the house.

Nothing I knew but we went out into the field & we came home to eat & we went into the mountains after the goats & we came home to eat & we went out to dig a ditch & we came home & ate.

There was nothing I knew but the farm & I did not go out into the town but went out into the mountain & I did not go out into the army but went out into the field & all day I held the spade & the scythe & all day I held the axe & the bag.

& we went into the mountains with the bag & the knife & we went into the field with the axe & the spade.

I only thought of the farm of owning the farm I only thought with my brother gone I could own his half with my father gone I could have it all & my sister to cook & my sister to run the house & the land only mine & the land had a lake & we could neither of us swim.

& we went out into the mountains with the axe & we came back & ate & we went out into the field with the scythe & we came back to the house & we went out together in the morning & we came home together in the evening & I thought of the farm & we went into the ditch with the spade & we came back to the house & we went into the ditch with the spade & I came back to the house & my sister to cook & my sister to ask.

& ask again & my uncle out in the field with the spade & my uncle out in the ditch with the spade & I went into the lake & thought about the farm & I went into the lake & made my will & all of the farm to my brother & my sister in the house & my father in the ditch of his fields & the goats up in the mountain struggling with the grass.

From here a skein, a solution:
harbinger of an opening

A little note from beyond, ie.,
the lost “family joke,” the long bridge
between moments of being
and their reverb

Should I not be supremely content
that a fire is built instead of made
made instead of male,

That in the pockets of this overcoat
I am female, a form of being bold but not bold
red in eyelet, repeating I am 27, I am 27
to the tea olive’s hidden smell
a sense of stalemate overhead

An obligation to make angles and lose
this animal body, to sing about
and value preparedness
like something we weave and erect a fort under

To deserve this realm of history
in no language

Never mind the shriek on the radio:

A hemorrhage subsiding
a long file of rain

Stemming from partnership. A new green leaf, speckled. Another, all this thunder grafted onto the night’s diminishing returns. The comet whirs, doesn’t stir. Sitting still merits enough praise to parse the time spent doing it. Spent afternoons, light slants easy into dusk. Oh, you: simplest gestures, a tilt, a lift, meant decades reeling out still from ligaments, from filaments and fiber optics. And what’s wrong with spark? Laser treading a beam from everything not kept close when they should have. Who is this hurting? As the oil from unsuitable paint puddles from the ceiling in yellow wells, convex, a fox is spotted. An oil drip spoils a tile. To turn the loudness down, to turn it down, to alter a pitch ever so, to alter, to bend toward counterpoint and fall short. To continue the tradition only to lead it into the woods as the sun sets magnificently golden, of predator wings, spread. Of a feather drawn across the brow, of a final sip of water, of all things still rustling, still singing insect chirp, still.

aggressions, pointillist
or grisaille

 

chickens
called my bones
“bird-like,” meaning not
a Mandate or Inches
centerfold

 

pianist onanist,
monochrome practitioner

 

I could draw your leg
or I could cook
your leg

 

my purple pants have
red crayon stains

 

your lips wiggle when you
read Gide

 

male philosopher
as seafood aspic

 

nostalgic
for H.D., for Mina
Loy, for Samantha in
Bewitched, for Amahl
and the Night Visitors—
a performance interrupted
by necking sophomores

 

he plays
ukelele by the river
at sunset

 

garbage bags go flap or
smack like
prayer flags

 

“crystalline,” a word
I’ll never use

 

I shocked the James
Taylor lookalike with
my badly timed hard-on

 

end my career
before Torn Curtain

 

Wursthaus, where we
ate (out of false nostalgia)
in 1976

 

the guy whose gallery
I tried to visit was sick

 

the guys
who flirt with me
tend to be diseased

 

a revenge
fantasy I worked up
while watching The
Flintstones

 

lust
for Barney’s shave-
needing jaw

 

sound
waves here
(the hospice)
cluttered with
mood music—

 

each day a new Bible
verse to use as
purgative

 

my
grandmother at the
Art Deco fair in
Paris, 1925—
posing as
a grisette

 

forward motion is
antithetical to
spiritual transport

 

I don’t want to regain
consciousness—the
Swan Lake school of
euthanasia, permanent
somnolence,
IV drip
Valhalla

 

everything
I am is damned—

 

describe
a ricotta tart

 

three-
dimensionalizing my
captivity, treating it
like a Glass Menagerie
system of symbolic
equivalences

 

the table
is cream-colored and
squat

 

the table
doesn’t have genitals

 

how happy the table
must be, to live
without sexual
identity, sitting
in its foretold place,
like Lot, a good
servant of the state

 

mornings
when I skipped synagogue
and lay in bed and watched
Flower Drum Song
as a suicidal plunge
away from responsibilities

 

my likeness to
Erda

 

chugging Red Bull in
Lausanne

 

chew the
inside of my cheek
like a betel nut
pacifier

 

heal his anus,
mortify it and then
un-mortify it

 

don’t try those
Buster Keaton tactics
on me—please remove
the word “genial”
from your vocabulary

 

interludes
of trance, when
my blood flows
topaz

 

Kim Novak’s final
film should have
starred Anna Karina
in a tzigane mode—

 

open your temple
for me to pour some
lumen into its
teak aperture—

 

redwood
or eucalyptus—
aromas of my
rage

 

the guy who
tried to sell me a
blue cardigan sweater
flashed his cock’s
flat head—like
a tepid rattlesnake—

 

I memorized the vista—
what else was I
supposed to do with it?

 

we
watched the Grieg piano
concerto octaves
(cadenza) from the
perspective of the soloist’s
inebriated mother, or else
her neighbor, whose
lawn was dying—

 

I’m the gardener,
I’m guilty of
its death by drought

when skin becomes nothing but body built from the fight familiar
the mouth eyes and nose become escape points

for bees who seek the whistle and turn infancy to cloud this of course
allows the mountain to sound the sunrise

and uncovers what tangled each of them in the first place
the syndrome of the iron flower

the pair of shoulders that never could make clean
the river between the trees

Between the briefly noted derision
and the grin there was a certain lack
of cohesion that fascinated me,
that sublimated cold my attempt
to keep things at the yam level. Rap broke
free from the tyranny of syncopation.
The best lines were redacted. I used my face
as a swab, soaked up the ooze in the
interstices of ampersands. Every mind
was the spondee of my mind, the last I rode
for some time.

Often I am permitted to return to this buffet,
as if it were a place like the Middle Kingdom

of my soul, which has grown overpopulated
with loneliness. Nobody’s in this booth but me,

under a panorama of the Temple of Heaven,
with another plate of diminishing returns…

Raising a skewered prawn, I think of you.
You’d appreciate these attempts at verisimilitude—

artificial petals above steaming feeding stations,
support columns carved out like tree trunks,

servers in panda suits, etc.—and understand me
when I say, “My gut’s not right; I myself am

the hot glaze on my General Tso’s chicken.”
Tonight you’ll have one complete thought, in bed.

The smell of your mom’s dress is closed.
A magnolia’s heavy unlatched tongue is closed.
The bitter scratch at the back of your throat is closed.
Your childhood’s rebuttal is closed.
The road holding up an arc of trees and their strange covenant is closed.
Disappearing on schedule is closed.
A field of rabbits spreading their fur around is closed.
I am easing myself daily closer to the ground is closed.
I am easy on paycheck night is closed.
Lying next to you in a box of bourbon-soaked cherries is closed.
I am almost the same taste and timbre as the empty field is closed.
Our eyes staying closed in proximity is closed.
Telling me this child isn’t my child is closed.
Telling him he belongs where belonging means absence is closed.
When you try to identify the poison it is closed.
The ravine raising its mouth up to the sky and swallowing the last horse is closed.
A review of the maximum leverage available here is closed.
My hands asking to release this fistful of air is closed.
Try and make another decision without me and you’ll see what I mean is closed.
Reporting back on a dream’s dialogue with awakening is closed.
I want to get on an airplane for the last time is closed.
I want to never come back here except to you is closed.
Crows dropping chestnuts and letting us crack them is closed.
Fists of flowers punching through the dirt no matter what the air says is closed.
You plus I plus you plus I plus you plus you plus constant fucking is closed.
Like a tail in the door being able to take it all back is closed.
The olden days where ships hefted the seas apart like god is closed.
Access to regret too pristine to share leaving its knife out is closed.
An element of surprise is closed.
Ask yourself where your blood is and say it’s right here is closed.
Your grandmother’s curtains refusing to move for a casual breeze is closed.
My great-grandmother swallowing her death down is closed.
Taking the land for ourselves is closed.
Erasing an entire year of a bed nailed to the floor is closed.
Making you the bed is closed.
Making you an object of forgiveness or sparkling teeth is closed.
Making this unremarkable is closed.
Narrative that reflects absolute truth is closed.
Believing in truth as fact under trees at night after a fire takes the stars away is closed.
The scissors we use to make snowflakes stay sharp is closed.
Another year of windows softening our gaze is closed.
Holding my breath under water to panic the heart is closed.
Tell me one last time please is closed.
Our mouths together dredging words thick as oil is closed.
The hatch over the mouse in your chest is closed.
Being small in the arms of myself is closed.
Holding on to a rock with a child holding on to me in a running tide is closed.
Looking for mistakes like feet look for glass is closed.
Body as fist as ship as celestial navigation is closed.
Brick by brick this hole in the side of our house is closed.
Won’t you wait somewhere just out of sight while I do this is closed.
Which of us was left holding the bag is closed.
Believing it’s possible to run the clock out is closed.
Please oh please oh please oh please oh god is closed.

Sort of error. My real hair, unhinged
from my head. Was I a blonde-girl
anymore or an experimental light, a
way for others to see through water,
ashes? I have already said what I am afraid
of. Yonder. I ask my father on the other
end about procession, peaceful
parting: Candie, keep yourself and give
your things. He means give up, give
way. Keep falling from windows
in order to assure the greatness of your
own height, if only to be the wreck
of your own pure lightness. Only
on a second story hotel balcony, bonds
can be broken with the world one
can come to skim, to see as surface. Chlorinated,
incalculable current unbearable without
tallied reflections. Stop. In the rented
room’s mirror, the face I deserve and under-
neath, another atmosphere I have never
endured: I doubt it is oceanic, operable
by infallible salts or expanse of warm blues,
cool blues. An indigo, a lapis, a lazuli. Instead
I suspect a smallness
No—a clarity
No—a clarity
No—a clarity,
a cross at a crossing,
a dryness delivering, upending as does specifically dirt
in demand of a grave. Just
a thin yield, as earth under blade, giving
to pressure within freeze, shale.
I know the odd dumb organ breaks
beneath my breasts, never showing
and only even aware of itself because of the
occasioned hand pushing back my hair to comment
I can hear your
self. Have I already said
what I am afraid of; I have already
tried to fuse this, this
bare flicker
nude synapse

stars alight”  the drift spray
 a black-wing
smiling crony of cold
stars make the light delirium
make   aurora spoon
 this beanstalk ebullience of push blown
yeasty forms
the luster
mums
glossy featherheads and tails like boas flinging
a dish of Strand

To Polish the binocular    Black Eye of Emperor

navy lord of ice gnaw
in spirals    the rooms the offices
 are
old masses of extinction
now

artists of the absolute
 
now brighter than their own
winking I’ll come right after you, I will
be back
on quilt aurora too cold to fear

Define a forest. The men who meant to.
The houses I have lived in and left.
With unnatural affection for the warped glass.
The waves sound like the freeway
and the cars mimic the sea.
We are living on a pain and pleasure planet.
I have countries to see.
I insisted, Earth,
upon your friendship.
Have I written sufficiently? We are all talk.

Purple follows me
and breaks noise
makes noise

silent quiet

Purple knows when to
show her face

she knows that I am a surgeon
who arranges characters
with an unsteady hand

like a child learning
about flightless birds
wondering what’s the point

like a young boy
teaching himself
how to jerk off
in his mother’s bathroom

where would an ostrich fly to?
how far could a duck walk?

Purple says
I’m not violet

and canaries will adapt to live in coal mines

There’s a way out of this
sketch. A mercurial self,
the self convex, tubal ligation,
atrium blown open, & there it goes.
The same history of over the top.
In dawn the line out is long—
we’re fenders on the body asphalt.
& we’ve over-stepped
the resounding drone of those organs
just for a say so, but now that’s resting

Two burns in a needle of sunlight    not the shared quiver of whitewash. These partial pitches given    to wires, a correction in temperature, instinct felt outwardly.    Here we are lost in a plunge of air. Here we are given a fruit medley.    The ground soaked with brine, cinched to itself. Every backlit text,    each molecular switch or sequence in an orb weaver’s dance,    a massage mined for its light sympathy.

*

You ended higher and suppler and simpler on the rooftop’s ad hoc patio. You listened for sharp accords    a complete sequence, more animated than a miniature demon robbed of his human playdough. It gets easier to recall the flicks and shards    harder to discard them. Later you watch a puddle be calm, no longer agitated by the paddle yet no longer flashing on the    flipside of a reflection.

*

A lover must give thanks and chase the beggar’s urge back into its mud-nest, the downlight glanced by overhanging eaves, under one limited partnership, a single field of fixed causes, a single durable form, a scrubbed white linen sheet stiff with drying, a singleton endlessly bare and dry and waiting to make sail.

*

You receive a gift in return. Slowly the woodwinds crescendo, the migrators choose longer routes, tuned to wobbles in the hum below. To speak of something done to us in adolescence, some brush with dusk, seeping around the edges of a reservoir. To lie in the shallows, always day-old, a dense cadence pumping through the rhizome, bleeding inward and feeding on its own vessel, to be among that feeding.

Smelling like bananas was never a thing I wanted.
It’s just something that happened. That’s the thing
about growing up, that man in the banana suit said.
Some people give off the stench of THIS IS
ALL THERE IS. I don’t get that sense about
the man in the banana suit. Today I will make
all the masks I can, I tell him. And he says, Great!

We don’t know who we are. In Arizona and New Mexico
and Colorado it doesn’t matter. The word rock. The word river.
A burn pile can smolder underground for years. You think you put it out
and then the mountain explodes. I wish I would more quickly
recognize your suffering. Sick as sunken fruit. If I cut you
you would bleed. Lemon light of June, hovering just beyond
our mouths. A city connected by train sounds. Want moves from my arms so I use the word
beautiful. I mean mystery. Is that lightning in the distance? You say god,
the highway folds its dark arms around us, I say Grand Opening. A car for sale.
A future. I look into the light of tomorrow
and our lost babies look back. My friends stand at the ocean’s edge
while a tree tries to grow on a ridge. We march the beach’s ribcage.
A baby, a branch. The waves, cellular. The fact makes it less frightening, J says. Grief needs
a shape to soften in. I think about your face in my kitchen and a pine blasts
around my chest. I seek out language
to say my love into, an animal blinks. Someone is dying
on the road right now. People are waiting for who
won’t come home. That is a lava dike,
the rancher explains. A crack forms, heat flows.
Sometimes we fucked so much
a gap closed, healed over, and yellow flowers
floated. We went out
into the world at an angle that oiled it: craggy bluffs, a ragged wet
distance now between us. I have been working
my entire life to love you best
in this instant. I am failing, still, at least a little
and this is why I keep
waking up and falling down. Ride into the valley. See the mountains
on either side, asking nothing, palms open, keeping us dying
until we know better to die.

I enter smiling nonetheless
Room arbitrarily unmodified
Squinting through my
Fogged breath to fuse
Broken glass and their
Cuts. One forces the air
Out and the other sets
Its tangles.

Good morning, kitchen
Cold with light, October
I don’t remember
Skeptical of sex and
Place of mind.
It is four minutes past
Six, you are opening
The door, undone
Ligature. Lend me
Angular animal body
Moldy light blossom
On the temple when
I get hungry
My first call is to you.
Spill slopping
The floor I cannot
Mop it up, cutting into
The first of the month.

sometimes I feel
like a young woman
my lover nowhere
I feel the influence
of death in this
canyon

..

the feel of someone—
else’s human skin

..

I am making a history
of which there is no proof
save this letter to you

..

these women look starved
& the men refuse to
speak to me

..

I am afraid I am
strange here

..

my least & greatest
fear is to not be
remembered

..

these clothes for weeks

..

today I encountered a girl-
child in a wedding gown
on horseback   stunning
in her rags & unbrushed hair 
her eyes would not cry

..

and what of lawlessness

..

today I ate
some local flora
and am very ill

..

this view is my
solitary prize

..

in thought alone
I walk daily

..

today I heard
no birdsong

..

in this sultry weather
the horseflies
are nearly driving my mare
insane

..

this afternoon I watched
two sparrows fight or breed
for hours

..

in the night our guide’s
mount was struck down
by lightning   I have never seen
any thing like it

..

a swarm of hornets devoured
all our fruit while we slept

..

the pinks blow hugely

..

the flies here are enormous
and sport about my face
till I am nearly mad

..

two of our party have
lately died of fever

..

a great hawk passed over
our camp three times today
alone

..

horse mushrooms
abound they can-
not be eaten

..

I spent the night shivering
in worry of the fever

..

was relayed a most astonishing story
of a shipmate thrown into the sea
shark-infested near Ceylon
where he was rescued some
two days later having clung to
a yard-arm stark naked

..

lovely weather, red even

..

since arriving here
I have become fond
of shooting

..

I came upon an enormous skeleton
in the river today

..

walked nearly fifteen miles for fear
the path was too rocky for the horses’
unshod feet

..

I haven’t spoken to a person
in twelve days

..

I imagined I would see
the face of god
in this land I have
seen nothing

..

several bones
along the trail
as though they had been
placed there purposely

in the afternoon.
bells and human voices
nesting.

trapped in the dream
about snow
in Texas.

in the afternoon.
a woman takes her love’s name
personifies the dead
bangs her head.

are we always afraid?
betrayed by my own subconscious
my eyes make dark without
bodies. long snakes hanging
from my arms by their fangs.

a child dreams of flying
by pumping her arms
as if in water.

the world gifts us
with little smoke breaks
from fake happiness.
is this all?

of course not.
we are not all addicted.
we do not all sleep in the afternoons,
[ ostracized. ]
I imagine myself as a man,
drinking scotch in the evening
and building porches.
hair squirting like flowers from my skin.

god never intended these
sleeping bodies.
never went to sleep
with a man
touching lightly with his
foot, which means
god never knew
what it feels like to
cradle your own consciousness
in a warm hive.

at 2:00 am I wake
with my mouth open,
my mind a moon still
half submerged
in the snow.

the houses where we grew up are dead.
all those little mythologized guilts.
digging up squirrel bones in the backyard.
buzzing sounds as you stalk your likeness through the trees.

I don’t even know what to do
when I’m not drawing your face
engines drop from cars
and cars roll
I can’t begin to stand
without my feet mixing
it’s that Saturday feeling
that ruffles my lungs
and makes my hands static
dipping and gliding
the bluebirds
sucking and spitting
mouths of some creatures
like people
I go rooting up
softness from exes
then glimmery distrust
a white wave pokes
from a blue continuum
I go my sweetheart sleeping
on a becandled mattress
all his hopes
single out someone
blowy heater
locus of supplement
heal a split lip
the wind won’t
and I backup when the wind steps
just in front of me
drowsy lips
and nasal barricade
with suffering
I can manage
putting down a pen
but I don’t know what to do then

your head is a bedframe, you bend it with weights and solder the sealpoints, hands like two bags of coffee – the burlap is busted, the three-legged race has committed your memory to a room in a small town buried in the green of a valley next to a trickle of river that never grew up enough to compete as its name. the waves of ambient noise and spilled juices. a slack string of letters you childwrite the walls with each wax melted car. i call the shapes out-out to their crimes. who put the tailor’s chair next to the dummie? who stuck the pins in the spine of the dress? who slept along the seams of the metal and numbers of bus windows put out by rocks and caresses – the dirt in the shoe and the picture on the mantle of a bird that you knew once, caught fire among a series of unlit candles

This is a meditation on conclusions
Drawn about the dream that I am dying
On the outside of the inside of the dream
A head in a teleprompter says
We are all dying
And I don’t hate him for it
This is a meditation with your knees
Above the waterline
Body like a flag
Staked in ambiguous territory
Elect which patterns
You must purge
Press your fingertips to
The back of the throat
When the cloth comes
Catch it
Like a magician you can pull out
Fistfuls of knots
Wrestle and unfasten them
Spread the blanket over the water’s surface
Safety-tanked in your motives
That’s when you pull the plug
To the great suck
Touch yourself
To the great suck and the air whittling
Warmth from your skin
Touch yourself
Like the bulb above the tub
The future is a bright place
We reach for
Sometimes wrap our arms around
If I dream again
It will be to this sound

Ovarian speckle, lash and silicone thrive,
our tongues and tails and medicine—men taste—
buckle-lick us deep, your name reminiscent of mud.
Wasted thrive, aluminum dwell. Two, eight.
You drape your insteps with denim and call it august.
Boom, baby, I migrate our bodies and graphite.
Thick freak, core when our bodies made moon-born,
star-veined lipids clout our skin, mottled sand
we drape and billow. And our thighs: craters.
Unknown gravity, autoerotic, cement coats our shadows
in slick little fishy fingers, and his bones turned jelly in my teeth.
Cold sky, frozen still, its trails of sick birth matte our faces, frescoes and carats.
Writhe, cars. Honey pavement, jagged legs, bristled suns and Vaseline.
Cold house, tumble young and warm, skin/titanium contact.
Shadow-wrist kings slip fuchsia, tabs where she puts her name and burns twigs.

Hélène Cixous pointed out, “Who hasn’t accused herself of being a monster?”

you put the bag on your head
I put the bag on my head

you wear spectacles designed for two people
I wore an assortment of masks

there is poetry in a matchbox
small hinged forms, this way and that

a woven mesh over my head
a clear animal presses up against my face

there is something here to do with touch and balance
caught between a point-of-view and a pile of rocks

you dreamed of this road
I dreamed of watching you turn the bend
disappearing and not disappearing

somewhere you are holding this piece of paper
you’re raising your eyes, the up of it pulling you through

just think of how a mountain would show feelings
the green light like a whisper, a rope
there was dirt on my hands and I was thirsty

you stop and listen to the sky-white clouds
ink-lit sky

Having picked a fish clean
I know what time is up to.
To be emblematic
I call the shell “bone” or “house,”
I call the gull “bully.”
The poem I run from
chases me with a stick.
A trick for late October
is not to use human brains
but use brains nonetheless.
Another: enter a room and act
exactly how you feel.
Congratulations Brian Blaser
for standing here in 1990.
You managed to carve a stone.

Fear deep and joy up over:
dark July forenight.
Shiver sweat not dark but unseen
exploded over the suburban ball.

Come get me, I’m making myself
ready for you every day, Lord,

like they say all these people
here are doing.

Fevery, we were a feral
candle that a hand drew.
Snarl of light, omnivorous
tricks tricks us into
only me again. Loss as party
recollected. Through loss’s mesh
radiant then apeshit we went
forth like night driving itself over
a wet screen. It was a party,
it was a room. It shifted
like a crystal in the dirt.
Fondness and disgust alike
grew fingers, broke fruit
into sections; sorted rooms
by transgression. Soft some
terror herded us in puffs of air.
I rode it weakly, like a seed.
Long pink lines of emphasis
trembled over the arms and
faces of the people there.
The color pink
recalled the body—its bluffed
joys, its bracelets. Forgive us
the places where nobody partied.
Where we dressed up instead.
I said hit me and it felt like a
wrong answer gone kicking through
the god that swallowed us: king-space,
pink gate, solve for flood.

Autumnal horseflies fabricate
fornications ‘round cracked
streetlamps throwing cold light
before fistfuls of rain,
and the hickory trees in panic.
Inside, more serious than I,
you’d have remained in bed
for a period of twenty years,
a body at loss of definition,
and shot nerves, under the gaze
of pale-skinned young nurses,
the smell of mold rising
from the floor. Formerly little more
than a succession of local
phenomenon—like feet growing
accustomed to the dark—
you are the bloodiest Christ,
trundling off to the cultural center
with a projector
under one arm—we must
get you interested in a girl,
a friend who might do
everything for you, front to back,
only, I might have done it better.

I continually put autumn
In my writing, discovering
How I prefer your lineaments

To any thing this rotting
World adores. Scholars tussle
Over standards, just elide

Them in the sentence
I call to you from pauses
On sobriety’s palanquin

I’m ready to climb down from
All that song saw fit to move in
Before your hum allotted

Spring’s abandon, winter’s
Measure, empty dishes
Scraped to wasting in a house

Of foreign sinks. Tell me now
Why I still come here
Preferring your appearance

To everything exciting
On a morning, digits
Stressed with message, pieces

Moved across a formal game.
Out of glare and noises
To make a wasteful palace

Lamps for burning up
The dying day, spent
On truant sovereigns

Slowly only breathing,
Breathing’s service
Ended serving you.

Born of blut and ill-
formed intention,

V. practiced crystallization-
a fly caught
in a fine-toothed filigree,
aching his way into becoming brutal.

As if, in the spider’s head
was woven

a shelter for time if time could be
stopped

*

Did you ever feel full
on this world

a tissue pressed to a loosening tooth

until blood suffuses it

Find those shut, blue light holes. Clipped for feeding, a ritual. How does this shirt look on me, on me. Nothing but more feast. When we look up, dead trees. How does your season work here, inside. The quiet possible. Smack my back up on it. You did it for me, for me. Bruise grew for weeks. In your absence I came for hours, ritual. Am I drinking enough water, you think me a bird. Something hollow, the pits. Nothing but a waxy build, framed again in gold. Something owned, returned broken. Bent the spine with his name. Dug it in real good.

Are we writing the novels
we dreamed?
Where we bury our bottles
in the sand
and the stars are cracking
everything open
except the stars are not
what you think they should be
more the fade-out of the bulb
than the game show host
at the top of the hill
looking down on a city
that refuses to exist. Marvel
at the green, the trees, the water.
The clouds whispering
through the windows.
The flat expanse of the sky
criss-crossed with episodes
we can’t bring ourselves
to repeat. The imaged lines
a gauzy blur.

1
The Waiter Watches You
As if a woman could lease her hunger
to any bidder, then wear his coat
as a charm against the shitting birds.

A Soda?
The silhouettes sweeping now
across the sky hide the sharpness
of the beaks they bear. Distance is
a second skin. It may be the only way
to learn the anatomy of birds
is to eat them.

Waiting
Birds lost their teeth
to become more aerodynamic.

That you are not going anywhere
may be your best quality.

Why don’t people leave
seduction at this: a woman alone
cannot see all of her moles.

Silhouettes
Pencil in the air. Mascara on your wand. Across the patio,
woman in the window, you an hour ago, rubbing
glass, hand as sponge.

“What will it be.” Cardboard coaster on the table.
Because thresholds are sexy, we make them over
and over.

A Soda?
It is not the same to stand shirtless
in your own rented kitchen with cold yogurt
at the end of a warm, washed fork.

A Soda
Right, overheard: “The disorder
of lust.” Over her water: hands
swat air, tip to drink, nearly.

Someone orders quiet.

Not all birds can be
song birds, people forget.

2
Silhouettes
The weight of a bird’s feathers—more
than its skeleton.

Silhouettes
Cardboard coaster on the table—face down.

Silhouettes
Face is text, if you are thinking
of a man. Spine up.

Of distance. Height. Distance.
His skin. The riotous stubble

of your own thighs? Now that
is one way to feel an animal.

3
Waiting
“Holding court,” someone might say.

Legs flush with wicker, skin
newly riddled—an empty glass
is an object waiting.

Waiting
As if flight were
in a single feather.

It’s not.

The Waiter Watches You
In the moment before patience turns
erotic, then turns for good.

Patience
Of course, what is more intimate
than a disease?

An Empty Glass
Spine to the sun. And craning
to see it, as if, as through
a pinhole, when you
turned back
around, you might find
your image
projected into the chair
across from you.

4
A Soda
For the hand
that interrupts
condensation
on the glass.

A thumbprint quick to dissolve.

To see in a feather
the joke
of ornament
which is

Waiting
no company.

to transmit
you
owe
me spring
you take in your hand a power
the utmost
instrument like a gun
man will shrink from the task
mastering his
enormous
need to
plan
a book
all mothers use it unconsciously 

“and there is nothing
left except light”
and an animal  dying
contains light
what it leaves behind
there is a spectrum
of theories  spirit
dust suspended
in the air prayer ash
and they enter
into the body
through the breath
to the darkest chamber of the heart
a home
its failures
the garden overgrown an abandoned house a hotel
its knocking
fold yr. hands Child
if there is light
if y. see the steeple
if y. see the people

How do I
Deserve? Liquid-crystal
Backlighting one hand,
And the other
Attending to a hardback. Do you
Remember the 16th century?
I mostly remember
Street lamps
Pouring themselves
Onto sidewalks. Mostly
I remember how I almost lived.
And how I never was
Cut-out to. Most of us
Are taking
Screen shots. Most
Are in the shower with a beer.
The pathos smeared
Across this paper
Is spoiling in the sun.
The way back
Is published after the fact
If ever. I feel lighter
Hauling my life
By its precision-cut
Chronometer.

I imagine myself
through desire
to numb myself
the victim participating
to save you placed in a gurney
in an outburst of violence
destroying old feelings
I’m brutal, at first, unsanitary
aroused, then friendly
coached by a system
released into a crowd
small system
to sanitize me in history
to awake in what I’ve been feeling
the official culture, ahistoric
awful insistent—
locked turnstile
the absolute value: wealth
whitened year in you
in any direction
dissonant
a deadlock of not-cure
to face anger, with anger
with what claims everything
“young” “tonight” on top
crumbling from the top
to build the bottom
in unmade shapes
I drink from the invisible
order that sustains me
the flammable skin I’m in
you must
be forced to be free
whomever you are
you must live
by loss of desire
burst in query
in a deeper void
the engine choke
in the same elusive surplus
circling us
and blind beyond
the chore of enchantment
the cloud light
the contours of maladies
pure surface supplying
the excessive object in me, us
less than money
thirsting—claimed

What could happen next, just before light refolds the corner, runoff pools,
a needle falls and the glint appears to the thought of the biographer 
of the mother of the father with the hand in the mind you made up.

Who doesn’t want to behold the red button, the murder weapon before it was?
Who doesn’t want to have had the weapon before it was used? Who doesn’t want?
Who doesn’t? Who? Everyone’s clever until the error is laid bare and bleeding.

Something happens next, becomes more or less beautiful, finishes coming
and just bes, I mean is. Something lives at the penultimate moment.
At, of, or in the unbutton, it lives with some fibers attached.

I was dead
but they kept killing me
by the seaside,
the Super Target,
on a plane,
in a beetle’s husk.

My arms stretched wide
but could not
find my eyes.

I won’t betray you
I won’t betray you
I say again
& again to Artaud.
But where is the sonnet of power?
Where is the sonnet of suffering?

And when the skin comes off
it comes off like a shower curtain.
And when there is joy
there is joy like a dirt road.

You do not get
to pick your oracle.
You only know
your weaknesses.

Like a myth you could sleep inside
like a hollow reed singing who, who, who
like a planet in its wobble
like a fine, translucent egg and the current
against which it hatches
uncertain bride of meridians
swishing above the core’s suggestion
like a hive heavy with feast
the bay leaf in the oracle’s mouth
before she shrieks your tiny destiny
or the rope-bridge slack underfoot
each step gripping its modest vector
propelling this insufficient substance
like a halo tipped, mathematically,
cleansed with golden soap and blown through
a bubble searching its roundness in air
like the real universe peeking out
at its edges, waiting for an idea of itself
to loose its mighty arrow, to look back at us
and say not this, but this.

The difference between
shade and shadow is

the former you inhabit.
The difference in

magma and lava is
the same to the core.

I’ve inspired some
love songs, but never

a history text, please
write me back, I’m

dying, you
see, the thing is

shadows can’t be black
when they’re made of light.

i didn’t know i was
making a distinction
until it felt like too much
to get into later
my hair combed back
like linda i wiped my hands
on my ass like linda
when she knows
there’s more to do
looked for a clean shirt
my size in linda’s drawer
purple thongs purple thongs
with lace lighter like lilac?
asked to grab the plates
woman of the house
holding matching bowls
in my hands arranging them
with love and concern
a remarkable sense of duty
loyalty to my fellow man
loyalty to my little brother linda
the person i am in full conflict
with the person i’ve established
myself to be historically
hosing down the driveway
kneeling in the lapse
with cut flowers resting
on one knee touch them
the person hosing down
the driveway touched them
tarp mound catching sun
the color of the garden hose
cement stones lighter
around where the hose met
the house and the water got out
lifted the running hose
end to my lips
sucking at the clear funnel
like the small bird in a moving gutter
new basin he whirred to me
articulate little thing
i called him linda
i spoke through the water
llliiinnda
still within the displeasure
of one tented interval
acting itself out after the next
with no recollect of the first event
i took his relief as my own
just the same

I shut the tired book but open
the longing song   Good to live

down here for another spell:
in the morning slums of love

the sun crazed roads
travel into me  And his sounds dirty as lakes

Where the map grid ends
so much water begins: like a song

we listen even
to the sleeping rocks dream  the kind

of noise you can’t talk about
in a book

When a road walks you this far
don’t try to say

it wasn’t actual:
I hear the proof

when he wakes like warm
gravel against my ear

Susurrus  sub rosa
I don’t know how to keep this down

or away
from the cartographers

so I won’t get sized
to faithful scale

If something bad happens, where do you turn?
By turning, a lot can happen, but it can take a long time.

We turn in slow motion.
These hollow years we crane our necks, leaning.
Don’t miss one tiny, itsy, little, important bit!

When you turn toward someone, a secret undoes.
Its petals puke forth from my gentle wound mouth.

I think of the whole city I left
its germs of regret and failure cams.

I think this in a city I move through with more adult problems, more failure.
The loneliness felt at age sixteen these words fell onto my journal: Dear diary, I don’t get it.

Dear diary, I am so alone.
Spoken in the mock meek voice of a boneless, amorphous spinster.
Take the 38 or the 51, the Needham Heights line from Roslindale Village to Back Bay,
or the Orange Line to Forest Hills. The head would turn left to see the approaching vehicle.
But I left the hometown. The beach chairs are folded up in the cellar.

It’s been ages since I groped in the dark for my R’s.
Now I throw on my trill shades, hold to temporary and lasting friendships, but sleep alone.

My arrowcursor touches many faces,
but the darkness candle lit in Boston stalks my feet.
Dear Diary, I still don’t get it.

I’ve felt the love in heat with learned hotheads, blaming denim shirts in the night.
A manic teen’s fragrant sticker portfolio. I have a lost cashmere statue’s dedication.

We are looking at apples. I proffer some fucked up shit, question every move.

How many dollar beers does it take? How can I be ethical and also love? You’re no detective.
On TV everyone is on one trajectory towards a steamy sleepless night.
I’ve not been shredded lately.

I want to paint you with your fingers until the darkness lit in Boston gives me brand new feet.
A phone leak: phone calls like they’re normal. I know who I love, but it’s never convenient.

I know the story that I tell. It’s no lamer than yours.

Let me go through your skin organ: below the chains and above the organs.
Below the clothes and over the skin.
Let me go over your life’s work: I’m holding your brain and crying.

Admiration and creepiness and admiration and creepiness and walking backwards I exit
through the same door through which I arrived: a nod, a step, a nod toward a step.

The devil can pass right through us if you use more than one door.

My Nana was full of this kind of shit. But I will not go back in my Mama’s vagina.
No this isn’t my kind of autopsy: I’m alive burning.

It’s crazy to think this way by continuing to associate with the dying or dead.
It doesn’t matter: I’m prodigal.

I’m in the sick city making love. With whom?
I’m in the sick city making love to an idea.
I’m in my grazing years but holding no gold or inheritance.

And I won’t. There’s no beautiful material to lose.
I wouldn’t say any of this if my body won Gold in the touching Olympics.

I’d like to put you in a sling and swing your broken hand back and forth shaking it.
That hurt? How about that? Does that hurt? How about right here?

I’d like to put you in a hammock, rock you and love, waving Bye Felicia!
I broke your hand. That was me. Happy, happy birthday.
Happy birthday, I broke your hand. I’m still turning toward you,
communicating more, more like the bloody sun as the time passes, with each passing minute.
It’s hard to understand but the touch of your hand can start me crying.

My Faberge Chihuahua Little Jonesy
now sits in an urn
and sometimes just for fun
I make like he’s mascara
mine to wear to church on Sunday
solemn there with Little Jonesy
who did not care a whit for Christ

The whales are all coming loose. They are hitting the surface like ice floes, the swell of their flesh like parachutes. Looming into the salted air. The hearth of their skin is covered in secrets: inch-long scrape along the vertebrae, pinch-sized wound in the underbelly. The sea, full of promises it cannot keep, so I gather invisible strings like balloons one wishes to keep from the sky. The sea, at night, is another sky, and slow-moving bodies billow their way through heavy currents that are lifting and sinking slow bits of kelp, tiny fish dust, crushed shell. I gather the sea like it will not betray me, I hold my body like it is large and weathered. I come up for air, and my belly is filled with gaps, distances, fissures, intervals. There are scrapes in the flesh one cannot see, wounds in the folds one cannot feel.

In the end they seemed to have a strange repose.
To have it without performing it.
Because it’s possible to perform the repose.
It’s possible when that chair is the same
chair in which your grandmother sat, and later your father. And you
too climbed onto it a year later, and in general, when someone says
chair
the image of that chair comes
to your mind, because you and your grandmother and your father had a chair.
It is not so in this case.
Outside the cars are buried beneath the snow
today a girl’s fever put you on the edge of a fence
of ideas like airports
where flights have been cancelled,
by snow, by snow, by perfumed snow.

That end, in which these people seem to have a strange repose,
it’s not more than the beginning. Seated in sepia colors,
both hands
clasped, elbows on knees,
the head tilted forward,
all of that gives the impression that the worst has already passed
but stays in your mind,
like a sinking ship
occupies a space stranded at the bottom of the ocean.
Diving once, I saw huge fish like sharks, the density
of their danger, the darkness
and the marine flowers, and the reefs,
are still on my forehead
when I tilt my head forward, seated on the chair
that belonged to someone I didn’t know. Someone had
to sell it, and look at yourself there, seated, your country is the weight
that tests your repose,
the stillness of the sea while these things
fall inside of it.

The weight of these things, our weight,
is an affair detained
that speeds
among the stars
and there we’re standing,
beyond our chairs and those of others
with our hands up like we’re being arrested
when in truth, we are about to take off.

Run two fingers over the surface of your nipple
as instructed by the pamphlet: a smooth,
circular motion, how you make a jar sing.

—The squirrels
that burrowed
in your bedroom walls
to scratch a home out—Buds
relentless inside a body
—The man-made pond
you used to skim for fish,
a vibrant green and pedestrian bridge.

Progress from the areola toward the perimeter,
your fingers, as if their own small moon,
make tiny laps the size of quarters.

—A rush of rainbow scales
like streaks of blush
—A hundred down-turned faces
of trout
—Your little dimpled
self in the tension of a line

I push back
to shimmery

mindscapes
as if any

of what we
are belongs

to us. In flight
above me

birds. To them
I’m black glass.

A wonder
the mind

like junkies
always looking.

A tressed bauble unbees
capacity, hassle
in ides, dare
idea: why silence in shaves?
why shut dull, dry
in weed?

wear a dress, wrapper
like a Hershey’s kiss
—this, body
god or parent, pink
wrinkled, heeling

in sun, gobbed organ
in wind or gleaming
sorrel on white, a sanitized
& broken constellation—

To eat that shirt
until one bloats.

Dry fibers absorb pangs
drying
the throat, a purse
of seconds.

To step out from the sandal,
to touch the
bloodwarm foot to the bare
bus floor before the exit.

My mother’s standing dim-lit in the hall,
talking to Rennie on the telephone.
David takes off my shoes in Bynden Wood.
The day before we’d laid a path of rocks
through Thomson’s Run into the pine-cone dell,
beyond the marsh the guidebook calls a fen.
The fire creeps gingerly, not like a god
but like a boy gone home to bed with books.
Perhaps you are, as I am, harsh in love.
Atop the day is lacquer; heat obtains,
a silence into which a landscape rolls.
I am behind, hauling a log off-trail
through someone’s yard. An amber weathervane,
the wind below the vane, the gnats above.

No blue yet. It rained
while I slept. I should
be working but
I text you your name,
three times: You, You, You.
Perhaps you’ll come
over tonight. At my
desk I write: The day goes
gray as weathered wood.
It might rain again. When
you text me a picture
of yourself in front of
a mirror, masturbating,
your face obscured by
your phone, the sun blinks
on. The sky smells
of wet wool. What
is that tree called, still
and silver? I should
know. And what were you
thinking of, bored or
stirred to some joy
or stupor, fixed
on your own image
in your phone in
that mirror that
held your belly’s burst
of shocked black hair?
What we have is small
and strange. But true.
I once thought: to be
in love: is to lose
face and accept it.
Isn’t every poem
for someone?
Why not you?

An approach: evening, or
the splaying of a hand to catch rain. That morning,
I had drawn sheep on a rock in ash, they are there

evermore, or
dependent on a slip of the nerve, a break
in the cloud. I am not here to ask whether

not the A and E cannot be cloven, or
if they must always be fused. I cannot read,
and the ash tree makes a shadow.

I know nothing else, nothing knows me. There was
a woman with a lace collar who gave me a book
through a cat flap. I looked at the pictures.

and I was not satisfied. I drew in the margins. I let
the sheep in with the rain.

and to think of the seed as just another
artifact of itself

off the fall,
the peach boys attached to their pit
neither of us knowing the feeling we belong to

the swearwords of a liver
unconscious in sound bites
a gift of music
retreating
from these intellectual property rights

in the lower abdomen
he branded his swell
of advice

caution tape traced in dandelion wind

a line between hoof and mouth

The age is not torturing he who am atomized by your embrace.

People die in things we don’t even think of today, like castles.

A warning peace cruises softly over the public.

This truthful circuit. You’re in my house how.

Directions exit directions, God following their slack.

Suffering is exhaling when one can’t exit my music.

Hearing to music at maximum volume can cause a person to be death.

Throw another rose on the singer. Does he absorb?

The audience laughing in an orb.

December breaks onto the coast.

I’m so looking forward to becoming an environment in which some creature occurs.

But I’m diagonal, day’s mezzanines collapse.

Until the public passes into the twelve-hour tunnel burrowed between these thumbs who crush crime.

I ride three modes to work: one underground, another with sunrise, the last a passing cage.

Opera blasting from a passenger’s buds.

When I arrived my student relayed the following.

“A Shakespearean actor breaks down in the face of a greenscreen.

His dialogue outsourced to plastic elves.”

Who speaks into flat forest?

The echo has nowhere to go and go.

The second call its first dimension.

Above all I’ve endeavored to change my birth’s location.

My parents the thing that’s happened all week. Their warming rays a pile of sleep.

He didn’t have adults in his voice, though he was weeping with it.

I was trying to persuade this look of glass with a score in sand.

His parents in the vicinity waiting for a legal team on the beach.

They are there to tell what has happened actually.

By actual I mean verifiable, evidence printed in the world.

The train’s window going live in daylight.

Its blade and geometric spray.

I wanted a surface to reflect its emissions.

And for all mouths who came to bathe there crippled with braces, foul fuel erased inside.

Each meal a heavy metal pool.

For a couple of years I up and died.

There’s a reason you’re reading this in black.

My ass is splashed with Mozart.

A lit candle saws his head off in the forest.

It is part of his practice. And things feel slightly alive.

Above a station in the metro someone executed two officers.

The New Year arrived and arrived.

My friends are here.

The papers said when the slayer exited his train we all spilled out, faces on an infinite bough.

The tear is ripped as a golden goblet from its body’s bag.

Things feel a little alive.

In my own made-up dark
I understand light as ash falling from god falling from injury.
The light-rope dangling and a mother’s
adolescence is a gun
left in the body. A bright liquid night
spit on the sheets and drying
like the pulp of an apricot. The sun
today is hysterical or maybe I’m in love
in another life. I’m looking at you
looking at the sea. I’m shouting at the waves,
anything, you lied, can happen.

Considerable darkness see-sawing in the sky
Fabricated blurry behavior & the adrenaline of wolves

It dyed the body down
To a voice in the walk

I avoid

Thought stalking muses
This time

Flower devil, handsome death
& the shape of reflex ignites

You don’t want to know a story

In all those trying years did you ever know about my misty moonbrain?

It was light & dust across roads in space
I extract designation

No licking

I’m not entirely certain why you came
Altered & hiding hand-sewn fire
Within the magical realism of classism

You are not alone.
There are a lot of people

quietly interviewing
themselves.

You seize timelessness
and then you pay for it.

Every gas station
is green
have you noticed

money and grass
of which we have
neither.

Red we see first
but green we feel

the lie goes in
through the skin.

The only way
to imagine
being human

is to imagine
being interviewed
as one.

Giving a very smart reply.

But here
look at the sky

look how red it is

No sunset makes its way
into print.

It’s dissolving
look
we’re watching time

and I’m a little older
tonight.

The sun is amazing.
The moon is amazing.

And it’s amazing to think
of what it would be like
to delight people

with who you actually are:

saint and
criminal.

I am just like you
a hot wreck

setting my religion
to music.

I can feel something
visiting

your gold tooth
in the dark.

Being depressed
it’s a shadow
a season

You don’t have to talk
this way

Protecting your legacy
it’s fetishy

Like living
at the museum
of your body.

Eating your own corpse.

I don’t want
to curate my death

or yours.
So please

say
something
dumb

It’s important, you know
for geniuses
to be sloppy

It makes other people brave.

Come
here.
Share the chair.

I think I’m someone.
You are too.

I’ve always wanted to know you.

To still to cold
lucidity, to absolute,
the pulsing

visual field: arrest
the tachycardic
eye’s pulse, eye

a clear fish
egg, iris and vitreous
humor colorless:

to sear
all sterile
by isothermal

chill: to take
all in styptic
and antivolatile.

In 1895 or thereabouts
Harold Clough was born
in Calais, Vermont.
I knew him for the last oh
25 years of his life,
and deep into that time
I thought to talk with him
with a tape recorder running.

I never did.
You’ll never hear his voice
saying anything.
What a dope I am.

When he started driving a car
there was no such thing
as a driver’s license.

He was under five feet tall,
with huge hands and feet,
and his hair stuck out
from beneath his dirty baseball cap
like quills on a porcupine.

It didn’t bother him
to hold live wires
and he could find water
with a stick or coathanger,
it didn’t matter which.

The skin on his hands was so tough
he could just reach in
and take a pie out of the oven.

He showed me how to hold a nail
and at the same time
to drive it with a hammer,
using only one hand.

Around 80 he subscribed to Playboy,
amazed that he could see those girls
all totally naked and glowing, right there.

He once mailed a donut to my dog.

He knew how to lift a barn
all by himself.

One day I got a call from a friend
who said, “Old Harold just died.
In the hospital. Heart attack.”

About an hour later
the friend called back:
“Harold ain’t dead.
He come back to life.”
Not only that, when a nurse came back in
he was sitting up and smiling.

A few years later he really did die,
of a fire, in the house
he was born in.

I once asked him for his mailing address.
“You can put Harold Clough,
East Calais, Vermont.
Or Harold Clough, Adamant.
Or North Montpelier.
Woodbury. Or Calais.
Don’t matter none. It’ll get to me.”

we inhabit a bland planet prattle and shop in precincts
no photons torpedo nobody wormholes nobody
telekinetic not one of us can fly but we sweat
no interest accruing on our MasterCards either
no caps on our data plans no gaps in our Medicaid
through the fevers of spring through our seventeen
months of summer our seven throngs of fall
when the leaves change several times an hour
until it snows those days we need it to snow
so the sun can thaw the barrio dry lay itself easy
as a leg draped across your legs on a porch swing
everybody has a porch swing the beat cops wave to
when they pass they don’t protect us brutal
they don’t police the teeth out of our heads
or hunt us as if they are monsters afraid
of the dark we are not fearful of any invaders
emigrating into our Oort cloud no jingo caucus
gums up our galactic congress no bigot polemic
commandeers our election cycle our super PACs
protect us our lobbyists defend us even
our Republicans consider our expertise
not one is an American there’s no such thing
as Americans there are only bisexuals
all forty-six of our black presidents all
thirty-seven of them women all us bisexuals
infatuated with each other and all our caliphs want
is a key party all our Zions require mutual consent
there is no God there is no God so we get on
with our farming and cookery so when the aliens come
they come for our cuisine they stay for our bar scene
tip us heavy and split their spliffs with us at sunup
on the beach before breakfast before taking us
for a matinee where they marvel at our CGI
the Real3D of our worry that depicts them daft
as we are hungry grunts always fixing for a fight

Though all names are gaseous, and soon,
Mercifully, to be blown away, it’s still better
To have a minty moniker than to be cursed,
Even after death, by one’s creditors and marks.

Silly old Jew, how can your last breath trump
Your howling birth, for even a quick slant
Of sunshine is worth it, though you end up toast.

Precocious, he’d rather linger at open caskets
Than slobber at orgies, not that there’s any.
Even before the clumsy and anxious undressing,
They might flee, leaving you to touch yourself.
Unlike corpses, lovers don’t stay put. Come,

Let’s tickle each other before we’re hard.
Boozing, we sling tosh, but that’s fine, for
Deadened faces can’t cheer up the damp,
Mutely suffering yet, at times, perky parts.

With a tube down his throat, the sick man dreams
Of pho with raw and cooked beef, and brisket,
While in a darkened room, a young man stares
Very hard at miraculous strangers. Sleepless,
She imagines much nudging, lapping and kissing.
Only in the mind does life spread out fully. As
The young man cleans his crotch, the corpse
Is washed, then incinerated. She too washes.

I woke, stretched,
unbuttoned

my tongue to the dumb
word love, to long-

stolen here and halting
thought half-lost

in vinca, our borrowed
stars go by and why,

for home, do I hear
bones hum and names

unbind through shifting
vistas? Stone seems

made that way,
not broken, so don’t

crack open, leave history
hungry, if no fence

invents you, skin will. Time
to slip into it.

Quick rice was white rice
A picture of an old man on the box rewarding impatience
Virtue almost a kind of fortified nutrient
It only takes five minutes to prepare

On the tv screen I can picture rice paddies
Reflecting the sky back to itself as women bend over
And put their hands through the sky
Hats hide their heads in modesty or in shame

Why do I hear helicopters when I close my eyes
And the long stalks bending around in circles
As if in sympathy with the blades or the stars
Or watching an invisible animal bedding down for night

I turned off the tv and had children of my own
I had to learn to cook so I could feed them
Then I learned some grains cooked slow
Jasmine for example or Arborio thick and squat

Ladle after ladle of steaming broth dropped into the pot
And stirring it in circles that keep spinning
Spinning until the liquid’s gone
Add more and then I repeat I repeat

The same motions differently
Salt the water and bring to boil
Drop in the wild or the brown or drop in
The forbidden and turn the heat down

It takes an hour
I can play games or I can do chores
Wipe prints off windows
Turn solicitors from the door

The radio plays songs between news of the war
Just parts of songs nothing whole
Fading out before the words come on
When the drone decides the data looks right

Is firm to the tooth is tender but has bite
It sends the bomb home
Silent as delight a button turns off the noise
The children eat so they’ll grow

*

Dark purple at the bottom of the empty
White bowl we ate all we could eat
Of forbidden rice with avocado and meat
Like ink at the bottom of the bowl

I could write their names on a grain
It might bring them luck
Glued onto a string tied around their wrists
It might bring my children luck

To write on rice with ink made from rice
To dip the single-hair brush into the bowl
And paint their names patiently
As ink dries so they walk through time

Carrying no burden greater than a grain of rice
No wise man in a cloud looks down
The water’s been boiling so long no steam
Curls up into a cloud

No cloud gathers while at the table I work
No voice speaks from white
Cloud of sleep-tossed hair
The child wears her open mouth and stares

Out the window at her hands at the tree
That says maybe when the wind blows through
Its cloud of leaves maybe this work will
Wander back to earth somehow somehow in the dirt

Make a bed where a cloud can fill a head and hide
What’s been done from what’s been said

*

The longest grain can only hold a single word
Just a name just a hint like joy

Like pain hints at some fact outside myself
Like rice in a plastic bag
Like a cloud squat and dumb in the light
On the table wanting while it waits

All the words like like
The book of genesis is waiting again to begin
To begin I need to break the moment apart
And on a grain write the word begin

Not long after the beginning an old man sits in flames
They curl up around him like petals
They seem so gentle when they seem like a flower
That is an image of fire on fire

Like words singing inside flames don’t burn
Like rice in the scathing heat softens damage into use
So that old man sitting in a flower on fire speaks
And a younger old man writes down all he says

I am jealous I am kind I kill I condemn
I save I choose all of you numerous as dust
As stars as grains of rice
Quiet in a box or in a plastic bag don’t wait begin

It makes the fine motor skills ache appropriately
It feels like starch in the mouth worship
No images love others print it down on these grains
Watch the pot until it boils be patient amen

The inner shore is ice
Two swans stand on it
Adjusting their feathers
They can afford to be casual
They're white
And together

Between their shore and mine
The wind tears at the surface

Pluto.1

                                the pearl starts over
                                a new grain of sand
                                we are going to find
                                in the planet of blue
                                a freshly written eviction note
                                gone fishing for better tenants
                                a sash hanging off the horse
                        told the story            without you
        the kind of children we deserve who rob us in our sleep
                                              we never need to believe in anything again
                                they take our car and money and head for the beach

Pluto.2

        they requested a happier poem
        the distinct sound of a backstab
                                up in the stomach getting a fix on the signal
                                      leave vomit on the
                                    seat and tell them we
                                are not sorry for any of it
                            poke surrounding haystack in
                          search of a                  slow song
                        excess is haunted by our poverty of benevolence
                                      but we grab a broader patch of shoulder
                                                   corrupt the smallest eyes in the
                                                                    freshly printed poem

Pluto.3

                                          judged by the way we fall in
                                  love in the bathroom in sweating out the misery
                                                     entering the fine blades in harmony
                                              chopping all of our best to distribute over
                                        the whole goddamned rotted beating muscle
                                                     even when we have
                                                     forgotten where we
                                                   are love            finds us
                                                           just sticks us
                                                           sobbing with
          shame inside a glorious steaming pile of the musk
    saying no doesn’t matter you can’t say no for long

Pluto.4

                                                                              we win from time to time
                                           abandoned above adaptable positions of the losing
                  we risk everything in thinking we can navigate maverick of the green
                                                                                        carry a bottle of wine into
                                                                                         the pumpkin patch looking
                                                                                            for a new         way to
                                                                                             angle the old songs
                                                                                              sell me a ticket to
                                                                                              your dance please
                                                                     I believe in the strength of poetry
                                                                         a little stone in the moth helps
                                                                                  balance her on my breath

little did I know I was accruing I was amassing itness striving for allness stopping short of relatedness the light hit me
in a way that people tell you isn’t flattering and it revealed portions of my self that had been waiting to be trotted out
for consumption for dissemination for fandom those who accept it get to keep it it is theirs it is theirs it is a new
puppy in a house with an old puppy it is theirs

She raised me on one knife. A heavy butcher's tool
that crushed bones; there was much to break in exile.
The only light from a rectangular window was blocked
by a staircase, our ear to the comings and goings of the elders
who lived above us. At dawn, they coughed up phlegm
across the balcony, over our sleeping heads. They mumbled
their prayers all day, unflaggingly accumulating merit
in hope for future lives. Almost every night she made noodles,
she julienned beef – which was buffalo – she never mistook
her fingers for the meat we were to eat. Every meal
was a statement of her memory. Every night I sat
as she drank tea and recalled the day spent apart. Among
my many tools is a knife for bread, a knife for meat,
a knife for vegetables and a knife for everything. They bide time,
attempting to make happiness. My knives seek my skin.
When I bleed, I think of her. How she would take my finger
into her mouth, and would tell me not to mistake a knife's competence
for knowledge. That it does not have a heart. Every now and then
when the day has a sore ankle, I imagine she will come home.
I brew her special tea, I warm her cup. I wait for the door to open.

Until yesterday, I hadn’t run into Dan
In a few years, so was surprised
To see his hair still black, his body
Still muscled, with only the slightest
Hint of a beer belly. “I was never much
Into drinking. I smoke weed after work.”

“Still, man, you look great! Look at me!”

“You know, I’m half Asian.”

“Well, I’m 100% Asian,
And I look like shit.”

Dan said his mom had just died, so
He had to hustle home to make a pot
Of chili to bring to his dad in Fogelsville.
His brother, Cyrus, was in jail again,
For, what else, dealing drugs. Dan
Used to be his brother’s partner until
He got an office job 25 years ago. Once

When he was really trashed, he told me
About killing some black guy with Cyrus,
But I never got to the bottom of it. Now,
Dan’s a good dad and husband, with two
Nice houses, one in Sea Isle, New Jersey.

White hair runs in my family. We’re all born
With white hair sprouting from our hearts,
And though we appear so ancient tumbling
From that tunnel, we stay immature
Until we’re laid out in that final box.

A shutterbug, Dan shoots pedestrians as he
Rides his bike to and from work, or as he walks
His shih tzu. “People are very odd animals.”
With bodies coming in waves, causing awe
And arousal, we raise machines to our faces.

Freakish being, come here. No less odd, I touch
Your head like I’m your dad, but I’m not your dad,
Since you’re my mom, but I don’t quite know that,
So in my confusion, I kiss your forehead, then
Your closed eyelids. Since we don’t know how
To do anything according to nature or nurture,
We lie perfectly still until the eyes are away.

I don’t know who said an orphan
    cannot go for a funeral
        because the highway leads
            into a night  whoever reads
            the road will cross
                    a grave
        a corpse is an unwanted
    seed
    seeking a room for nine
        guests to hang on

the only remaining answer
    of a song

The fluorescent light
goes off and the shadows
fall apart like a cardboard fort.

The invisible should be sturdier,
like that stormy summer
the rain came so heavy

the waterfall was just
a thicker column of sky.
Now a fly throws itself

down on the formica table
and buzzes and spins
on its back, quickening

the poison. It resembles
a word scribbled out.
Won't do, won't do.

But oh you of the river-
wet lips, I miss you
this moment, and this.

my husband’s deep
in a dream of papier

mache bowls colors
arrayed in a way

what will we do
with them? he asks

the dream-me
we can’t toss

salad in them.
one of our guests

puts one on his head
he wakes to dill-green

the silver tabby’s eyes:
manzanilla olives

hours tumble out
like birthday wrap

I drive each way
with no radio

My aunt my momma’s sister
She had a real good
Piano had it right

in her front room there
She lived just up the street I used to
when I was a boy      / I used to      hide in her

bushes when she was giving lessons
just to hear her play
I don’t know why I hid

She loved Chopin and all of them
She and my momma had some differences between them
One morning I walk over

because I know she has a lesson coming
But when I get      there her front door it’s
wide / Open and I don’t hear no

music just a few
bad notes but not bad
like a child was learning them

I sat in the bushes anyway just waiting for a while
But I got bored you know the way
A boy gets bored it’s like he gets more

interested at the same time but in far off things
So I peek through the window
And then I see it her front room it’s all tore up

Some fool I guess
had robbed her / Busted her      things up busted her
piano too       / Just to be mean I guess my

Aunt she’s just sitting on the bench
staring at nothing
but she must have heard me      / Because she turns and smiles and she

starts to stand up      she leans      forward she takes her      / Hands
they was resting on the keyboard from the keyboard      / And grips the front edge of the bench
I watch her hands      but at the same time I see every part of her and every part of her

Looks bigger like I’m focused on it      / Like if you made a picture of a woman
From cut up pictures from a magazine
And nothing fits together      but it’s her but I don’t recognize her

And shit man I don’t know
what it was but I never will forget it shit my heart
Starts pounding and

I / All of a sudden I can’t      breathe and I
Run I run home I run so hard I throw up
Soon as I shut      the front door      right there / Got my ass      whipped for that

But not for running but for throwing up
I told my momma      everything and all she did was shake her head      / And you know
Mmm mmm mmm and What       / A shame and she went back to what she had been

Doing in the kitchen
How can nothing be the same if you don’t talk like nothing’s different
Anyway naw I never learned to play no banjo

In the movies I just
wiggled my fingers
and they laid the music over me

a celery root
a spoon
a pear wrapped in green paper

but there are some grey areas
like when I kissed you and his face
entered my mind like a cry

they say kindness comes
from understanding its opposite—

your brothers locked you
in an air conditioner

but who taught me cruelty?

the hawk shifting foot to foot on his nest—no,
nobody can say

but I can say

blue flames begin to lick the newspaper
shredded in the enormous hearth
I prodded and fanned

Glenn Ligon put pink lipstick on Malcolm X.
On Malcolm’s eyelids, he dusted a blue made luminous by lead.
On his cheeks, he painted two copper dots, like a doll’s rouge.
The process was gentle. It involved coloring books and children.

Glenn Ligon titled the painting Malcolm X (Version 1) #1 (2000).
Ligon loved a curator named Thelma Golden, who looked at the image for a long time.
I don’t know, she said.
But he let it hang in Minneapolis’s Walker Art Center.

People called for the painting’s head, and it died on the wall
the way everyone wanted. But in the art world people were
always declaring this defunct, that dead. The curator was not scared.
She tasted the eyeshadow and tried to see

the eyeshadow Ligon had seen on
Malcolm, beneath. She tried to see how
the lips that said If you’re a man, you take it
still spoke today.

If a child puts Malcolm in a dress then some say respect ends.
But if we reach up to Malcolm with our lipgloss, he smiles.
If we put it on ourselves first, to show how it isn’t poison,
he shrugs and takes a sip of water. He says there’s poison everywhere.

Why didn’t he say that then? Because he was made of time
like we are. We are made of time and so we don’t know.
In the future, we will not be golden if we don’t do the work.
But if we do the work we’ll hear the art calling for our heads.

Ligon knew that Malcolm was responsible for women who make themselves,
and he was also responsible for the lead found in eyeshadow, bullets, and water.
And Glenn Ligon is responsible for Malcolm X and eyeshadow and water.
And you and I are responsible for Glenn Ligon and bullets and water and women.

Glenn Ligon reaches up to you with the glowing blue.
You should close your eyes so that it goes on smoother.
Savor the metals, and watch them drink up the coloring children.
Soon the children will stop their gentle work and wonder what you were thinking.

It must be admitted that real
Problems require fake tasks,
The door won’t stay open

On its own, a cloud respond
To any of the intended
Directions conceived for it

From below. It should come
As no surprise while hour
Presses hour into daylight

We are our being put
To work idly like stars,
No sleep per se but from

Time to time an absence
Of events. Then one day,
No, not even then.

And yet. And yet not
So much. At most, a minor
Doubt falls from the agreed-upon,

Filters through distraction
Toward notice, is “found,”
Then carried around as proof

Dooms move a few inches
Per year—life is therefore
Best looked at in passing

While horizons flare.
Things go calmer along
An edge, advancing from

The present set of streaks
Along some decaying paths
Suggesting this halflife is

A makeshift cameo
Where dusk does a brief business
And only rarely does it grow

Hotter overnight, preferring
Instead to pulse and dip
Within a patient mix

As inevitable as avoidable
Where nothing matters so
It sweetly does. That and that

Only is why I continue
To develop useless systems
I’ve already had it with,

Had it on very good authority
Then lost it, exchanged it
For this, this was my maxim

Now (meaning then), literally
The word itself when still
Some blue to its air.

Which tempts one to say
I as though a door opened
In a star and houses were clouds,

Clouds studies in the field
Of breathing bodiless,
Bodies versions of flawed dark.

That and only that is why
I pursues its antecedents
Forward in time across

Their various pulses, counting
On you and the others to provide
The reliable surprise

June rain is, then isn’t.
And specificity all
Wait, no, forget it,

But can’t go out like that
So stays on in a way
Which feels like coming back

Again, one of those houses
That seem to lean forward
When you look at their eaves,

Of which the night is full.
It goes without saying,
Then with it, that this

Habit the environment
Has and wears, spirited
Rumor of pertinence,

Is the matter of fact sign
Of being before great change.
And it’s true I’ve begun to read

Again, tend small things,
Draw the fingers of the left hand
Absently through dark water

Of another day whose stars
Are occluded, siding against men
In any issue, fighting the urge

Not to, preparing each meal
As though it were the next.
Things are terrifically,

Both the point and beside it,
To it, so much blue sky
Poured into a staid mold

Above and around, not
Quite among, not exactly
Benign or ill, just

Running an easy indifference
Almost total but also
Thinned out to where

You can nearly see through
To the nominal source. Time
Needs an antecedent

About as much as I
Need my job, which is to move
All things from their place

To their ultimate destination
Where these are identical
Though not to be confused.

If nothing else could rouse you
for seven days, then conclamatio—
the eager singing of your name
relentless and in group, the gathers
of robes touching one great circle—
commenced. And on the eighth night
of no response the pollinctores came;
doused you with a dust of flowers
that once made you sneeze but now
became your mask of pallid unbeing.
If you were at peace when last vocal,
your given name was called. But if
there was fear you were in peril,
nicknames confounded the nicks,
the demons that seemed to seek you.
If you were reachable in any world
other than this one, the repetition
of the word they called you by,
your name, would guide you back.

what about the soul
what about it

more like a whole egg in your mouth
more like two halves

of a lamb
on a spit

I stand with my back
to myself I am turning

I see
what he will

see I see what
he saw

God was a misapprehension
that would not go away,
a bright fabric bleached to nothing
then by light
restored.

Was their many tales,
their hands, the only
means by which they were allowed

to touch.  Depth
of careworn, care, the
confusion of love.  Their

ruined limbs blackened with frostbite,

the cysts that brought, at least, color
to their faces.  God,

their gestures.  God among them,
the surreptitious squeeze
of fingers, blown
kisses, the innocent dreaming
what it would be to be grown up:

To have clean socks.  To be God.
To have a birthday.

Mortician’s knit—1—purl—2 climbs
temple to temple:

slippery threading closing a parted

peony & poppy brain, giggling
still. Beneath a red

handkerchief, waxen eyes,

pronounced floppy eye
lashes. My cartoon fox

trounced with a delicious anvil,

metallic kiss to vein. Absence of a movable
mercury mouth, quiet won over. Wrists

in line & bones never more

connected. Wait. I should brace
to realize the lax-sewn valley between

scrubbed nipples. Someone’s heart

was excavated & weighed today for
the first time, not-echoing, on

metal. The blisterlight resounds secular &

sops up corners, maybe eyes.

Important to also imagine paradise

Harbor where the wind begins
In the shadows in the vines

Love is redundant, indefensible, effortless to disprove
Fragility was of value or was a value

When I was alive somebody ordered an extra coffee
Beside me in arboresque rain

Here you are

disillusion’s rimed nock
affracts the hour

this blade-country
marrowed
into a word,        a leper
(adrift among staithes)

even the sky is moving
its black hives
to some higher ground,
I observed

I bring a razor
to the wedding feast
see how bright
the knot     that testifies

to the gold
coin’s mechanical thrust

invisibly, the shore
signs back to us,
solving for              (ex-)

o day-linden, en-
hespering,     a blind clot

& nuisance
to the binding-hooks
my hair grows towards

black yucca of the rain
ensheaths itself
in theft’s shepherd–delta

passing through
the tomb–carapace
mercy listens
for the sniper’s voice

the war moved a
little, against my face

the poem
is not a body, though
a body holds it
in the same light

black yucca of the rain
wait with me
with the interred poem

the sniper releases
the child’s hand
& drops his garment

the tine–animal
advances
you can feel its beige
compression scar

before the jury–stones

which        silent
await the second bell

On the other hand
real Kool–ad
hoc, abut men
running for exception, a
once–now–nonce, esq., briefly,
         a drawn shade
WANTED here, however
castaway shadow of the drowned—
         warriors walking underwater—

there, a shore
peppered with spent rounds

  you felt
                                              like a new
                                    animal   there are
                               lookout drops
                                              too open
                                           to behold
                                              I felt
                                   your heat your
                                        heat    the deer
                                               running
                                         my blood
                                            almost    a floral
                                        amphitheater
                                   and I could not
                                                        redwood    would
                                             not name   eucalyptus
                                                     evergreen    o tree
                                                abyss        I looked
                                                    at you      in the deepest
                                                 piano dark



the snow has made outside
into a small museum

at night a child
bursts from my mother

I know it is not me
because there is no cut in her

no dark scar carved
into aspen bark

just the animal
of her abdomen

I am jealous of this
body crashed through hers

but mother tell me
how cold the knife


With just the desire
The organism keeps out
Undoing the platform twice
Anger with anger
And loss with loss
Two years later
We’ll find disappointments easier
And replace one magnet off the refrigerator
Reach out to the plant
And break it
Then smear our faces
With dust

Loosed from the rain, suspended
like a bough that broke and didn’t fall,

Sergei returned to fix the fake fire.
I’d worried the pilot was on too strong.

Though he fixed it for free, fire
always means profit and free

in this case means already paid.
“Finally,” I calculated,

“I found out I love you.
We achieved the physical

life of difference
we’d always held from each other inside.

I saw your life as if across a stage
I had tossed you a looking glass.

There are so many ways to think of us
that I have thought them all.

In one, we’ve been a painting
to which we were in a museum drawn,

stood peering at it for days
imagining the essays

and then we walked away.
In another, we preferred to dine

with literary people of unliterary sympathies,
who said at the restaurant, humiliating the effort,

Get your head out of books. Write for the waitress.
I close down around me like a thousand-petaled lotus

when I privilege my sympathy with others
over my system of belief, my thought

that at times I have no sympathy
at all, none except my own belief

that I have no belief
that is not a sympathy.

Freeing myself from what ailed me in others
gave me room to encounter someone new.

That’s how I took you, as someone
working for but excluded by virtue.”

“Makes me feel dumb,”
he said of my poem.

porno Clydesdale leadership pony totems

on fire     sons would be      bid us prance
tamp this scrub grass to come up in sparklers

branching available      Camaros are a form reliably

passing fast like goodbye aughts being no longer
a young man I let your mother wear my gold
Italian horn into a New Year’s Eve what do you think

of such types one told my mother I’d need a horn
finger the calcium     knob at my cheek     what a three line English
what if the promise we love is Neptune’s white bull in retreat

from a little town in the waves Saturday morning holiday quiet turnabouts
big stores look away on the frame of our mirror

two long tailed birds kiss a flower between them
1974 to 2010      a good chunk before you     a few presidents

Already what would kill you was
There     killing you     before you did
Those things that strip my memories
Of you      of love      already what



Would kill you was there     in the scans
Later I saw stained light how     hard
It was and is     still to accept
An innocent a physical       illness



As an excuse     I wanted you to
Have wounded me with your whole heart
As I had thought you loved me grand–



mother for what love ever did
I fight so fiercely as I fought
To keep the harm you did to me

the summons               the sleepy run in
a run on sentence stops           an awkward wave
I rubbed my eyes
           and I didn’t know what to say

the next evening I find you
the you with the readymade
a story you recount to me about myself,
you sit me down         I listen.

I had ordered two drinks to avoid waiting
in line I cheated. I cut through for you
warranted all of my attention
           to ready an arrival
                      to toast
with bourbon and tepache

before you my skin broke         hung on a hook
behind my bedroom door
for far too long

and I took it off
and put it on,
and smoothed myself
down

I am my skin’s
rightful landscape.

You can walk through
                                 visit if you’d like
You can stay over too,
my bed is small         enough         my wingspan
in this expanse
there is room for you

your plaintive song calls out to me
stumbling into dream
while you         the corner of my bed
stroking my head
nursing my barren wastes back to better shapes;
restoring me back to a nature once compromised by systems

I dream of taking the baby out of the house.
Waking up, she registers
the edges of her crib
and the mobile above.
I microwave a white bowl of water.
She begins slowly to move
and I reach in to lift her.
I prepare her, changing her,
holding her warm
clean flesh in place,
extending a free hand
for a flat, tiny hat,
unrolling a sock
onto each smooth foot.
I struggle for a while
to arrange her limbs
in the tangled cloth carrier.
She squirms on me in the mirror.
As her mini clothes spin
hot in the back room,
I pull the gate closed,
lifting it slightly
so the square hole
lines up and locks.
I share her with the block.
Metal chains and blue leaves
painted over a soaked couch in the street.
Their fat vibrant edges
are garish and new,
but what could be louder than her,	
alive like a dog.
Heavy as a bag of food.
Her feet hang, her warm eyes
roll back. She bites my finger
with a soft, wet mouth.
Passing clean cars and thin trees,
their smooth bark
painted white at the base,
taking in the hard, layered leaves
of each potted succulent,
I consider using this freedom
to call someone familiar
as the baby looks up at me
and fixes her eyes there,
her weight buckled to mine,
her sock falling off.
I'm starting to get to know her.
She has a center.
I fear tripping over a branch
or discarded plank,
and crushing her beneath me.
Wrong light, like bits of concrete,
where stars should be.

I live up there
in fast shadows of a top floor
window woman,

pulling black hair from her brush

I’m warned that you don’t live here
by the child
on the stairs who with his shard
of parking lot concrete defends
your pink apartments

& under that night’s bored helicopter I have made
the lunches for tomorrow—
once I dug a grave for someone’s cat—
slack–eyes unheld by thin meteors
of bone that float outside the socket

Always this
gratuitous animal display
of teeth we code as smile, to even have survived
somewhat, freak out in your
sleep on a plane

Days I haven’t slept enough I’m summoned
to the captain who built the house
they took apart
to make the bank of benches at the urgent care
Invisible light, the sun streaming in
to the citadel on stolen horses
His table’s set with wooden steak chops,
plastic peas
He's chewing something small like nuts & nodding,
nodding at his

suffocated embers


When perspective arrived it claimed
a building behind every man on
paved soil. The eye,

hardly concerned
with curve, will follow every line
to the vanishing

other. The men are spun
from choice of colored
cloth, spin—

cycle of pages
from scripture read again,
again, as the son (& all

sons) are saved
in a thousand
fabrications.

A feast of reproductions
in the age
before mechanical

error. Before trees
& cities were allowed to touch,
the I had to find itself. Thus:

I dove into
Your fantasy,
& never—

(Welcome everything in)
Using both cursive and print in the same
paragraph or voluminous examples of
“cross-writing” during civil war when
paper turns scarce. When the words do
not resolve but clank and die next to
each other. Arbitrary actions leveled at
flagstones in architecture, resetting our
margins after the poem has already been
typed into “emotional” paragraphs. A
hovering form of distortion. That we die
and only the recordings will go on
existing. Who filled my head with such
dark and exceedingly separate stars?
Ghosts I lifted along the turns of
wandered roads, ahead of the game,
behind the times. We regret our early
books for their lack of innate distortion,
a dead yellow breeze onto the gold coin
floor show (molten lights). When he
faints from terror she busies herself. A
crinkling irritation, violin electric black.
A writer is a foreign country coated in
ritual dust. I mistrust my neighbor’s
children, all government, they have
come out as a terrible person (in droves)
I welcome you into the sound of
repeating our demands, as distillate,
archive, plumes of coal smoke, simply
the time it takes for the bank to form
above us. “Living goes on
to resemble its cure.” And setting that
against John’s line “Sexual facts are
tiring too... I dreamt Christopher Smart
as the escaped lunatic hero who begins
to detain fascist after fascist through
force, shadows of iron lace, Saint
Peters’ St. & Royal for the final chase.
For I will consider my sonnets
unconnected, titled and dull forever
after this, fluttering after full of worry, I
will keep blowing out this brutalist
stricture in music, demanding a
dynamic in language that mirrors the
mind is insanity, a common distortion.
Where there is no actual clash and
surrender, it’s every day and still has a
sprung enclosure effect. Orange and
Black Wall falls over two pages. I make
endless destroyed works as they will
become the best poetry, exquisite, half
forgotten, a torn tissue, four to eight
specks of unequal green.

after some
while, to
persuade himself
as the snows
pile

all things, he
thinks
think, by some
mortal link

fine particles, bright
sound in
air, loud surface
of sea, still
groans from the
ground

all this he hears
and it endears
to him the silence of the spheres

raises his
fist, lets
go, wrist
over face

light bent just
so, into figures of
common sight

white cloud and
thunder, under
rowdy skies, day
swallowed up

dusk

dark

sun–
rise (all these he sees
no farther up than the leaves
of trees)

immediate
questions, failures
successes
doubts and opinions
clashes, caresses, dry
bones, dry
bones talking on
telephones

moats
filled with
rubbish and roly–
polies, Jesus Christ beside
Pompey in the Holy–
of–Holies

no Lord in this
devil of a
rain, hailstones hacking
valleys out of plain

a thousand years, sadder
and sadder, where
appetite
mounts a
ladder
of
rock
river, sky
air
well enough
placed

edges inter–
faced, the old trite
story:

memento mori

straining to
follow dis–
appearing light
his eyes ablaze with
night


Please pardon our appearance
here, piecing rivets,
stitched apart into
Perseus holding himself
to the mirror. Holy mess
of a tangram, where
same figures contain
each other—and words,
do they contain us as
well, we’ll just have to see.
Poems are holey. A façade
bends away from the face.
I can see myself saying that
what breaks from you
remains.

All winter our house was warm and deaf.
I could just see the few white flowers
outside the window. A true happiness occurred.
Don’t stand there now asking to be loved.

We could feel the thawing in the river,
low and guilty. I was still learning her particularity,
all the beautiful colors in her face, even as my arms
loosened dreamlike from around her.

It all happened as my premonition told me it would.
I loved her, but I’m not sure she loved me back.
I know that many times I misspent
her hope: it was flowering, and it was finite.

Then again, maybe I’ll want a young wife
in my old age. A bad man is the sort of man
who admires innocence. It’s a theme that breaks her heart,
but not the one that’s particularly unbearable.

I could touch her at any time. All the while
she was thinking of the work she wanted to do, despite
her absolute, unreasoning devotion to me. How life surprises you.
I had never been here before and yet I thought I understood it all.

What happens to old love, tell me if you know.

a whole new brand of anecdote in which
embattlement became estranged from fight.
the lukewarm war.

                                said even drone pilots
can get the blues. said you can’t plug the leak
without a duct-taped mouth to smack around.
said binary was never meant to serve
as honor code.

                        he used to wear his ring
til it got bent from kickback. from recoil.
he didn’t used to be so coiled up.
the grass out back was never quite this high.
sound of the mower though.

                                             a study showed
that surgeons who played shooting games improved
their operation outcomes. deft and swift.
fine motor movements yielding smaller cuts
and less to heal. control. control. control.

Under the condition of a small hole in the floor of an auditorium
is where you will find me, sometimes in my Girl F suit, my hair as big or bigger than the rest of my body. So no that’s not a rug don’t you step on me. They used the word condition but that is not how I see it. They say it is a small hole but look, I am in it, and I am not a small person. An auditorium, yes. Listen. Last year I finally had my Girl F suit made which is great because now I have something to wear when under the circumstance of a small hole in the floor of an auditorium. We’ve been in many, me and the suit. And if you had hoped I would speak to the actual experience of being Girl F under the condition of a small hole in the floor of an auditorium, just remember that I am not at all Girl F, I am simply wearing a Girl F suit, and as for the questions regarding whether this is a real small hole or a small hole that is real, or a very very small real hole, and which auditorium in which circle of reality, well those questions are better resolved between you and James Dean. Everybody says one thing, you say another, and he changes back again, James Dean into Girl Dean and I’d really prefer if you’d stop hating on all the scales and spaces of who we all think we really are.

I

The embryo un-gels, falls runny through splits of this open palm.
In the corner of the living room I catch the wrinkled fern frond
unfurling midrib, the just-open stipe service to me only

in this muted light. Overnight, the cactus pushed out from its stem
a new bud, a sternum cracked open to make room for this other heart.
Outside, at the base of the honey locust, a cardinal turns focused:

a pair of robins feud over a slick body the rain’s just let from its burrow.
They’ve each an end and no more than two quick tugs before it’s torn
and all its rings go falling from the central shaft, clinking

against each other as they slide down and land in a ruddy pile, easy
as loosing a thread from its eye, I imagine. I am witness to the bed of red
shortleaf needles upon which it dies. When I look back for the cardinal

it is gone. Even I know the disquiet of stillness here in this mourning
as I stand in this room, legs calm and apart, and watch a stream
of blood run steady down each my thighs.

II

I’ll tell you everything I know about blue jays, what makes them blue,
how their plumes don’t stow it but that sacs of air in their barbs scatter
incoming light, casting a blue light from the bird, making a non-blue

thing appear it. Roses scraping the northern window mimic
the lonely bird who slings its bawl through its sad radius to
whatever will listen. I heard one can hear the flow of water

through a tree so now I press my head to anything to hear
hearts drumming. Listen: you can hear an echo coming. Ready
the pruned breast’s drops pooling at its tip–lower it to this

open mouth. I sense you dreaming inside me. God of anything, send me
something to keep alive. I’ll tell you then what I’ve known but what
do you know of throats anyway, what have you to say of red, of blue,

of the small clefts of light that drip through the feet of curtains,
of the way the same red bird returns each dusk to the most-east branch
of the blue beech out back, singing or crying I can never be sure.

an odd past
future tense
I exist to some
degree of moving
forward I am
an am of
the sediment
on the surface I
can only hope I
am past all tense
moments ever
springing like

1.

I have this dream where I am the Daughter of the Machinist.
My father, balancing pipes that lead to other pipes, dropping
a marble ball. Precision as love, without remainders, without
the toothy excess of spiral bound notebooks. I cut love clean.

Instead, I am the Daughter of the Gambler. Who is winning this
staring contest? I ask my father. I dare you to blink! Slumped slug,
he spills all the chips on the table and says nothing, always
nothing. Chirp, chirp, goes the robin, Robber of Dreams.

All around me, Atlantic City butters itself with dinner rolls, roiling
ocean bilge. No one looks me in the eye. Here is the Daughter,
spun in boardwalk cotton candy, puke perfect. Here is the Father,
saying I am your father. Village after village, fishmongers walk away

from their fish, drawn to city stupor. Dream of the Dung Beetle,
I soothe. Of its celestial turns, simple machinations in muck.


2.

With each celestial turn, each match, I am mucked, soothed not –
no tooth under no pillow. I gnaw on a spare rib to teethe myself,
delicious. Dream of the Baby Owl, twisting its bright eye onto
you. When I was born, I did not cry or blink, a Telescope Doll,

spittle spun and talcum tossed. My mother told me she’s the only
beauty left in this world. I knocked my gavel in agreement. Hear,
hear. Song of Justice, Just Enough. Today, the planets gnaw on
their nails in smoke, exhausted. I wipe CO2 from my memory,

in a circular motion, waving hello. In a photograph, my mother
cradles me in New York and I: shaking a fist in front of a statue
of a white general who did not go to jail for murder. Across
the street: Casino Buses of Lost Dreams arrive in Chinatown

with red cigarette streamers. Here, the ghosts cry so loudly you
can see their breath in alleyways, winter wailing down to rats.


3.

Rats seethe in alleyway walls, winter there can not fall down
sooner. My brother, born in the blue flame of February,
is my mirror kin. Together, we kick everything in sight
to see better. Ant hill, MSG bin, box of plastic cutlery

clanging a xylophone avant-garde. We raise seashells to
our ears and hear nothing but garbage trucks lifting all
that we waste but want. Crush crap, the Dinosaur of
Garbage gobbles. Together, the Restaurant Babies refill

napkin and sauce containers like regurgitating bird food.
We sing of duck sauce and chili and straws pulled down
by levers, levitating in tubular innovation. Customers
furnish their mouths with lacquered loins, a pork

procession. Dream of the Country that Shall Not Be
Named, coins in clouds held over our heads like carrots.


4.

Head in the clouds, I coined a name: Hellish Careless Rot.
What I called the garden my father smoked in, seeds of
ash and fire spit. Cilantro stems under boots of drunk
men demanding payback for oceans they’ve crossed,

convinced the Ocean crossed them. Cross my heart, my
father swears, eyes as red as a rabbit, Grazer of Nothing.
Tomatoes roll down sidewalks, little splats of startling
summer. Dream of My Heart Rolling Away, state by

state. Late July, my grandmother clips green vines with
her claws, wears it as jade. The garden simmers in brackish
brown slush. Rot like armpits, rot like lizard eyes. I dream
of string beans so long, they lineage. My Mother the Gardener

digs deep like every worm I’ve known. She overturns the soil,
the Living freshly furrowed. I want a vegetal love, she lulls.


5.

She loves all that is living: wants fresh fur, a lullaby of vegetables
to sing her aching bones to sleep. My mother stretches snake-like,
hissing at machines she furnishes with envelopes. Her body over
worked, my love flying around her like a bat. Frantic flight, I echo

won’t you take a day off? Dream of Labor as Love. Overtime is time
and a half, the Half Moon coos. My Bat Love: her kindly blind
kin. Equations of the Equator calculate. Night shift after night
shift equals sedimentary sleep. At Pimple Dusk, my brother

inspects stubble on his chin, looks like the Father as Adolescent
Idol. Year after year, we watch banks being built on ancient
ground, money sprouting rabbit ears and rivers receding in
recession. My father blinks a bottle away, wobbles in his wonder,

where is the Daughter? If by mountain, canyon, forest, or heart
ambled. Daughter, I have this dream where I say what I mean, first.

I search static for a portrait of an eye; for your real eye rolls in socket away from me, absorbs my tissues in half light, thinks it knows me—distastes me—wants to suck my marrow & spit me wet & disoriented into an urn. The stagnancy lies to me; I’m a whole wound built from synaptic lies; scribble my name & before I ask, erasure—how synthetic rubber burns your jaws in chew; my name grits between pulp & dentin & enamel of molars; you forget me before you know how to speak me. Our thrash & flail temperaments where history winnows my vagina, my Mexican veins, my genetic disposition to die earlier than; we call these unnatural causes: environment of a single-parent-upbringing, weight of oppression. How my relation to someone forgetting; chaffs of me, where I lay down in the fodder next to my own guts & organs & muscle memory; to be ingested or at least tasted once, where you find me in float of your belly’s acids, etching my lips to the lining of walls.

in the zone’s imaginary war found the image
of war was surprise surrender, an over-stimulus
  package of floating flower. framed

corner grenade in fire in time. who knew

black paint was orange like that when
you improvise a match. riot came and taught
taggers to color with fire, hiss for pain not to
be a weapon, roar for weapons that don’t mean

pain. fluid at once and masked protection –
he was that muffled retaliation, icons up for mutilation,
that conversation which failed to note
                          how the failure to create music is nothing
less than its own music was the only failure. sung
writing and strung writing wrong differently and sand
different edges of the zone’s militarized jaw. brick

machine’s offense is your pleasure in the sweetedged grind
between what they hear and how it would sound if
they could hear and how raw it is to say what you said
so not to be heard.
                                      only music can enact its own
mutiny, motherfucker, the world when the one turns
on the microphone but wears a mute.


