There is nothing sentimental

in this forest. A squall, birch boughs

sibilant. Some hearth upwind glut

with wet wood. You, who have

taken a fine polish, could have wed

a woman you would have loved.

I dwelt once beneath a linden tree

sprung up between leaves of mica,

scaffolds, lanes of passing traffic.

Its redolence stifling and flawless,

conditional. I do not miss it.

Clubmoss torn from a tangled

understory underfoot: its spores

ground and blown into a burn,

strewn — burnt rapidly, & bright.


A man goes on a journey,

          a woman does not. Instead,

birches murmur into the song

          of a bird unseen,

the forest endlessly receding.

To be alone

          and without purpose:

a seed borne on wind

          to flat stones arrayed

on a remote shore, witness

          to news, songs, myelin.

One of her last friends

          a succession of ribs,

distinct and vast in sudden collapse.

Mother, we make no choices. Mother,

          I count your frail bones.

Mottled gray and gold

through alders dense —

like a wreath, scapular,

her garland of reversal.

A garment in bias cut

corners the woman

I was

          to have become,

whose hipbone juts

just so, traced and splayed

like brambles bent

          to a wooden floor.

Bone unfurled, unfurling.

Sea as heavy as pencil lead,

ice from shore to shore as leads

draw together, subsuming

something smudged out.

Glassy as seal oil. Surface

hoar collapses, collapsing.

Imaaġruk

          only a word between us.

Always talking about the eyes.

Blue eyes. The Brennan side.

Blue car, black interior. As she walks by,

black dress. Blue and black dress.

Why does he mention the interior?

He’s in the dark. Sometime in the second hour.

I want you to feel what I feel.

It won’t wash off.

After that they drove to the river. A Thursday

afternoon, some men out fishing, with poles.

He is made happy by a small hope.

The weather holds.

She can’t get a signal.

I don’t know and why should I have to.

One of them begins to cry. Because

who is he? Tell me what you’re thinking.

What is important to this person?

Again, he makes the wrong choice.

When I told her she said you can’t tell me this.

I said okay.

The table had been laid.

He was in trouble. Lying, I guess.

A man who could have been good.

He put the wound out there. In the granite.

For some reason, I locked the door.

It was dark?

It was night.

It’s hard to resist the urge to keep a fire going.

Even when you’re not cold anymore.

Even when you’re burning

up what you might need later.


Did she lock it? or was it locked?

My life has changed since we last spoke.

No resting. No tuning.

But I want to keep the room, and the chair.

We loved blue.

That’s intimacy, isn’t it?

She was always happy.

I’ve been thinking

of Thoreau, and feeling the desire to walk.

To walk for hours a day, like we used to.



Remember when we met on OkCupid?

          You called the profile picture of me in scorpion pose

beneath a palmetto tree playful and suggestive.

                    How long can you hold that? you asked, and for maybe two minutes

I was rare and witty, a smart romantic comedy.

Dear Forgiveness, I waited three hours

          for you at the corner table of a bistro renowned for its kale crisps.

When you didn’t show up, I gave the world

                    my phone number, I resorted to the usual shock-and-awe —

your empty chair like a burning acre,

my tongue like the cotton plugging an aspirin bottle.

Even before the headache arrived, I was treating it

          with blackout blinds or the caffeine cure. One vacancy

follows another; have you noticed? Pills plopped

                    into a clammy palm — full-hollow things,

as in hobbies or strong opinions.

Dear Forgiveness, I have found the missing footage

          of the little girl who got none.

I have gobbled all of the cherries you said we’d eat

                    together. I have gobbled all of the consecrated fruits,

and I’m not sorry.

No language but our own shabby

inventory — your childhood mattress,

2 chipped mugs, 4 pre-dawn sex acts.

No audience but the anorexic air

of Mexico City. Your neighbor

with the incontinent bulldog was there

on the landing. And the other,

the willowy hairdresser you must’ve

been fucking, was there on the stoop

appraising my bad bottle job.

Imposter queen becalmed in her

rented coronation barge, I flaunted

what we were like a liability.

Those scandalous four-inch sandals

tore a smile of blisters across my ankle

until I wanted to be carried home

past the construction on Condesa, to let

the jackhammer’s throes rattle my jaw.

Cones changed the flow of traffic.

Flight attendants took the newspapers

away before the plane landed.

If I’d known then, husband, that you’d fly

due north to find me gloveless in this

ordinary Midwest of hunting rifles and English,

I might’ve ambled through the loudest plazas

in earthquake weather, or kissed the hairdresser

with a mouthful of wax and sympathy.

I might’ve climbed to the rim of the black

volcano and offered the fear I nursed

like a chubby baby to the fire

that will swallow us all, eventually.

And then everything pressed the eject button.

I dreamed bookcases collapsing like exhausted

sherpas. I dreamed a hernia, kidney stones

and a weeklong trip with the oven on broil.

I dreamed the terrible weight of suitcases

and airline fees; fire and folk remedies

that led to new afflictions. I dreamed beetles

in surgical masks beating the windowpanes

while we spooned on a bed of concrete

and conspiracy theories. I dreamed

the Portuguese Water Dog that betrayed

the whole academy. I dreamed a media frenzy.

Camera crews arrived. Buses arrived.

I barked and got excited.

I dreamed all the pieces of silverware

I stole from fine restaurants in the 90s

flying back to their 77 rightful drawers

with incriminating stories. I dreamed

the burnished weight of soupspoons

that anchored me to subway poles

and bus seats when you were just a wish

I recited to a floor lamp in the ugliest

borough of a city. I wrote letters

and ate words with my fingers,

as a fugitive should. I believed you’d

listen to me if only the music changed.

When I woke, it was the afternoon

of the eclipse and no one remembered

my name. When I woke, I went to the roof

and banged the pots and pans

to scare myself back into myself.

Maybe tonight:                                 sleep?                    big spoon/little?

Maybe not                        wake up every hour?                    Maybe deep?                    like other people?

& when I wake, I won’t                                be the guy who fucks

younger guys than you.              & you                  won’t cry trying to stuff me

                in your mouth                                when I say not tonight.

                                                Maybe we’ll give to the homeless, the panhandlers.

Maybe we’ll dog walk, house sit, cat foster.                  Maybe I’ll stop laughing

when other people fall.                                Maybe                                it will still be just me.

Wake to piss,                    have coffee,                        walk the dog.                    Maybe four blocks

from home we pass a jogger:

from the college soccer team.                                                 & I might smell him:    glad

for the wonders of the body                    all those bits of him!:                    scattering,

                 coming

into me, so I might                         recognize                             misrecognize:    hot

gravel, upturned earth, cedar shavings:   glad

for the midmorning sun, how it creates reliefs

on his lats & delts & quads.   If

I had my way?                                   I’d set the dog                   across his path.                 Trip

him up.

I’d drag him

to some shade, dial 911,                            scrutinize him ’til the ambulance arrives.

I’d cradle him.      Answer every question.                                            I’d pretend

he fell to Earth.                I’d watch him loaded, ready

to see him go.

I’d squint ‘til there was nothing.

In its middle, that buzz.  That little

white noise.  Something

subterranean:  hot:  provoked: a colony

of yellowjackets.  Disturbed,

ready to rise.

Prepared to visit, to make us

pay for waking it.

That this whip could be so swift and clipped

as the syllables of your name.  That

each connect of strop and haunch

would blend into song.

That my name — when you say it —

is always simultaneous:  always

verb and noun, disavowal

and conciliation, equally.  Until

my name — those words for me —

hold you like a hand, your face still.

Bringing us eye to eye.

What I didn’t say

when she asked me

why I knew so much

about dying, was that,

for me, it was work.

When Dad called to say

we had a month, I made a list.

I called in my team

to my office in a high rise,

those Rosies of know-how,

those that had lost someone loved,

those that had done the assembly line

of a home death, and said,

What’s this about not keeping

her on TPN? One woman,

who was still soft with sadness

said, It depends on whether

she wants to die of heart failure

or to drown in her own fluids.

I nodded, and wrote that down

like this was a meeting

about a client who wasn’t happy.

What about hospice? I asked.

They said, They’ll help,

but your Dad and you guys

will do most of it.

I put a star by that.

We had a plan of action.

When this happens, we do this.

When that happens, we do that.

But what I forgot

was that it was our plan,

not hers, not the one doing the dying,

this was a plan for those

who still had a next.

See, our job was simple:

keep on living. Her job was harder,

the hardest. Her job,

her work, was to let the machine

of survival break down,

make the factory fail,

to know that this war was winless,

to know that she would singlehandedly

destroy us all.

When she was dying, it was impossible to see forward to the next minute. What was happening — for whole weeks — was all that was happening and happening and happening. Months before that, I got the dumb soup wrong. How awful. It was all she wanted and I had gotten it wrong. Then, in the airless days when it was really happening, we started to power panic that we didn’t know enough. What should we do with your ashes? Water or dirt. Water or dirt. Once, she asked to just be thrown into the river where we used to go, still alive, but not living anymore. After it was done, I couldn’t go back to my life. You understand, right? It wasn’t the same. I couldn’t tell if I loved myself more or less. It wasn’t until later, when I moved in with him and stood outside on our patchy imperfect lawn, that I remembered what had been circling in me: I am beautiful. I am full of love. I am dying.

My older brother says he doesn’t consider himself Latino anymore and I understand what he means, but I stare at the weird fruit in my hand and wonder what it is to lose a spiny layer. He’s explaining how white and lower-middle class we grew up and how we don’t know anything about any culture except maybe Northern California culture, which means we get stoned more often and frown on super stores. I want to do whatever he says. I want to be something entirely without words. I want to be without tongue or temper. Two days ago in Tennessee someone said, Stop it, Ada’s Mexican. And I didn’t know what they were talking about until one of them said, At least I didn’t say, Wetback. And everyone laughed. Honestly, another drink and I could have hit someone. Started the night’s final fight. And I don’t care what he says. My brother would have gone down swinging and fought off every redneck whitey in the room.
O

             Prophet

       Tell your Master

When I am Lost

In the Darkness I am consumed

By concentration not to lose

Colors.

Uninterrupted blue ocean sky

A childhood memory

An invention of the imagination

Swirling water with words

I doubt the dance

Men take for granted

Thoughtlessly

Stereotype of submission.

The curtain closed between women

And the world together.

Together we will measure our separate roles

Mourn our losses.

I watch the cobblestone street

Through the wooden trellis.

A multi-faceted vision carved for my modesty.

The window box full of blood poppies, kind daisies.

Such blooms belong in unruly valleys,

Accidental beauty.

To see a flower uninterrupted

I have to pluck it.

Take me to Iran,

And Irak

Give me back Pakistan and Afganistan

In the 1960s and

Full of free knees.

Laughter chimes in sunlight and memory

In that old picture I am crossing my legs

For emphasis, face focused with curiosity.

Then, when I spoke, others read my lips,

Interpreted my eyes, and watched my laugh.

Sun dappled courtyard, cobblestones made way for my heels.

As I laugh, I am light and feel like skipping

Through some perfect string of words.

What is more important than the topic I have forgotten,

Is the conversation I was allowed to have.

Sometimes, he said, she beat them

with willow, for the smallest things;

sometimes she beat them with lilac —

rougher, harder — for the larger:

a woman too old to raise

these children left by their father,

adrift on their mother’s rage.

The willow whipped, but bent

in its green lengths against

their bare bums: poor cheeks

bluing, bruising before her.

The lilac banged and scraped —

With willow or with lilac: could this

be true, or another of his tales?

Maybe his grandmother grabbed

a stray stick or piece of kindling;

in any case, they cried, by all the world

forsaken, wrong without knowing

why; knowing only how hurt

was done. And hurt in their own

turn as soon as they could, as much.

She’s so arrogant, I put the book down at that,

one of the poets said, and the others agreed:

Nadezhda condescended, exaggerated,

while I sat confounded, who found

in Mandelstam’s defiance

my articles of faith, my way to live.

The others argued the primacy

of heartbreak against my attempts

to explain: Mandelstam’s earphones,

earphones, who turned me in? —

betrayal as common currency:

nights waiting without sleep

for fists at the door, thoughts

hunted down in a neighborhood

of executioners, crackling on the phone.

When my heart broke hard,

as if it had never been broken

before, what Nadezhda

meant by ordinary was this:

the friends unafraid to listen,

to ease my way; and in a town

of no secrets: the postal clerk

adding the extra postage

to my letter; the colleague

taking my library shift that day

without being asked, in dailiness

as we are privileged to know it:

the snowplow sweeping a surf

of snow before it first thing,

scattering saving grains of sand

like cinnamon in its wake.

He took me like a mother, drew my head toward himself,

pulled me onto his lap, wrapped his arms around me and cooed

into my hair, softly as if I was dreaming and

                he didn’t want to wake me.

He sang a song that sounded like birds singing in the sycamore

then tree frogs. I wanted to leave. I stayed where I was.

He wore a lovely shirt. His hair was surprisingly kempt.

There was half a candle-piece and a rug of quarters. Tomato soup

on the stove. I thought, “What a shirt.” I prayed my breasts

would magically spill from the zipper. I wanted to feel my calloused heels

on his thighs. I wanted to linger ’til dawn. His pared nails scratched

an itch that had eluded me for years. I cried as if I were slicing onions

in his kitchen. He was a good mother. He held me, like a daughter,

and I was as beautiful, as he believed me to be.

The cathedral, two blocks away from my flat in a city

where I used to live, chimes every morning at dawn,

and the sound is vague, whereas the rounds fired off

on a random evening when I went back to visit were clear,

moving through the air with such clarity I stayed down flat

on the bed with an arm thrown over my still-sleeping husband

until it was over, though over is a slim wish, because

it will happen again — though next time a window may shatter, or

the skull of the old man a house or so over should a stray bullet

find him. I found four shells the next morning in the side yard.

Sometimes the early bells toll a song I recall from a childhood

spent in a church-dotted South, though those churches lacked

the delicate ornament of St. Florian’s I’ve come to covet.

When there is a knock on the backdoor, I don’t answer.

Of course there are those who don’t knock but try the knob

or key my car on the curb because I have a car — though

no carport or garage, just the curb  — and that is enough

to inspire hate in someone spilling out from Kelly’s bar next door

who has saved for nothing but a week of drinks downed in a night.

Salvation works that way — a man begins to thirst in the night

for what closed-eyed he saw glinting like mica under a stream

running fast over its bed, and he reached from the bank

of his dreams to cup that coin, to bring it wet to the lips.

I understand. I too can almost taste it: the metal and the rapids

moving through me, entering the way the promise of bells enters.

Yes. I might be saved by such a stream if only temporarily. But

moose or bear or rats would shit in that same stream. Consider,

the way the man that keyed my car felt momentarily assuaged

by bourbon, a drink he felt to be a drink of class to forget

he had been accused of having none, and until he saw the car

daring to sit on its tires like a sign saying “you who have nothing”

he thought he was okay, thought the night had carried him to the Lethe.

I get it. But I don’t blame strangers for possessing what I do not. And

I don’t expect the water to be anything other than the water it is.

There are, after all, several ways to skin anything. My grandmother knew

most of those ways. She had been skinned herself (so to speak)

in that her skin was so often examined and found wanting.

What would one want to do with it, really? Despite the constant oiling

which left her arms soft as anyone could possibly desire,

her hands were ruins. She never hit me with them.

My grandfather took her with her hands at her sides.

Laundry water, cotton bolls, horse hide, the blood of goats.

She had to cook and I had to eat. She could skin a raccoon

in minutes. Revealing the flesh (actually a purpling pink) easy

as snapping a guinea neck. She would have given anything

to wake up in a new skin, though hers was delightful in the light.

But what did I know?

I’m not the first to ask that question. The toil took its toll

and though her face barely wrinkled, her knees and elbows darkened

into the skin I wear now. Roughened into the heels I scratch

against my husband’s calves in bed, because I don’t listen.

I refuse to wear shoes. I’m as country as she didn’t want me to be.

I loved the way she smelled. Like outdoors. Like new sheets. Hot

grease and rifle burn. Raisin pie with coffee. Front porch. Corn cob.

Her skin held all she did her best to scrub free. Scrubbed so hard

it liked to take the skin right off her.

Which was what she wanted. To have it off on her own terms,

not the eyes, all the eyes that demonized her: Unsightly. Dirty.

Unseemly. She saved for lace, for crinolines, for pretty gloves and

wide-brimmed hats to hide her skin. Mine is mottled. Stress-blemished,

but soft as hers and I know it. Easy enough to remove. As a girl I tried

to burn it off. To find the pink I was convinced lay beneath.

I’m not the first. I wore scarves she made to cover the evidence

of my curiosity. I give myself over

to the lotions of the day. Disparage the oils she did not love

but felt she needed. She’d stroke my cheek and say, “good baby”

and I’d feel good in my skin, in that moment.

I’d hold her tight some nights and whisper, “You are the prettiest,”

and she’d feel good, in hers. I want to forget, but I have my mirrors.

And there she is, shadowed, in a sun-struck field.

On Veterans Day, with no idea why, here we are snow-golfing

again in our usual threesome, exhausted, cursing, cold. Deadbeat,

widowed, divorced, we should be with our living parents at the Y,

the hospice, the home, but this is our place to do, die, be, at least

for now.

From driven women we have learned our names, and have had

practice in driving ourselves together, alone, and alone together

off the driving range. From driven men we have had lessons in the

poetry of the game. From our mothers we have been warned that

with our precise swing, back swing, and follow-through we were

perfecting nothing except becoming willing to dress and act and

take a mulligan and stroke our balls again and once again like

golfers will do on a freezing fresh-snow day like this day, which is

not a fair day to golf, not an easy day to like, even in the good and

terrible linked company of friends.

On the third hole, I tee up and say, “Boys — when this snow thaws

 — out come the sated worms — out come the sweet odors — from

the maze of tunnels — under the shallow — roots of the ocotillos —

and mesquites and acacias — at the edges of all — this greenness —

and out come the burrowing owls squinting — at their young ones

 — in the melting brightness.”

My ball has curved away to the right over the rough and onto the

ninth green three fairways away.

Are my friends happy for me? They are.

“Eagletime,” says Dwight.

“Like Elvis Muddy Wadsworth Tennyson,” says Harry who blows

his hands and Dwight’s concentration at the same time.

“All sky,” says our prose poet, Dwight, after his three wood sends

the ball high, high, directly overhead and lands it almost on the icy

divot where it was teed. “All sky. All loss. All smoke spent in holes

where I went nowhere for twenty years with one woman who

gave me one kind of violent kindness when I most needed to have

none. One week of peace. One fucking week would have been

enough. One.”

“Is this golfing  — or what?” I ask.

Harry says, “Putt in the sand!”

Dwight says, “Long putt in!”

Harry asks, “My turn?” He shrugs snow off his arms, cants his hips

down, takes two practice swipes, according to tradition and his

individual talent, and in an orator’s stance he addresses the ball:

“I know you — don’t I know you? — after all these years of eating

air from the mirrors in your empty bowls? What did you admit to

when I admitted everything to you? What hunger of mine

satisfied your hunger best? If I said it was too late to bring my

shame out of hiding, how would that strike you?” His line-drive

smacks the door of a porta-john and ricochets back to him.

“We should have at least worn jackets,” Harry says.

“Snow,” says Dwight. “Driving snow.”

“Who knew?” I say.

More or less, all three of us are regular men. We are Romantic,

Confessional, Counterfeit-Beat duffers in our middle, old, older

ages, slumped under the weight of our clubs which are the same

bag of bad choices and memorized verses we have lugged over

groomed paths and roughs and greens since our fathers in their

ultramarine Sansabelt slacks and matching phosphorescent green

socks and shirts first brought us. We didn’t ask to be taught this

crass and subtle art exercised on military bases with military

passes for the civilian sons of veterans. We didn’t ask then, we

didn’t, but we still imagine our skinny arms round the griefs of our

middle-class clubhouse sages who believed

we believed in the poetry of cutworms and roses, of one kind of

beauty chewing another kind apart, who thought we thought this

mattered, this veteran’s perk, this stylized sport of the set who

bought their memberships with their lives.

We were their Baby Boom troops tripped from our cribs and

whipped into shape by their words to the wise and those game

legs and war-sacked eyes. They cuffed us with their blunt leather-

gloved hands and called us by our manly nicknames: Soldier,

Buddy, Bud, Guy, Man. This was the boot camp where they taught

us debarking, mapping, bivouacking, and laughing, belly-laughing

at ourselves and not by ourselves.

It was swell.

We watched them laughing and we heard them cursing, cursing at

the flag and the club and the course ahead. They fed us Cokes and

bought us beer nuts and goofy gold caps, and they drilled us and

dragged us out against our wills for another punishing nine

pilgrimages, nine lessons in leaning into, swinging through, lining

up, reading the course, the green, the good lie, and lying good on

our score cards with our standard-issue dull stubby pencils. They

licked the tip and wrote, and let us lick and mix our spit with

theirs.

It’s a crime and a crying shame the way we visit the dead but

never their graves. Even on Veterans Day. Our shoes crush pecan

shells under the dust of snow on the steep path to the fifth hole

set high above the long fairway’s two berms and the three bare

cloud-willows crowding the apron of the green.

“You first,” says Harry who gives me the honors as the worst of us

in this poetry. “Tighten your grip this time,” says Dwight who has

lost so much from tightening his so well.

“When this thaws,” I say, “what races into — the dark pitchers

underground are — sweet goodnesses only — that the locoweed

and spiderling — and thistleseed can find. — The meek inherit —

meekness, and the wind — pitches the meanest — of us into

darkness — where we drink first and — outlast all grace.”

Where I want to be I am. Where I want to be I am.

“Good lie,” says Dwight.

Harry blows on his hands, says, “Mmmm.”

“I am teeing,” says Dwight. He is a constant man in all his

wordloves. He practice-swings once and is ready. “No forms,

rings, files, rungs, no gripes, no fake unforgivable grins and

asshole canned lines, no loads, lows, lifts, no falling down,

climbing out of leaning into leaving from, no death, no burial, no

tomb.”

The ball has sharply sliced off into nowhere.

“You’ll never find it,” I say.

Harry says, “Not a prayer.”

“Want another shot?” I ask.

He does not.

Harry asks, “Sure?” but he is already teeing up, already shanking

his own shot into the thick cactus and mesquite some people call

The Rough, some The Jungle, and some The Shit.

Harry says, “I can’t say it — what I miss most. Last vow? Last curse?

Cursing? Vowing? Warring? Being cursed? Our dead-end

anniversaries blessed by everyone who knew us? Our thirst? Until

the thought of death parting us seemed sacred.”

I ask Harry if he wants to fall out. He slams the wood into the bag,

draws his seven, heads toward The Dark, The Bitch, The Pit, says,

“Listen to him,” the snide way his dad said the same words to my

dad or Dwight’s in the days when we followed them into The

Crap, The Swamp, The Deep, and shrugged off our complaints,

said, “Hell no,” “Sure as hell,” “Like hell,” who never broke stride,

who knew our orders, who never said never.

It was criminal how they loved us, the old flaying, choking,

flubbing guy’s guys. And we knew they loved us if we only knew it

almost in one practice swing once — their arms on our arms and

hands over our sixth-grade unscarred hands.

Teaching me to scan, my Dad told me, “Dogleft and bunker on top

and a trap and tough approach with a five-iron slap and a

backspin chip up and a long roll on where it breaks right-to-left

and down.”

Dwight’s Pop said, “Skyed that one. Right on the pin. Eagletime.

Lost in the sun. Shanked again. Long putt in.”

Harry’s taught him, “Ass in the drink! Butt in the sand! Big gun.

Magic wand. Goddamn wind! Drove one! Dropped one! Dicked

one! Bogieman! Dripped in.”

You could not convince us that was not nearly love. We were

convinced. We are convinced.

I suppose I am supposed to say their wives and daughters are

owed an apology for being kept away from these nine green

islands all those years ago and since. I am supposed to not contest

custody of this, supposed to beg women banging the glass ceiling

to forgive our lusts, our beer guts, our business suits, our hairy

backs and butts and cracks we made and make them kiss to come

in under par. Or I am supposed to add blame to the blame we

good old boys already assign to the good old crew of dads.

To be that way I would need more time.

On the ninth green, the wind in his teeth, Harry asks, “What

should I miss first? Last second kiss? Last long list of tasks?

Asking? Being asked?” He misreads the break, the depth of snow,

mistakes his strength, and misses. “I miss asking to be asked,” he

says. “The trapdoor of sleep. Noose of dream.”

“That’s your best?” I ask.

Dwight says, “You’re finished?”

“Par,” says Harry. Liar.

We owe our fathers an unrepayable debt for both our certainty

and doubt. It seems whenever we remember them we are given

back again every acute joy and chronic grief, each one.

Harry holds the pin for Dwight so he can line up the shot and wipe

his eyes and face on his shirt, and speak out.

Wordless, Dwight putts in from twenty feet, crystals arcing off the

golf ball burning a green line across the whiteness to the hole you

would swear was widening and caving in and deepening before

our eyes and then sipping, then drinking, then swallowing.

Dwight reaches in. “I miss her. I miss him. What I miss is honest

ugliness as venomous as a snake tattoo the size of the left side of

your chest. As shameful. As useless. As murderously permanent.”

Determined to not even try, I pick up, and agree to the penalty.

“Boys,” I say, “the clouds are pitching more snow — over the raked

sands — and the tilted greens — and striped fairways and — onto

the stunned bull snakes — in the glistening — yucca spikes. It is

blinding — the cursed cactus wrens — their wings struck — by the

shrike’s puzzling shadow — in the golden flakes.”

Are we done?

We are exhausted. It is late. Cold. The flag on the ninth green luffs

and snaps in the wind. Ghosts in the snowfall laugh, cough. Curse.

Dwight asks, “Can we stand another round?”

“I can go nine,” says Harry.

I say, “Sounds good,” and salute.

“This is the grip,” they said, and gripped us. “This is the form,”

they said who formed us, and said, “These are the rules we

learned from the men who ruled us.” Told us women just didn’t

get this poetry and never would. Asked us, “Don’t you

understand?” and understood we never could.

I’m being interviewed on a television talk show, I’m an expert on breathing. “Sooo,” the host croons, “Oxygen. How’s that feel?” “Like having an alien in your chest,” I say, and the live audience roars. “Let’s see you breathe,” the host says. “Go ahead, lung up ―” and I do, inhaling and exhaling to wild applause.

✼

It’s billed as an “in-depth two-part exclusive” on retaining the use of all my limbs. “Which do you like better,” the host asks, “twirling your hair or jiggling your foot? Opening a door or kicking it closed? Which,” he leans in, “would you prefer: Parkinson’s or Polio?” Flustered, I start to stand up and he slaps his hands to his face, saying, “She’s standing up, ladies and gentlemen, she’s standing up ―” and I freeze, to mounting applause, half in and half out of my chair.

✼

It’s another television talk show and I’m “the Doctor of Digestion,” a metabolic wiz. They wheel me out to the stage perched on an old-timey stand-up scale. “Sooo,” the host croons. “Food. How’s that feel?” Someone cues video and we turn to montage: laparoscopic images of everything I’ve had to eat for the last three days. “Carne Adovada!” the announcer booms. “Split Pea Soup!” Each announcement meets with wild applause. When the video ends I turn back to the host but find you, smoldering comfortably in the host’s appointed chair ― you lean forward smiling, your skull-eye gleams, you stick your black-boned finger right down my throat.

the music — vijay iyer’s music — chimes, thumps, piercing

          sweetness, brass bellflowers, vibratos, and gut strutting — so

                    phisticated and direct — dropped my pulse into suspension

          for uncounted minutes, before building or leaping to an in

sistent string of !*!!@***@!!@@!*!!!!**@@@!*!!! — exclamation

                    points and other wildish signs that danced round my neck

          and beneath my feet. it was jazz that rigged me to it and,

through it, to other equally wide and deep wells of sound.

          i wanted the music’s embrace seamless, but a voice, woman’s,

                    white, a bomb exploding with its own joy, kept cutting in.

i have been taught by everyone and no one that my desire

          in this moment — for silence, a transparent globe of concent

                    rated quiet, to surround the sounds on stage — to voyage

          through a space in this holy encounter that will move my

mind more than transport my body — represents the death

                    of something african in me, capitulation to a western soli

          tude, a european worldview, my plaintive soul, leaving, soon

gone. i miss the days long past when i could swallow my

          pleasures whole, without the charnel undertones or rank

                    aftertaste of irony. have i said goodbye to the pork-pie hat?

there’s nothing new in the metaphor of night

                              as beauty, until she squats over your head

           like a woman intent on pleasing herself upon

                                        the evidence of your unbidden (forbidden)

desire. let her have control — or better, just try

                                 to resist her. her stars are fixed and shooting.

          not shot, but restless, flickering, ambivalent,

                                        is-ing and ain’t-ing like black do. (you know

we do.) a new do don’t always make change,

                              but it can put a shine on pain. shame, the way

          we let go of memories drawn to dawn’s magnet

                                         like nails to a scab. ritual wounding as alluring

as any tattoo. brake before breaking through

                              the ice between an air of appreciation and lung-

          fuls of blue. splashdance — ambiguous. are you

                                        wet or not? whet or what? not one whit? stoned

sharp, edgy, a shadow in moonlight on snow.

day steals the night away, not

                                                       its dawning

                      but its bright blazing

                                                                  needs,

           its huge                     orb of obligations



                                 certain things remind me of our

           endless                                                                 human

                                            capacity for

l  o  n  g  i  n  g

                                 raincoated kindergarteners straggling

                      in from recess

                                                       the floorboard nail still

           catching socks in the kitchen


                                                       not to

settle                         for second                -hand

                                                                             -place

                                                                                        -class

                        not to	                    give up

           on                  some fresh                           wind-blessed

sense of possibility                                    but

                                                       to give

                        imagination free rein

                                                          reign

                                                                    rain

We who fear our smallness grow a little

smaller, cut and filed to fit the keyhole

in the mirror, to roll our spines into a ball.

My cat gets it, as does the mouse curled

inside him, or the many who surrender

their power to the crowd, the thousand torches

one revenant of light. One fire, one Führer.

The more abhorrence spreads the less it touches.

Once, I was too tiny for my body

and so pulled myself toward some center

I never found. What I believe, I see.

Death is nothing really. It’s everywhere.

In time I grew taller than my father

by an inch. When he died, he grew another.

In this dream, you cannot open your eyes.

Be calm, it says. Either way you go blind.

A wonder anyone rests in this bed,

in the elevator dark that will not rise.

There are nights that lie down with the breath

of a thousand oceans. They grind the sun

into smaller, more manageable portions.

What is the opposite of the fear of death.

Is it the fear of death. Is it nothing yet.

Is it the bomb shelter you never knew

was there, until it told you it was not,

until it gave your face to the pillow.

Your body will tell you. Sleep scares you

until you’re in it. And then, you won’t let go.

Mary had a little lamb, he chanted,

so that the world might reply in kind,

and on every street that Mary went

a voice, unmindful, as the record turned.

Who knew the busy century to come

would release a flock of phantom choirs.

So many, in fact, we hardly noticed them,

how they hid us, drove us, anywhere

but here. The more we labored to preserve,

the more it blended into the atmosphere.

Our bodies too dissolved into words,

lambs that wandered most everywhere,

until, faded, scratched, we saw our shadows

stretch into the distance, and we followed.

his eyes were the smooth glint of seaglass

the powder blue of seashells on a soap dish

they were the clear water of a sea whose algae was rapidly disappearing

if she could lie down in the woods to sleep a geologic era till she could wake up with sapphires for

             eyes like those

They would talk about the war & where they thought a golden age should lie, behind them or in front of them. They liked the handmade pistachio ice cream at the pizza shop. She told him what lumbers behind her eyes, something like a husband waving, something like a houseboat on fire. Around dusk she gets uneasy & that’s because she sides with the diurnal animals. She thinks of day meeting night as a feud, or as an ancient game where day hands over to night a baton & night keeps running.

I hold     this clipping

               in my hand of         the man

throwing      a rock & it

bares the      weight

               of clay,      it itself

a glazed       & jagged

piece of    a potter’s work

that has survived      a millennium

& my       friend is my

                father      & my father

is a black-figure

athlete       in my palm, an arm

               whipped       back in a perfect

curve of pitch       & adrenaline      I press

               the clipping       between the

pages      of a book so

               that it      might take

root again      in that soil


There is a quality about the rectangular shape of a stanza that is suggestive of a window pane, a sheet of glass through which we can see into another place. I sit up in bed reading when I should be sleeping. It’s a comfort to think that somewhere another person is also sitting up in bed reading, not sleeping. And surely, tonight, in yet another bed a woman wants her eyes to be windows into the soul, but no one looks in. For the span of five minutes I thought, I had all those years misunderstood the concept of the eyes being windows. And I was delighted: yes, I said, the eyes are windows for the soul, the soul is what stares out of them, safely inside the room of you. And then it was gone, the excitement, the long syllable of thought. And in its wake what had that been, a poem? just a room for being, in that night there of no sleep?

Now I am in an altogether other room, this one filled with daylight. There’s a tall window, & above it a second window facing heavenward, & what if you won’t give me heaven? — then let’s call it the realm of heat & weather systems churning. Can I say it out loud? The poem is the window for the soul, & the soul — you, the reader, the beautiful friend looking out.

Old marital disputation;

Hadal the cliff, nightly perch.

Too old to hang there, defying gravity?

Spring rain. Fresh gown

of horoscopes. She wears a bodice

of welts. Stress, futility, allergy?

Even at the mattress edge,

her birth stone is green

with blood occlusions.

To sleep, she pretends

she is a pilgrim in a church

furtively biting the altar cross.

Saints abolish time without telling.

Touch foreheads, beloved ghost.

Keep this in the head, of course.

The mouth its splintered source.

Easy, now. The sky cannot have us.

Not yet. What I can never get

enough of is your body,

tongue that tongued my blood

when I. When younger.

Privet hedge, slut of the suburbs,

receive me now, walking, alone,

attared length of an unspent season,

witness to a pair of wrens,

wee ewers carousing the porch

with worsted findings,

nest hidden away, flanking a rogue

thought of mine, unrelayable

as the choked perimeter of prayer.

Brought beneath my instep by storm,

orb flung to wet sand path this morning,

you wreathed, sheathed verb,

you hold uncharted, turquoise, filmic,

sugared by treasons, ocean

veiled as the eye of the she-robin

that pelted door-glass yesterday,

then lay, twitching, for hours in my gaze.

Rise, I prayed. Fly. Into the naked terroir,

season of my beloved beneath & so far

inside me I’m already way beyond mind.

Fused, griding there, still upright

as within skin, I believe I —

until words come again. What is dying

if not the told clung stone, self, future

falling through blind flesh, tor,

toward I died, I still live,

which is the myth love makes of us.

Nothing beautiful as what’s past

our capturing, silver hoard,

so too blue glass, salmon strokes

of the past few minutes

surrendering a dissolving note

in the children’s christening cups

I’ve lassoed on a tabletop scarf

into still life. Solvent and pigment,

things must change.

The cloaked brush risking

the altering stroke, making

feints, falls, everything,

even what I most hope for,

remotely near.

Loaded, lexical, plot’s curtain

drops. Crimson. Victorian.

The End. How apply this to the fawn,

fendered & felled overnight, now turgid,

a tiny table overturned at road’s edge?

The tissue that binds us

beyond the limits of narration.

What ends in these matters

is not mere words. Vultures disassemble,

verge, then settle.

I drive by. Postpone. Defer.

But closely read sky’s dilation, O Fabulator.

Vico eating a charred wing

of bird; the first trope meant, in Naples,

the mourners

stand in a hard rain hoping the old windbag

would repent into silence again…

A thousand year old vase floating

in the lake. The chinese

dead in an earthquake —

colossal, down and again ecclesiastic.

There’s no hour for death,

it’s all of a moment. And

only a king may kill a king. They just

permitted me to sing

this song of greyhounds

eating young blind moles

off the Empress Dowager’s lawn.

Vico once struggled to describe the candy lights of a circle

parallel to some horizon

but at the height of the sun,

all charms and motion — reddening

the sack-paper phantoms of noon

like so much gingerbread…

Let learning be simple chalk and slate, corrugate

flags of a late republic

terror of form,

in the line of a breast to bony hip:

again ecclesiastic,

self-elect like a cold porridge

for breakfast.

Some woman naked in mist

puts a black stick into a pomegranate

and her king’s brain takes a bruise

in the yellow sleep.

He thinks the sudden freeze

is close to a dog’s posture

while taking a self-conscious shit

in the manger. Birds are

frightened up into the night sky,

the stars reply

with a language of opportunity

unlike the stair-climbing

of lovers who are groaning

in mid-afternoon, the pitcher

of iced tea beside them now

steaming; she’s wiping

up between her legs,

he drags on a black cigarette

and the old woman

of this poem while

hovering near the ceiling

says, children

you could loosen-up in the hips,

you could drink her spit. Oh, just

forget it. You’re hopeless. The lovers

giggle, running under the cold shower

out in the back, in the neglected garden

with sack draped over the rosebank.

It begins with a schoolteacher dead

in the trees.

It begins in another town.

Even the greeks thought the city

would finally be revealed

flat as glass.

Black tea brewing

in a large rusted coffee tin

isn’t the death of duality’s

hapless prosecutorial friend

who transcends.

His broad red hem drags

over the rocks of an old road

where Saul found the light

full and embryonic,

lodged in him. He was a prick

of the exemplary life. And a clerk.

A steam-whistle off on the horizon

and the ghost of polity

in its long gown is walking

through the city carrying a sunset

on its shoulders. It is not proud.

This sack of birth can have

two fathers

like a litter of cats.

It was not sound. It was the light that opened him up.

No one told him

to cut the heavy flesh of the chord —

leaning against a dusty column

the placenta of iron and hair

slapped the stones of the road:

it was the very night. It was cold.

I feel like a spent clerk

tramping away from the hillsides.

The camel sick

with blood in its urine.

It’s the mystery of drunken birds

up in the morning date palms…

More and more intrigue

and cold lamb with raisins.

In recent memory

it’s the waltz of the nutcracker

and a green

model-t back-firing… in Damascus,

your mother’s grave

filling in waves

during the late evening dust storm.

A tintype of a blue and rouged

pilot whale being fed alewives

from a yellow rowboat quickening everything —

it is dragging you away

from your sister’s children

playing in ashes

while her dead husband carves the lamb.

The earthquake killed

a third of the government’s cloaked men,

it arrives in the air

like prophecy

or a cocktail of naphtha

and English gin,

the birds

go drunken

and you stand in the doorway

spread-eagle

as if in a painted crucifixion

of a dead girl flummoxed in the tree.

Beneath a Chinese Elm, next to the pink

open claw of a geranium, the buttons

on his arm lie down on a grass blanket

and drink from a silver straw that registers

all the bad weather in the world.

I work at K-Mart and love it; paid in cash,

the intimacy scares the shit out of me.

Dad gets fucked up and sleeps

behind the library like a bird of paradise.

On Sundays, the sea is poured into paper

cups and the telephones hang from the wall

like speared fish. I piece voices together,

wrap them around like a necklace.

Outside, love melts like dirtied snow

while brother, Mom’s sad alter-ego,

waits on a couch for probation officers.

I don’t give off that much light anymore,

and the sparrows have gone underground.

Two brothers drove to the wooden rails

of the desert to smoke crack and line

the world with their aluminum truth.

The bonds of horses. The platitudes of men.

The light at these parties is dim

and a guy I’ve had a crush on for a million years

kisses me in his bed. I take off my shirt,

pretend to lie in the sand, be part-ocean,

first snow, like I’ve been given a candy cigarette.

That’s the summer mom had a piece of her

taken out, then came home and baked a turkey.

On her car dashboard, a photograph

of her son doing life in prison.

The apartment building

where the cats slept in carports

was pale-green,

enablers lived there, hobblers too,

men who swore by their living

and made love beneath a coat of arms.

I hear that today is the twenty-first anniversary

of your not speaking Spanish.

Si, es mi cumpleaños.

If we sought too much of them,

they were not there.

Wolf, walked the Pomona Fair

and hat, wanted and taken, was stabbed

in the graffiti of his heart.

I can’t be with him anymore.

I go to his grave but he’s not there.

Hawks watch over

and shrivel up at night.

We walk the beach,

collecting the stillborn juices

of dark-pink flowers:

sustenance, payment

for those who’d lost.

There’s no sunrise like the California sunrise,

it’s like watching your mother weep

by the side of a van.

A wish made long, tonsil-like.


Was it the clown suit that freaked them out?

No. Not the suit.

That wouldn’t explain why, at the State Fair,

even the other clowns — who looked like him — avoided him.

Seventeen would tumble from the same miniature car,

and he, alone, would fall from another.

A man has lost his job.

He can walk on stilts like a saddle-billed stork.

He can wobble on the unicycle like an over-grown cherub.

He can juggle bowling pins and do unspeakable things

with water-squirting flowers and a rubber chicken.

Still, this man has lost his job.

Truth is: he was too good,

particularly in the art — and yes, it is an art —

of tying balloons into recognizable shapes.

A flurry of lungs. Fingers that twist the knots.

Just the right amount of breath,

the right amount of sadness and tension.

And look what he’s made.

Here’s Lincoln slumped over in an opera chair.

The Titanic diving for the ocean floor

and all the little lights snapping out one by one.

Saint Sebastian full of arrows

and a sadness that spreads

from the man to the crowd

and through the crowd

until the crowd is throwing profanity,

tomatoes, stones

at the one clown who won’t play by the rules.

Did I say this happened at the State Fair?

I lied.

Because when I think of all the fools throughout history

who stared into the heavens and swore

our planet was not the center of

that roiling cosmic soup, or those who were used

as tinder atop some religious pyre,

or drew a set of wings then drew a man between them,

or split atoms, or found cures, or whispered the word

love in corners where such words were not allowed,

when I think of these fools and the crowds that must

have cornered them,

it’s easier to picture the sideshow, the spectacle.

It’s easier to point and let your laughter

fry the air like carnival music.

Did I tell you about the time one of my uncles

gave me a deck of cards? I was a kid,

and to teach me a couple games, he explained

every aspect of the deck. When he got

to the madman in the circus paint,

he said: “This might look like a clown,

and you won’t need it in most games,

but if you lose a card, use this one instead.

It could be anyone; it could be you.”

Then he shuffled the deck.

In Michigan, on his seventh birthday,

a boy is given an old toolbox. Thank you,

he says, for the tool box, Thank you,

for the wrench dotted with rust,

Thank you, for the greased screwdrivers,

and the needle-nosed pliers. Just imagine

all the wonders the boy can build

or repair now, right? No siree!

Immediately, he sets out to discover

how the world was made

by unmaking everything the world has made.

A light falls from its fixture, and he says thank you.

A fence, relieved of its nails, and he says thank you.

Sudden three-legged chairs. Bookshelves

spilling their belongings to the floorboards.

Thank you, he says. Thank you. A demolition man?

Not really. Better to call him “curious,”

one who looks, then understands,

how everything secedes, returns to dust.

Items currently damaged are held as a counterpoise

to the items inevitably (but not yet) damaged.

There used to be elves in the forest beyond our houses.

Green men and blind angels.

A bare-footed prophet stepping out onto the waves

of moss. There’s nothing that can’t be explained.

Look at the boy as he looks out at the field.

And now the field is gone.

So why then does he keep saying, Thank you?

And when will he stop? Only time will tell.

Or, maybe we should say: only time would have told,

as the child has taken that apart as well.

Father Time, piece by ancient piece.

Bone, hair, hinges. Like an antique watch.

Little screws missing. Ruin everywhere.

Your child is a little lion cub

ready to tear into

a hunk of antelope is

a fuse bursting into

electric sprays of light

is trouble, you

say, like me. Has

your eyes though, pale

as the eggs of quail.

Yes. And also, shouting

No! as I reach for her balled fist

I wonder if she is

our negative capability.

Dare I say she’s beautiful

or that seeing another photo

I feel inexplicably like a father

though I am nothing other

than an ex-girlfriend

falling in and out of touch?

Dare I say I like to study

not her features exactly,

but all her small perfect shadows?

Her sleeves like swallow’s wings,

the oblong ring she casts

moving down a slide,

some latent echo inside you

now there of me, some remnant

of the night we longed to

against the drum of a water tower,

but did it instead again and again

on a bed too small for one.

Would it stretch wonder

if all our immaterial actions

like wayfaring dreams could sire

the ambition that ignites

when we let a child sit

too long with her own design,

let her stack blocks

one cube at a time, sturdy as

a well-pointed chimney

or a giraffe’s dorsal spine

or a tower of solid cheerleaders

kneeling into sweaty backs and thighs,

until the pyramid’s gotten too high

and without warning

all the bodies tumble down,

laughing. Look at how

we make so much out of nothing!

✼
Little Nothing,

dare I tell you

what your mother and I made?

Firsts and fights

that left the kitchen

whitened by a fine silt of flour

and bras twisted into

the untidy nests of lyre birds

and closety love

at the drunken end of straight parties,

in cemeteries

and in shower stalls.

Without sheet music

we were prodigious,

learning by ear and mouth

how to produce

each vocal score,

and when we were done

and we felt like making more,

we made it. And we made

sweet, fast nothings

with other people, too.

Little Apophat,

I could tell you stories of

scientific miracles,

late ovulation in garter snakes,

the courting rituals of macaques

playing hide and seek

behind tree trunks,

how when seals stay out to sea

months after mating

biologists call all that waiting

suspended animation.

Which is to say that

making you took time.

No dog-eared copy of The Price of Salt,

no nude drawings from a community art class,

no painstakingly Kinseyian inventories,

no anagram tucked in a World Atlas

where the Tapajós and Amazon rivers meet,

no souvenir (stucco wasp nest?) legible as the one

Miss Bishop left, no tickets stubs,

no letter typed in future perfect:

You will have to lift the shag carpet beneath the oak dresser.

There you will find a key; use it to open:

no love letters, no ashes to say,

the letters were burned.

Not much here: An empty canvas bought for $1.35

still wrapped in cellophane, a bottle

of turpentine too hazardous to dispose of,

Life magazines, a lone wolf spider, some expired meds.

Like I said, nothing here,

and me now, on hands and knees

to sniff around, to root behind,

to put one fist deep in the compost

just to feel the heat

of matter breaking down.

Friends, will you bear with me today,

for I have awakened

from a dream in which a robin

made with its shabby wings a kind of veil

behind which it shimmied and stomped something from the south

of Spain, its breast a’flare,

looking me dead in the eye

from the branch that grew into my window,

coochie-cooing my chin,

the bird shuffling its little talons left, then right,

while the leaves bristled

against the plaster wall, two of them drifting

onto my blanket while the bird

opened and closed its wings like a matador

giving up on murder,

jutting its beak, turning a circle,

and flashing, again,

the ruddy bombast of its breast

by which I knew upon waking

it was telling me

in no uncertain terms

to bellow forth the tubas and sousaphones,

the whole rusty brass band of gratitude

not quite dormant in my belly —

it said so in a human voice,

“Bellow forth” —

and who among us could ignore such odd

and precise counsel?

Hear ye! hear ye! I am here

to holler that I have hauled tons — by which I don’t mean lots,

I mean tons — of cowshit

and stood ankle deep in swales of maggots

swirling the spent beer grains

the brewery man was good enough to dump off

holding his nose, for they smell very bad,

though make the compost writhe giddy and lick its lips,

twirling dung with my pitchfork

again and again

with hundreds and hundreds of other people,

we dreamt an orchard this way,

furrowing our brows,

and hauling our wheelbarrows,

and sweating through our shirts,

and two years later there was a party

at which trees were sunk into the well-fed earth,

one of which, a liberty apple, after being watered in

was tamped by a baby barefoot

with a bow hanging in her hair

biting her lip in her joyous work

and friends this is the realest place I know,

you could ride your bike there

or roller skate or catch the bus

there is a fence and a gate twisted by hand,

there is a fig tree taller than you in Indiana,

it will make you gasp.

It might make you want to stay alive even, thank you;

and thank you

for not taking my pal when the engine

of his mind dragged him

to swig fistfulls of Xanax and a bottle or two of booze,

and thank you for taking my father

a few years after his own father went down thank you

mercy, mercy, thank you

for not smoking meth with your mother

oh thank you thank you

for leaving and for coming back,

and thank you for what inside my friends’

love bursts like a throng of roadside goldenrod

gleaming into the world,

likely hauling a shovel with her

like one named Aralee ought,

with hands big as a horse’s,

and who, like one named Aralee ought,

will laugh time to time til the juice

runs from her nose; oh

thank you

for the way a small thing’s wail makes

the milk or what once was milk

in us gather into horses

huckle-buckling across a field;

and thank you, friends, when last spring

the hyacinth bells rang

and the crocuses flaunted

their upturned skirts, and a quiet roved

the beehive which when I entered

were snugged two or three dead

fist-sized clutches of bees between the frames,

almost clinging to one another,

this one’s tiny head pushed

into another’s tiny wing,

one’s forelegs resting on another’s face,

the translucent paper of their wings fluttering

beneath my breath and when

a few dropped to the frames beneath:

honey; and after falling down to cry,

everything’s glacial shine.

And thank you, too. And thanks

for the corduroy couch I have put you on.

Put your feet up. Here’s a light blanket,

a pillow, dear one,

for I can feel this is going to be long.

I can’t stop

my gratitude, which includes, dear reader,

you, for staying here with me,

for moving your lips just so as I speak.

Here is a cup of tea. I have spooned honey into it.

And thank you the tiny bee’s shadow

perusing these words as I write them.

And the way my love talks quietly

when in the hive,

so quietly, in fact, you cannot hear her

but only notice barely her lips moving

in conversation. Thank you what does not scare her

in me, but makes her reach my way. Thank you the love

she is which hurts sometimes. And the time

she misremembered elephants

in one of my poems which, oh, here

they come, garlanded with morning glory and wisteria

blooms, trombones all the way down to the river.

Thank you the quiet

in which the river bends around the elephant’s

solemn trunk, polishing stones, floating

on its gentle back

the flock of geese flying overhead.

And to the quick and gentle flocking

of men to the old lady falling down

on the corner of Fairmount and 18th, holding patiently

with the softest parts of their hands

her cane and purple hat,

gathering for her the contents of her purse

and touching her shoulder and elbow;

thank you the cockeyed court

on which in a half-court 3 v 3 we oldheads

made of some runny-nosed kids

a shambles, and the 61-year-old

after flipping a reverse lay-up off a back door cut

from my no-look pass to seal the game

ripped off his shirt and threw punches at the gods

and hollered at the kids to admire the pacemaker’s scar

grinning across his chest; thank you

the glad accordion’s wheeze

in the chest; thank you the bagpipes.

Thank you to the woman barefoot in a gaudy dress

for stopping her car in the middle of the road

and the tractor trailer behind her, and the van behind it,

whisking a turtle off the road.

Thank you god of gaudy.

Thank you paisley panties.

Thank you the organ up my dress.

Thank you the sheer dress you wore kneeling in my dream

at the creek’s edge and the light

swimming through it. The koi kissing

halos into the glassy air.

The room in my mind with the blinds drawn

where we nearly injure each other

crawling into the shawl of the other’s body.

Thank you say it plain:

fuck each other dumb.

And you, again, you, for the true kindness

it has been for you to remain awake

with me like this, nodding time to time

and making that noise which I take to mean

yes, or, I understand, or, please go on

but not too long, or, why are you spitting

so much, or, easy Tiger

hands to yourself. I am excitable.

I am sorry. I am grateful.

I just want us to be friends now, forever.

Take this bowl of blackberries from the garden.

The sun has made them warm.

I picked them just for you. I promise

I will try to stay on my side of the couch.

And thank you the baggie of dreadlocks I found in a drawer

while washing and folding the clothes of our murdered friend;

the photo in which his arm slung

around the sign to “the trail of silences”; thank you

the way before he died he held

his hands open to us; for coming back

in a waft of incense or in the shape of a boy

in another city looking

from between his mother’s legs,

or disappearing into the stacks after brushing by;

for moseying back in dreams where,

seeing us lost and scared

he put his hand on our shoulders

and pointed us to the temple across town;

and thank you to the man all night long

hosing a mist on his early-bloomed

peach tree so that the hard frost

not waste the crop, the ice

in his beard and the ghosts

lifting from him when the warming sun

told him sleep now; thank you

the ancestor who loved you

before she knew you

by smuggling seeds into her braid for the long

journey, who loved you

before he knew you by putting

a walnut tree in the ground, who loved you

before she knew you by not slaughtering

the land; thank you

who did not bulldoze the ancient grove

of dates and olives,

who sailed his keys into the ocean

and walked softly home; who did not fire, who did not

plunge the head into the toilet, who said stop,

don’t do that; who lifted some broken

someone up; who volunteered

the way a plant birthed of the reseeding plant

is called a volunteer, like the plum tree

that marched beside the raised bed

in my garden, like the arugula that marched

itself between the blueberries,

nary a bayonette, nary an army, nary a nation,

which usage of the word volunteer

familiar to gardeners the wide world

made my pal shout “Oh!” and dance

and plunge his knuckles

into the lush soil before gobbling two strawberries

and digging a song from his guitar

made of wood from a tree someone planted, thank you;

thank you zinnia, and gooseberry, rudbeckia

and pawpaw, Ashmead’s kernel, cockscomb

and scarlet runner, feverfew and lemonbalm;

thank you knitbone and sweetgrass and sunchoke

and false indigo whose petals stammered apart

by bumblebees good lord please give me a minute;

and moonglow and catkin and crookneck

and painted tongue and seedpod and johnny jump-up;

thank you what in us rackets glad

what gladrackets us;

and thank you, too, this knuckleheaded heart, this pelican heart,

this gap-toothed heart flinging open its gaudy maw

to the sky, oh clumsy, oh bumblefucked,

oh giddy, oh dumbstruck,

oh rickshaw, oh goat twisting

its head at me from my peach tree’s highest branch,

balanced impossibly gobbling the last fruit,

its tongue working like an engine,

a lone sweet drop tumbling by some miracle

into my mouth like the smell of someone I’ve loved;

heart like an elephant screaming

at the bones of its dead;

heart like the lady on the bus

dressed head to toe in gold, the sun

shivering her shiny boots, singing

Erykah Badu to herself

leaning her head against the window;

and thank you the way my father one time came back in a dream

by plucking the two cables beneath my chin

like a bass fiddle’s strings

and played me until I woke singing,

no kidding, singing, smiling,

thank you, thank you,

stumbling into the garden where

the Juneberry’s flowers had burst open

like the bells of French horns, the lily

my mother and I planted oozed into the air,

the bazillion ants labored in their earthen workshops

below, the collard greens waved in the wind

like the sails of ships, and the wasps

swam in the mint bloom’s viscous swill;

and you, again you, for hanging tight, dear friend.

I know I can be long winded sometimes.

I want so badly to rub the sponge of gratitude

over every last thing, including you, which, yes, awkward,

the suds in your ear and armpit, the little sparkling gems

slipping into your eye. Soon it will be over,

which is precisely what the child in my dream said,

holding my hand, pointing at the roiling sea and the sky

hurtling our way like so many buffalo,

who said it’s much worse than we think,

and sooner; to whom I said

no duh child in my dreams, what do you think

this singing and shuddering is,

what this screaming and reaching and dancing

and crying is, other than loving

what every second goes away?

Goodbye, I mean to say.

And thank you. Every day.

In chapel I castled in air a flood

from rain that forked on the windows

silver and sheeted in gusts

to mirrors flashing moments,

and although the school was

citadeled on a hill, I imagined the halls

as canals I paddled with canoes carved

from pews — my oars

the crucifix and torch, my life

vest fashioned from the Common

Prayers. I camped in

the rafters and made hand-sized fires

of palms ignited by match and oil. At night I

would drink myself to my first

drunk on communion

red and spread Peter

Pan on the wafers. My daydream then

was not of love, though the stairs

became a waterfall, the computer monitors —

conchs on the lakebed, silent,

their green hypnotic

now dark. The organ pipes were dead

coral that burbled when I dove

from the nave to plunge

its keys.

I once said that prayer was the first form

of love

poem I knew, but before prayer there was

absence. I drowned the other

sticky children

pewed alphabetically

on either side of me

in absence — their bodies not

floating facedown, unrescued by their parents,

or the Coast

Guard. They were simply

gone with the flash flood

like the masses in Noah’s time that we never heard

knocking against the hull

or discovered in trees

bloated and winking, petal eyed

like Benny Goodman.

Noah didn’t survive

long after the ark. The water,

we know now, was

poisoned by us.

Behind the craftsman, twenty feet from the screen

door, the orchard stretched an acre deep, chicken wire

strung along its length, post to post, between our

yards. The trees tangled and diseased, though enough remained

to waste; that which fell with juice contusioned,

softening where it rest, until the sun, if it made it

through the trees, roiled the upside to split and spew, seeping ferment —

a taste in the wind that, before a storm, combed the leaves

to their pale undersides like the blighted backs

of knees revealed by a windblown skirt. Red and black

plums, Alleghenys crowding apricot as the poor peaches beggered

the sun. Inside their fireplace, two tires waited for

winter beneath a black rose of soot on the mantel. And here

in the side yard, a flower garden fit for kings, and beyond it, the tilled

rows of beans. In curlers, his wife trampled the sunflowers

when she neglected her lithium. The plums first reddened

like the cheeks of Eros and then darkened as if to bruise,

and there by the last rows, a compost heap held the fallen

fruits from which the flesh shrugged off to the pit, glistening

and sticky and host to fly and beetle and nit, year

in, year out. And last, there was a ditch rippling in spring

with rain flooded fluorescent with pollen that dried in summer

and revealed a half-buried empty can of candied yams and the fossils

of his boot from when he stumbled in and drew

water into his sock.

                                Such was the affluence of the dilettante’s

orchard, the glories of the mundane. And there I stood

at the fence while I was handed one after

                                                                another plum by Mr. King,

my arms deltaed in sweet, until we were both called

inside by screams that’d borne so much, in their gaze.

1.

Ashley has two children with names.

She had a baby in high school,

When we all thought she’d never lose her virginity.

I check my email at four in the morning

to find that one child is six, and I feel

I’m going blind. I take more vitamins

than I have teeth. I can’t sleep

more than two hours a day. It’s always 2004,

my grandmother is dying:

Aunt Marion cries,

It’s just not her. I don’t know how

I’ll bury my mother.

All I have are my hands,

pushpins to keep a sheet over the window:

it’s night forever if I don’t walk outside —

remember:

It’s Sunday. I’m alone

in my body.

2.

Trina was pregnant too,

for a while. The rumor is still that

she threw herself down the stairs:

she couldn’t afford the abortion.

It was her “happy accident,” like

the fifth cigarette I put out on my arm before

jumping into oncoming traffic.

The rumor is

deaths come to us, like ideas

in the shower, but I couldn’t wait.

I knocked my head against that door,

dumb as a woodpecker. I carried my grief

like a child huddled and shivering

in the belly of a nightmare

for a while: I kept my word. Portia,

listen, a note pinned to the collar,

a mangy, wandering dog. I slept

in the corner of my body, afraid

the light was a vicious, hungry animal

that flaunted

my voice.

The things people said:

depression isn’t real.

You’re too damn smart

to feel this sad. You have to make it up,

the time you’ve missed, the reasons

you’re trying to leave. The Lord

God will guide you back.

God, how could you do this

to your poor family? God,

you’re being so selfish.

     God,

          God —

I was expecting you to bring me jeans,

my Spider-Man shirt, not the blinding orange

Bible, pages thin as the voice of L., who is still always

hanging herself in the early conversations of birds

in the room across the hall as I dream. Some truths burn

like houses and the people who run back into them.

I spent the morning painting

cardboard trees. Jagged spears

that did not lay well

under the mouth of scissors.

I mangled the beer box

until there was only a forest of rockets

and bombs displaying alcohol

labels under thin films of acrylic.

The horizon is sharp and angled

now. I’ve planted corrugated pine in the living room.

At sunset they look like search light cones,

mini drag beams from an army of UFO abductions,

tepees made of flayed alien skin, anything

but your eyes

          returning to point and say what you see is a formation of lights,

growing dull now that you’ve been

probed and abandoned

          in the dark woodlands of memory.

I tell a kid he shouldn’t open his poem with “rock, rock/ sweet cherry pie” or close with “rock ‘n’ roll/how sweet the sound/that save we wretches/and gave us soul,” and what he really wants is a universal comparison between rock ‘n’ roll and love. A girl says to me, but I know that feeling, riding in the car with the music blasting. You look over at your boyfriend and you think, yeah, this is good. Later she says this poem is great because it captures the way men think. They’re listening to music, look over at over your breasts, and then they’re back in the music again. The class nods. After fifteen minutes I ask if anyone has heard of Jack Gilbert. We talk about picking hair from sink drains and why the word tangled was specifically chosen, and how the avocado and the other Japanese women are like ornaments in a tree. Another kid says, not everything has to be beautiful. He could have just said that he was sad.

Asphalt, bitumen, tarmac —

all too poetic for you.

For you, the road glows

vaselined

like the sequence

of a television dream

in which you turn

to me, finally, slow-mo

gesture me to follow.

Ahead, the horizon

is a guess

our spinning wheels

promise us.

Petroleum, perspiration,

oil the two-lane

— a break in the trees

is ours, a little door

out of the wind

we hurry through,

unbend to a forest

of height and whispers,

an empty house

we don’t want

to be alone in.

Then the road stills

when you torso

once more forward

thin into

the white and

vanishing line,

and miles fall between us

as a cut field

behind a fleeing deer.

In the years of their courtship he was a front waiter at the best restaurant in town. Though she could hardly afford to dine there, some nights he’d come to her window late, after he’d closed down the dining room and recite long, fluent descriptions of the evening’s courses, whispered to her so as not to wake up the man from whom she rented her room. She liked most how he spoke of the cheeses and all the ways he sought not to say “stinky” — though they both loved the stinkiest bleus, which some nights he would palm from the kitchen, along with an unfinished bottle of Dom left by one of his regulars, and he would pull taut the linen of her sheets and carefully lay out a cheese course, which their lovemaking would inevitably dismantle. She knew that she should not fall for this, that a waiter’s work is performance and part of an economy of crude gratitude that should not be confused with the tender economies of love. Still, even after years of marriage she swoons when he stops to ask the cheesemonger for an eighth kilo of Humboldt Fog and when he pauses to accept the wax package as if sharing wafers with a congregant, though she can see his lips tighten when another clerk makes a scripted wine recommendation and then they join the parallel lines of couples funneling through the express lanes toward the parking lot. So when she asks “What are you making tonight?” and he grumbles “Dinner,” she whispers her own lush illustration of what may come from the ingredients in their shopping bag, which he’ll assemble silently and present with barely a smile, as if he no longer wants anything from her.

Leaving the whole sky overhead,

a guywire of ridgeline holds

to this low grove where our cabin sits

within white pines, yearly shedding

their parentheses to the forest floor.

Inside, we whisper and cough,

hum the slow curve of bodies.

Our asides become our plot.

✼
Our asides become our plot,

hum, the slow curve of bodies.

Inside them we whisper and cough

their parentheses to the forest floor.

Within white pines yearly shedding,

in this low grove, our cabin sits.

The guywire of ridgeline holds,

leaving a hole in the sky over our heads.

This isn’t going to work out,

America.

Heroes  just go where they’re made to

when everything else goes awry.

Eagle Tail in stilled time

the body lifting surface

where churning falls gave

walleye, trout, coolness

for multitudes, generations,

now quiver his resolute effort to

something larger than humanness.

                                           Was it?

Or, was it the core of humanness?

Was it melody? Rhythmic water

moving serpentine as it had always

grasped? Carrying, then delivering

the boy back to surface.

                                    In turn taking in

the child’s sister with brave stranger to

people the underneath where

we seldom belong.

                             Are they now nearer

the center we stepped from?

Nearer where we all lived,

yet gone? In this world we lose

the ones who give the most.

The fruit of toil, its mission.

More than we muster.

                               Each time the water

surges and crashes, I feel his words,

“I got him. Hold onto me. I won’t let go.”

She shakes red chilies from her hair,

wax black with slight red strands, thick enough

to stand,  hold spicy seasoning until we fall.

 

Chilies she shakes loose, caught in leaning against red

ristas,    hung loosely on rose adobe walls.

Summer we greet our spiciness     from time before.

 

Shakes chilies she attracted,    red as wasps,

something winging while she stands swinging

her heavy mane.    Loosing it from flavor, season.

 

Spice in life rife with something only sisters share.

     Red chilies she shakes from her hair.

O undertaker, there are only

so many deaths a man can enjoy

when agony glows lonesome

in the body. There is only one way

for a man to die when there is no one

to watch his shadow flicker miserable

against the wall. O undertaker —

a man can’t survive a fireball,

can’t burn alive without collecting

scars where he longs for a kiss.

A man can’t smolder like he used to

now that we have so many new words

for love — gravel, epitaph, fiery

elegies for everything we will one day

leave behind. O undertaker — I’ve been

waiting for my father’s funeral,

for that day his passing will be

marked by a woman’s fists

against his casket. There is only

one way for a man to cry, one way

for a man to say goodbye.

O undertaker — most folks believe

in that fire seething beneath

a man’s breastbone. In the evening

when you burn the body, I will step

into the crematorium and find myself

unable to bear the flame.

From the dark rises Yokozuna —

sumo king with a belly full of thunder,

a hunger for pushing men off

their feet into the earth. His eyes

grow wide at the thought of a coffin,

that luxurious interior, that grim

receptacle for hair and bone.

It’s that push a man’s body makes

against other men that defines how strong

the flesh can be. It’s that push against

Yokozuna that marks the limits

of a man’s body. Death looks smaller

when viewed from a distance, more

insidious from the inside of a box.

Yokozuna looks bigger as he pushes

a man down, as he mashes a skeleton

beneath his buttocks. It’s that thump

thump against ribs that reminds

a man of dark spaces that push

in on him when he is alone.

Yokozuna claps his hands, purifies

the ground with a stomp, the air

with a handful of salt for dead men

suffering in a world without sleep.

Somewhere there is a bed for each of us,

a box that will not open no matter

how hard a man might push.

Call a man after a force of nature, a natural

                       disaster when disaster is another word

             for that wreckage he carries on his bones.

                       Call him a catastrophe when he needs it

                                   most, an avalanche heaved skyward

             and down across all our chests. Never second guess

                       the weight of a man’s name. The earthquake

            knows its seismic limits, its capacity for ruin

                                    so far from where a man falls hard

                                             on the inside and hides his injuries

                                                           behind a six-pack of beer and

                                    a punch in the arm. Call a man for the shape

                                             his body makes under the lights,

                                   for that species of animal he pretended to be

                                                            before we discovered that calamity

                                   lurking in his medical charts. Call him out

                                             for all those tragic things he has done.

                         Hide from the back of his hand, that cruel mark

                                   he will leave on your carcass. This life

                                             is an accident, a pile of broken stones.

                         Men are prey to those shadows of everything

          they have lost in life. Call a man whatever name

                                   feels best in your mouth — call him injury,

                         emergency, father. Call him home.

It’s not fear that drives a man

to commit those brutal acts

he writes about. The self-proclaimed

king of the Mexican Death Match,

Moondog Mayne bashed his own head

with a chair at night, chowed down

on live fish before charging blind

into a fight. Nothing scared me

until that day I woke up, discovered

I had become a man sometime

between thirteen and thirty.

It’s not death that thwarts a man

as he plans his own demise.

That cockcrow, that bow

and arrow, that clock a man strikes

to mark his capacity for pain —

Moondog was gassed those nights

he ate lightbulbs before falling

from turnbuckle to concrete, fueled

by a fifth of Southern Comfort

when he punched out a brick wall

because he was not afraid of anything.

Fear stems from a left hook,

not from any pure locus situated

beneath my sternum. Not fear,

but poetry — that sensation of flying

a man feels right before he tumbles

down a flight of stairs, that fleeting thrill

of a car crash just before the road flips

into the sky, the sky into that long

plunge through the night.


1.
A man can stand with both feet touching

the ground until his legs no longer reach

that far, until the ground disappears.

2.
Giant Baba stands six feet ten inches tall, taller

in Japan. It doesn’t matter how tall you are.

3.
A man can hold a woman, can’t stand to lose

her to the heart’s wreckage. His body will fall

apart one day — a rock crab’s chassis stripped

clean by seagulls, a dandelion gone to seed.

4.
Giant Baba stands over seven feet tall.

When he lifts you over his head, you will be

eight and a half feet above the ground.

5.
A man can stand for anything when seen

from below — fatherhood, majesty, satisfaction

after conquest. In the end all men are seen

from above — patch of lawn, chunk of stone.

6.
Giant Baba towers above your house,

dangles you by the ankle. Your life

looks so small from the sky.

7.
A man and a woman can wrestle together

in the same bed. A man and a woman

and a marriage can brawl all night.

8.
Giant Baba looms dark against the stars, back

blotting out the Milky Way, arms cradling you

and your family history. Listen to his mammoth

heartbeat, war drum, earthquake. Just listen.

9.
A man can stand naked in a foreign country,

can search for meaning in strange tongues. He tries

to find himself in stories about famous battles,

about giants. It doesn’t matter where he stands.

10.
Giant Baba’s body is made of girders

and mastodon bones. When you stand outside

to look at your house from new angles,

when you think of how your father died,

the giant will be there to catch you.

How articulate, the eyes

of silent animals when I chose

to shoot the sick goat. All day,

the dogs would not look at me, not

let me touch them, legs folding away from

the level to which I had lowered my hand.

And the chickens ran,

following their crazed paths,

every which way, but every

way away from me. The goat

looked as if she were running

as she lay, after, legs kicking.

But don’t chickens always run

like that? And this is no new

remorse. The light has always

been leaving my narrow,

north section. Place of the long

history of short days.

It’s the frost that stays. More mornings

than not here, no sun is enough

to undo the frost. I should have given

her southerly pasture. I should have

gone in another direction.

But consider where goats live

the world over. They browse

on woody brush. On rock, on cliffs.

In deserts, harsh habitat. They choose

cursed land. Who chooses goats?

I chose goats. I liked the bone shapes

in their eyes, the strange, slit pupils

they turned to me, chewing the corners

of my heavy coat. I wanted to live here,

on an old hardscrabble farm.

In this era, when there is no need

to farm, who is drawn to have livestock,

which die so much? Piss and blood

pour out of the back of a shot body.

But it’s piss and blood keeping them

alive too. Cleaning the stalls, cleaning

the wounds common to animals so curious.

She worked herself through fences,

under walls. She worked her head into my

pockets. Worked her way in

to every opening.

What’s different about a dead body

is what comes from the other end,

a great cursive scrawl of steam

from the mouth. It is the last word,

soundless, without the stop and start

of syllables, definitive.

What comes from the mouth

blows away. Didn’t I say

I was done with livestock last winter

when the calf froze to the ground, then to

death because it couldn’t move?

When I ripped it loose, the intestines,

threaded through crow-torn holes

in its belly, clung to the grass and shattered.

I said those were my ties to the place.

They were too cold to bleed. A quick job

to clean up and bury, I claimed.

I said I would never use animals

as the figures for my sorrows again.

But when the goat dropped shot,

the bread I’d brought to get her

to put her head down still in her teeth,

the chickens pecked at it.

I’m still here. I can’t stay away

from the hard images. Bread

taken from her mouth even then.

Tonight, when the trainload of coal, trailing ash

from the power plant, passed, I had no mournfulness left

for the suffering caused by the energy my lights

spend. Like the film images of the clouds that form

when the mountains are blown apart — how they pulse,

fill the screen, obscure everything — that’s how blurred

my mind was by the thought of what I wanted: another

whiskey. New boots. Possessions in numbers. To turn

and go back down the street to where the painter

who is not my husband but looks at me so long

holds his brush suspended above a palette of reds.

So much desire, and to desire goodness is no escape.

I will always end questioning what I’ve chosen,

regretting some greed. Or regretting that I slept cold

while the bulbs I left on burned into another day

when I would take nothing of what I wanted in my arms,

risk nothing that would bring color to my cheeks.

When the river flooded, when

I was a child, I boated

around the fields. And so it began,

my myth-making. I recall that altered time

foremost. I float.

Transformative washes

over the world — the time of evening when

I can have a drink, being in love,

the lyric way of speaking — that’s what

I’ve turned out to live for.

Though I know what’s more worthy

is the solid ground

and those who stood

on and worked it. My mother

would have been chopping

food she’d grown in those fields

while I was drifting over them.

I was heading out beyond

the sounds unintentionally but always

made by cooking —

not a special bell, no lifting song,

the economical and earthly summons.

There must have been, as every night,

the clunk of cast iron and a heavy meal

I was little help in preparing.

But what struck me

was the rarity: watching a lost garden.

The leaves wafted, the rounds

of fruits that had hung,

though ruined, were buoyant now.

Broken by refraction, they changed

to baubles I wanted.

The flood was a costumer, a jeweler.

And the way water cut ordinary sights,

that was appealing labor:

making stone toss about weightless light.

If there was a score to those years,

it was the somber percussion

of feed in a bucket, how we would

shake grain to call the cows, chickens,

kibble to call the dogs, call voicelessly

whatever would come. We spoke softly.

We knew shouting and chasing

what you want doesn’t work. We always

had something to say

and never needed to talk about ourselves.

Look, she’s hungry. She wants more.

Watch the funny way she does that.

Don’t you love it? I didn’t want dogs,

but there the strays were, in the ditches,

on the doormat. I let them in.

And so a life makes itself, awhile.

She wants to be kept forever.

I thought I would live in such a way,

walking about my small chores

in the stretching evening, forever.

It is not only strays who are disappointed.

A person may be kind and still possess

the command that means she will be

the one who decides to leave.

Even if it feels like all she has

is what finds her by chance, lingers by choice,

her companionship a woods’ cove

some happen into. The score to that time,

a common contentment that came with no tags

and went unnamed, was the hushed beat

of dogs’ feet on dirt, walking with us.

I used them, then, as symbols of how well

I could care for another, though they were becoming

the images of all I would give up,

what I would cry out about missing.

As if those lives had wandered away from me

and I was the one who would run for days

on a scent-memory toward

an end to which I thought I was bound. But toward —

that isn’t truly the movement that plays

over in my mind. When the dogs were

happiest, they did not need to be touched,

and no more affection than had been given.

Those were the days when I succeeded

in making love certain. They’d step ahead,

or sit at an angle, however slightly, away.

Because I have to reach for the cicatrix

of my own life:

a vein I duct-taped to the inside

of the bent lid

of a broken-into lockbox I flooded

with my own

freedoms. I kept the hems of those

porcelain angels’

feathers, as blue as the Colorado

river we never swam in

again. I kept each tooth you pliered

out of my mouth

and into a test tube as a keepsake.

I reach for your hand,

but it’s still gloved in shadow.

Who are you, really?

And where did you fling the key

to the reliquary

of yourself you never lost? Tonight,

I’m mortal: the clumsy

clink of coins falling in a glass jar,

the vein that swells

in my forehead when I laugh too loud

or cry too long.

Who gets to decide if a tooth is a curio

or a mouth missing

its bone? You asked me — again — to live —

for you. Tonight,

let me siphon the exoskeletons of these scars

that yoke us

into a bowl made of water. I am saying —

finally — no.

Because listen — the song they sing? So

faint, so distant?

It’s only you who still wants to wear it.

I watch you take pleasure

in salting chopped avocado,

squeezing lime. Yesterday,

I picked half-burnt cigarettes

out of the flowerbed

and tried to convince myself

silk is a shadow

but not a silhouette. Teach

me to believe I’m always

a child. You asked me

if I was afraid of the dark,

of losing you. No/yes/why,

I said. I’ve watched you

cradle the excavated shell

of an avocado. I still

don’t understand how

belief can ever be enough.


1.

The table is a lesson in etiquette.

                       You have replaced me with the rock and wire —

tiny flags and hearts.

The mother, the child, the father —

                       blocks, with little machines inside.

The chair is a lesson in posture.

I appear as a substitution for air.

 

2.

What we know, when we first know it, is absurd.

You cannot help but feel that no one has ever said this before.

Art returns us to the simple grammar of things without words to describe them.

Without thinking, things are as they were.

 

3.

There are no true monologues.

 

 

✼
 

 

4.

In the act of making, I cannot help but feel as if I don’t belong.

 

5.

Sappho still sings from what is left of what she sang.

No one remembers most of what Sappho sang.

Art is for the wind.

She sang, “lyre, lyre, lyre.”

 

6.

History is a long blue tube through which only a variation on a theme can be heard.

There is a world unlike the one you leave behind.

 

 

✼
 

 

7.

By, “having been thought out,” we mean, “felt

                                                                               deeply.”

 

8.

The apple you eat and the apple I remember you eating.

Ideas persist in the aesthetics of a world without aesthetes.

 

9.

Most [… blank] fancies the world without [… blank].

[Blank] is what is left after we are [… blank].

I’ll take your word for it.

 

 

✼
 

 

10.

The mind is the capacity for the unknowable.

[Blank] is what you cannot remember or forget.

 

11.

It is a thing, not that I know it.

 

12.

Because you did not ask, I gave no answer.

 

 

✼
 

 

13.

[Blank …] […].

 

14.

What we’ve made exists despite our knowledge of making it.

 

15.

A human heart beats in the clockworks of a concrete block.

We only remember the world as we leave it.

 

 

✼
 

 

16.

Mathematics and poetry will be attributed to the human heart’s desire to make sense.

 

17.

[Blank] and [… blank] are the true articles of faith.

The block is no less made than the stone.

You cannot say what you mean to a room full of ears.

 

18.

Atmosphere, to experience life by its sensations.

To be a vessel.

To look through an imperfect lens.

 

 

✼
 

 

19.

Every thought is a stone at the bottom of a mountain.

We must imagine ourselves happy.

 

20.

I do not belong.

 

21.

Only sometimes do the fearful wish to be unafraid.

 

 

✼
 

 

22.

The sentence carries the weight of all sentences written before it, should you wish to carry it.

The block tells the entire history of art, should you lift it.

This is not my first time either.

 

23.

I anticipate my words without readers.

I make a list of words and put them in a box to be opened after I am dead.

Only one of the words says “love,” the rest say “you.”

 

24.

Only the stone is irreducible.

If only we could run faster than our hearts.

 

 

✼
 

 

25.

Everything imitates you.

 

26.

The greatest comfort is that we know next to nothing.

 

27.

Look how wonderful our ideas are without us.

A copy of a copy of a copy, and.

I follow your thoughts through the obstacles.

Nina Buckless and I are driving down Main Street in her truck.

It’s got 200,000 miles on it                         and takes a calamity to turn over.

It is the holiday season, so                          the trees are dressed with pinpricks of yellow light.

They surprise us.

They glitter and shatter over us                   in a washpoint of star shower.

In that achingly sweet voice of hers

she turns to me and says,

I wanna hotwire a red ‘57 Chevy, but just to take it around the block

and return it where it was …

That’s oddly specific,

I say,

tired of her delusions.

She says,

Careful.

With all this dialogue and motive

you are now writing a story.

I say,

Nina.

You’re scaring me.

It’s not like you to caution me.

Nina says, Oh.

Nina says, I am not Nina or haven’t you noticed?

Now I am afraid.

I am afraid of how her voice has turned metallic.

I am afraid of how her eyes seem painted on.

I am afraid of how poems are like incantations

and of how my mother used to say,

Don’t whistle in the dark; you will surely call the devil,

and what am I doing now but whistling.

Rule 1 was perverse: if the witch in bed with me climaxed first,

her spells would strengthen tenfold.

The first unspoken conditional, the contract throughout —

that I was anticipated

by whatever wanted to overwhelm me.

                   Occasionally, you will have only the notion of liking the word songster.

What about the emblems? Who are the mascots?

A woman who collects Bakelite bracelets,

an early synthetic from the blues age.

She hates the cheapness of plastic and calls Bakelite its superior,

telling us the polka dots mean it’s good quality and lasting.

An infirm crowd, the Bakelite-addicted,

peopling the adult education center, milling around

in their widowhood and phobias — the latter part of animate life.

Inside, they sit so still so senseless

the motion-detecting lights turn off.

One night, a disembodied hand had come through the door, reaching

for the box of course evaluations. Lights on.

Lights Off.

                   Enough Hamletting.

                   Let’s just pick a cabin where everything runs on fire —

                   Couch, TV, Dresser.

                                       But in dreams you want grounding.

                                       A setting. You want to tie

every desert you’ve seen to another and know water

is the same water everywhere.

I don’t really like this coherence and connection.

The witch won’t either.

She’ll get her powers back, in tens. But if I

were to say to you, my fellow citizens,

that we shall send to the moon a giant rocket on an untried mission,

and return it safely, causing heat half the temperature of the sun,

and do all this, and do it right, and do it first —

then we must be bold.

                   Then the rings of light around the county library might be measured

like this: if they remind you of your mother,

the radium dials on every clock will last through morning.

                   Then you can even unwind the witch.

She will diminish — once warm and pulsating beside you,

now mechanical, made of metal alloys,

some of which have not yet been invented.

With camera tricks, the ordinary block replicates itself.

Rid of modern parking meters, thrust back to the 1940s, rerun

and generically reversing up into the hills.

Cars in vintage stereotype parked precisely

as the American Dream in spring … Shooting starts in April

because The Dream was never too hot, and so

made even the blue collars beautiful — slow

moving the way lucky people move. The past is here.

The future, here. One and the same in film,

depicted by the grain and gore — the body count and schlock of horror.

The blonde star, so symmetrical she’s alien, suffers

a staged car accident in the street.

Her body double and her own body slink to their chairs,

are done up from one rack, one palette,

before mimicking their own deaths — bad work.

The hull of the car carved to rest over her rib cage —

death doing something fake

to spare her, because ignominious or unglamorous,

film stars cannot die. Take Chaplin:

scuffling in the lobby of the mixed-income residential hotel,

($840 a month), his boxing ghost

now a selling point. Hollywood testing its luck, splurging

on chance, taking doom

stars upon itself. And we swallow: Hollywood

passing over to us the bad luck.


Even with a body dumped

in the water tank, the Cecil Hotel isn’t bad enough

to earn a spot in the Horrible Histories walking tour.

The cleanish communal bathrooms have two chambers, separated

by a shower curtain. We duck out

of the jet stream and drink beers in the dry partition,

then plunge our heads back under the water.

We do this for a good long time.

This is hours after he’d arrived in L.A. for the first time

and months after I’d left and returned.

He doesn’t like Koreatown; it reminds him of anyplace

with palm trees. Skid Row is entirely new.

The management: taking hauntings so seriously

they rope off the top few floors where

the raving man ghost was last heard.

This is where serial killers stayed: Ramirez, the Night Stalker,

and Jack the Journalist, who thought to expose L.A. crime, then

killed three prostitutes in homage to his subject.

The “premier choice of affordability downtown,” “European style,”

home to a few one-off murders,

rumors of the Black Dahlia,

and a couple of men committed.

Those at the end of their ropes end their lives here. It’s just what these people do.

So you showered in her death water?

Yes, a 21-year-old junkhead dies in an SRO

and I got to brush my teeth in what little

the water tank spurted out. They don’t fix it for weeks;

they have to deal with the elevator and the wireless.

Constant spectre sightings in the hallways all along.

Low water pressure all morning.

We could barely brush our teeth, but

authorities insist the water’s safe now.

Who has the right to make new things?

I mean, in ethical terms: who can produce interest,

what can reproduce with what.

I didn’t really shower in that death water at the Cecil Hotel.

I did stay there.

Cody really did smoke cigarettes on the balcony

and he really could see “some hills and smog and stars and shit”

and the up side

down sign of The Standard.

He really did think to say those city buzzwords

hills smog stars shit

But we never meant poverty porn;

we’re just gluttons for the symmetry of tents lined against art deco buildings

and the bedlam of cheap rolling luggage we were trying to drag unnoticed

past vagrants

We did scrub each other like we were each other’s corpse

preparations, Jesus’ feet, Baptisms,

all the good stuff about washing,

in the disinfected/shared bathroom/down the hall/drinking malt liquor.

But we were there 6 months before.

                    (If cutting a favorite line of a poem is like removing a limb,

                   then shoehorning the shit you feel entitled to write

                   is like sewing overgrown keloids and seromas onto your forehead.

                   Uneasy, uneasy. This sounds sweaty and sleazy.)

Perhaps the victim had a whole shopping cart of good ideas.

She was a methadone zombie; maybe she thought

the water tank was a Jacuzzi. Maybe she thought

I hold death in my pouch; I can not die.

My best friend’s quarter-life crisis begins

with a news article: Reality Is a Computer Simulation.

The plot-holes of our universe explained away

as design flaws: viruses, cheat codes, a market

of dim-witted alien gamers.

We’re the beta version, still in quality assurance labs.

They’re doing tests in Seattle.

If cosmic rays act as they shouldn’t, given

what we know, they’ll run more tests.

Even more if they act as they should.

So he plays SimCity2000 for hours now,

the nostalgic version, the one packaged with Scenarios, Vol. I: Great Disasters —

                               a wellspring of volcanic activity in Portland;

                                                    hordes of drunk lawyers causing riots.

SimCity’s mechanics are based on 20th century Californian development:

Cars, the default.

Earthquakes. High taxes and liberal policies.

A Mass Knife Fight to the Death Between Every American.

“The Exodus” is the closest thing to a victory sequence:

your little people, leaving

                in groups of 300 or more arcologies

                                    to colonize distant planets.

But it’s funny — thinking of the aliens controlling us now

sitting around their consoles,

missing the days before the unpopular releases,

before the slew of expansions,

like the Cambrian:

wishing for unicellular organisms, for levels you could scale in one day —

wanting their childhood favorites, games they could see the end of

before more complex iterations

following the Law of Accelerating Returns:

versions 2.0 and 3.0 and 4.0. Before

we all got away from them …

The air was heavy with blood.

The boys washed off in the river.

The girls, not allowed in, backed away

from the slim beach up toward the mills,

some shoved into the closed off canals,

the cold moss beds of cobble stones,

where more boys collected, and it was only June.

It is the horse in her he fears,

her eyes, large and rolling,

the yellow crunch of her molars,

and her heavy foot aimed at him.

He hears her in the stall of night

approach, the other animals scatter,

as does the dry dirt of the path,

and the pebbles at his feet

as he moves aside, as if to invite her

to enter into the event horizon itself.

He sees all her parts stretch out,

a string speeding forward yet still,

next to him, suspended in the cessation

of time, the galloping fury of her finally

arrested so that now his sleep markedly

quiets enough for the shift of his breathing

to stir her. She licks his salty spine —

he is calm, now — pats his damp mane,

Wake little horsey.

How can anyone conjure the invisible

and yet the invisible was arguing

with my friend by her parents’

stretch of river, where it is narrowest.

I walked down the path, towel

and picnic over my shoulder,

looking toward the clearing

where it’s easiest to enter the water

and saw them — my friend

and the misty shapes entangled,

pushing — I felt like a brush of dusk

upon them, the closer I came,

the darker they were. Did my friend

need my help? And then the stream

thickened, threatening to overcome me

and I climbed a high rock.

Night poured down though it was just noon,

my back sweating. I wouldn’t see

my friend again until dinner. Finally,

where have you been? she scolded.

Warehouses of palaces,

Warehouses of gruel,

Warehouses of lost sheep,

Tall columns of confusion.

Where are we now?

In the state of Massachusetts,

In the city of Lowell,

Inside of a smokestack,

Inside of a cyclone burning.

Inside of a cafe on 495,

Without coffee and money,

Without warmth or table,

Smell of johnnycakes and butter.

Where are we now?

Inside the Boston Public Library

In Copley Square, in Boston,

in Massachusetts, walking the stacks

Without books, without paper,

Without folios, without decimals.

Now, where are we?

Tall columns of however it happens.

Are we there yet?

We are driving toward the North Shore,

Toward Cape Ann,

Chased by green flies

And now near Maine,

Canada!

We are in a brand new Mercury,

Black with red trim,

No speedometer,

No gas, no feet on pedals.

You, where are you now?

Inside our cat’s milk bowl?

In a kitchen?

On the floor?

In a ranch house.

On acreage.

Many azaleas,

Many peonies,

Familiar mother on the terrace,

Her gin and tonic contained in a glass,

Silver sipping spoon,

Cherry tree branches,

Many Japanese beetles,

All seen clearly.

Where now?

We are inside etcetera.

We are in a place of stutters

And syllables.

We are very busy

With potholders

Yet, at the same time,

We can’t be identified as

Useful, (but don’t take that personally).

Where are we now?

Following the sea in and out.

We are a long drink of water,

We are full to the brim,

We are hopeful we will stop

Soon. We are kneeling,

We are bowing, we are in a real

Good holding pattern.

Parched, her crooked fire ant fingers

pinch my pupil’s membrane

breaking the water from its shell.

Sip my cool brown, Abuela.

Thread my lashes to my brows

stretch my lids one inch wider.

Flat, taut, dissected eye.

Want to see her resting.

Arms spread, legs sprawled

body twisted over purple baby budding azaleas.

The green of her irises peeled, shaved flesh

floating, fighting their way into the black of my curl.

See me.

Trying to wring her from my hair

seizuring hands milking over and under and through.

Now, I can leak your scent.

It is damp, like the wood cuatros are carved from.

A fragrance as sharp as a slice of piqued bamboo.

Can I have a piece of you?

Take your chopped swelled burgundy tongue,

fold it into the longest crease of my palm?

The weight of it will

instruct me to clench those buds

in my white-knuckled grasp

as if somebody just called my mother a spic liar.

I will punch through the earth’s body

bed you sleep on, tunnel that tongue

deep, deep in this dirt.

Baste it with sliced ribbons from the light heel of my foot.

Water it with the loving froth from my mouth.

Watch you grow.

You could have liked me.

Bathed in my rage

like chicken splashed in grease.

Maybe I’m that chunk of skin

scraped from your thigh

before they put you in,

dirt deep.

Or would my cousins

have shined, dynamite sparkling

between your caramel fingers

while I, the cigarette,

propelled from your mouth

to a grinding shoe?

Could you?

Between your cowboy swagger,

your peacocked prune,

and grandfatherly wad of greenbacks

flashed before mirrored eyes.

Not until I skirted across

a living room like a ring,

be the first to don

the champ belt hanging

from my shoulder like a shawl —

because after all, I’m still a lady.

After my triumph, you would have easily seen

your win.

Maybe you could have.

Because your groan

gets caught in my throat

and when I shut my eyes

I can see through yours —

I am stevedore to unknown sterilized silver

chemists, stickler for stigmaria shocked

into being by text-wrapped sticky Thalia.

Soraya, tetrarch of mash note terreplein,

you reinforce the rules of kriegspiel with a

light hand, my kyrie spreading like kudzu

regardless of Kshatriya boundaries. (Kulaks

always knew just enough Kremlinology.)

Laic Lok Sabha performs long division

over necessary neckcloths, the Near East

a near gale, the revolt of Soraya’s ullage

a felix culpa curving to the bend of massifs.

Carrier pigeons alight on carousels facing

labor camps lit by Lahori lacquerwork.

The corpus delicti of our long separation

is recorded in ladder tournaments among

ladies who lunch, stays hung up in the print

queue, Soraya, shadow play in Java and

Bali sheathing my textualism when I

violate the skaldic rule of informal union.

Hematocele collects in empty Helmand,

the mural crown abandoned to murine

musclemen. The stage door, boustrophedon

sprawl to austere aureate anharmonicity,

leads Soraya to the altar, occult shekinah

illumined by shell companies and vinyl

hung in the usual way, wealthy zodiac

zoned to the campus site of camisoles.

Cheat grass where the colorists among the

beau monde beat back the lone surviving pieta

of me holding you like a prosecuting infant,

Soraya, echoes spondaic theanthropy,

the truth condition under which I wait up

for the Wagner tuba to wail around air-

raids. (The wave state lighting the wagon

train might as well be Wahhabis on strike.)

Yokozuna burst open their loanwords at

the moment when isomorphic hard drives

freeze along the frontage of our septal

matrilineality. I swear upon the codpiece,

Soraya, to snuff the establishment Essenes

whose ecbolic eclogues throb with courtesy.

In the display case

          rills of script fill the open ledgers —

                     Liga, Dzintra, Janis,

                     Oskar, Sandra —

a single codex for the Nazis’ victims

          and tome after tome for Stalin’s.

Your hand taps lightly

          against the opaque case

as though some knuckle

          branded by frostbite

                     might echo,

a phantom the boxcars

          ferried back from

          Yuhnov or Vyatka.

Imagine having to choose

          between two butchers,

                     your brother’s murderer

                     or your other brother’s murderer,

a looped recording asks.

The tour huddles

          around a steel terminal,

the great leader

          in his admiral’s cap

                     looming on a display above.

Even in infamy,

          his Georgian brow

          is stern, confident.

A toddler returns

          his gaze, mouths a slur

                     of stumbling vowels.

Many Latvians greeted

          the Nazis as liberators,

                     a tour guide adds,

because at least they killed

          more discriminately.

Behind her, a lithograph:

the hanged bodies of nationalists,

          their limp feet dragging

          on a babushka’s fruit stand.

Two red army officers smile for the flash.

Here, it’s always

          one evil you know

          then another.

You imagine the cobbled square

          beyond these walls,

                     the onyx stallions

                     lining its rooftops.

Your choices now are simple:

          celebrate this statuary

          under hunger moon,

          or mourn the dead.

Is it a choice?

Before you: a violin

          molded from soup bones

          and strung with horse hair.

Will you play it tonight,

          wanderer, and

                     if so, for whom?

Driving Bill to the airport,

he pointed out the window.

Cormorant, he said. And I turned

long enough to catch a glimpse

of the bird suspended

above a smokestack,

above the discount mattress store,

where I’ve never seen a single car,

the sky a bright auburn

russet on the bird’s back.

It was beautiful, the bird,

but also the way he said it.

Like he couldn’t hold the word in

once he’d spotted it.

It’s a night since Bill

opened his book

in the bar haunted by smoke

to read about his daughter,

uhte, unhemlich.

And later asked

if one of the dogs could stay

with him, the corgi

named for an observer of nightingales.

He’s a man who knows his bedfellows.

Now only 8 a.m., and the stars

already cleared, my hands

newly anemic.

To crave

language

is to love a thing apart,

my friend not the many faces

I can no longer conjure.

Bill removes his glasses,

rubs his eyes.

Swallow-tailed Kite, how amazing,

he points,

and means the bird —

or can he mean the word

it slowly becomes?

1.

Your looming touch, there on the shale banks —

fingers holding taut the loose

strands of my body, lacing all my parched

cells into reassembled patterns

there beside the basin made legible by rains,

there beneath the silt of your catalyzed hands;

2.

Now the word for crow pierces blue

reservoir air, comes to perch on our dark arms

entangled and where I’m learning how to hold

your unfamiliar shape atop hot silica,

grafting my ingrown heart to your orbiting cheek

as monsoons sprout wings inside our ribcages;

3.

Finally here — inside of dusk — our sky’s chromatics

falter when clouds amass to mask

even the crow’s bright word for us.

In lieu of perfected sunsets, I raise to one zenith

an unobstructed kiss as your eyes tilt northward,

where already a half-moon climbs

above the red clay, braiding the black hair of indifferent stars;

I spent a year

down

          in the red

clay —

          That’s how I learned

          there are no

clean

          mysteries.

I try to enter an eon:

the one at the center of my skull,

but something needs a bridge there —

a way to cross the river that drinks from me.

When I listen too closely, I’m blinded

by the sound,

                    so many speaking all at once.

Shapes made of our watching

circle near us, and through —

We are moving around in the word,

into the light above the stone.

(There is a voice that can be seen.

There is a voice that also sees.)

Heart & rat, severed brethren gone straight to hell

& back for a lousy split of the gate & free drinks.

We have left our songs in the sun, revel accordingly,

Refuse to be left behind; neither can we lead

Seated, as we are, in this ashtray, steeped

In lump & whisk, trump & hulk, lush & guzzle.

A moth-eaten minuet hands itself to a southerly

Breeze, held in check by the god of the melee

& she-monsters that haunt the night. The jamboree

Arrived in town at sundown’s ashen light …

Pilgrims of the apocalypse bed down for the night

In the intemerate sheen of a baleful

Silver moon, rescued from itself by a red dog

That was to act as a guide on this semi-infinite journey.

All in all, it’s been a wonderful circus, chock

Full of amercements & sundry pleasantries:

The round-eyed barred owls were especially

Entertaining, swooping about the big top

Hunting for mice, but we had to avert

Our eyes when the capsicum & orchids

Started to dance around & lick each other.

The reputation of your little books & your

Retroussé nose beat us to the spiked punch

& your well-practiced asseverated diffidence

Played well in the hungry & busy room & hung

Everywhere like skulls or cheap perfume.

Lately we’ve heard the meat-packing district

Just isn’t what it used to be, the drains

All clogged with hooves & hair & last year’s

Fashions, the carbolic stench of twice-bitten

Trolleys rumbling swollen & disharmonic

Along the distaff river. Anyhow, no one

Lifts a finger any more & even if they did

Would any good come of it.

Consider the carnival workers, the side show

Freaks & novelists & their compulsive

Desire to entrain & make for the hills

To join the gypsies & revenants

In their battered wagons laagered in deep

Piney woods, the moldering cookfires

& their useless forms of divination.

Falstaff used to be the name of a beer

& we drank it all the time by the tunnel

Where the el becomes a subway one

Slightly grey & drizzly chthonic spring

When nothing happened. We were glad for it

& we didn’t miss it one bit. We tried

Translations & clairvoyance but nothing

Seems to get through the apparition

Of your ink-stained hand pressed against

The window’s torn shade. It’s been thirty years

Since you last wrote. Has the city

Taken you from us. Have you forgotten

Those you once loved.

The dirty roan

Elapses from its recent

Roll in the hay.

Eclipsed skies

Ruddy a twice-

Canvassed background

That resembles

A riverine border

Snaking toward an oil-

Slicked gulf. Distillates

& arguments litter

Our little neighborhood

On the Lower East Side

& a red bridge arches its way

Into another moonless borough.

The once-stabled city

Has given way — as have we —

& we ruminate on the muddy

Brown tin ceiling in this mid-town

Drinking house not far from the newly

Reconfigured square. The roan rises

From its knees like a ghost

& upscale tenements & shiny

Galleries decorate the vintage

Once-cobbled streets.

Would there were darkness —

Mobled, serene, a place

Where the life of leaves

Took place & the air

Was clear & comprehensible.

1.Tuesday. m a r t e s / 1924 hrs

1520

One will miss one’s

flight find one

self still in …

& remain w/ those howls

sound & calm waking waking

waiting known sound of thunder

told one’s self to dream of that

but not remembered

if that dreamt at all

brown eyes frown high

vein strain of old

Spain forgot forgot care

not things that are like

they were wonder

why care buried

& SING:

her eyes were brown-

deep deep brown

hair darker than her eyes

& something in her smile

& frown curled crimson lip

& high instep showed that ran

in each blue vein mixed brownly

w/ some beaner strain & vigorous

vintage of New Spain air heavy

night hot I sat by her side & forgot

forgot! forgot mah herd were takin

rest forgot air close oppressed

o o o o o o o

& I wonder why I do not care

for things that are like things

that were does half my heart

lie buried there …

2.Tuesday. m a r t e s / 0549 hrs

1998

clearly (again) in the subway

1,2,3 station at Chambers

talkshow featuring a cameo

by L.L. Cool J

show’s theme is body hyphen mind

in that order

a DJ in the station.

3.Tuesday. m a r t e s / 0452 hrs

1986

w/ a wooden

bowl protecting

me in this film

as she hurls forks

at me

I can gather

them from inside

the bowl

one sticks her cheek

how effective

to hurl forks

(as one lurks)

& have company!

4.Tuesday. m a r t e s / 1155 hrs

1997

rode standing

in the back

of a truck

through WallMart INC

past the courthouse

up the small knoll

near the library

& Minit-Market

home I sd to myself audibly

purple Gila Mountains

& Mt. Graham which I called Grandfather

sunset over Mt. Graham

bars of reds & pinks

we’re in the back

of a pickup riding

near the Minit-Market

we have instruments —

a guitar, a full bass, an accordion

we’re a Tejano conjunto

5.Tuesday. m a r t e s / 2309 hrs

1957

Oedipus also climbed

into the backseat

as we sped away

from the crowd

who wanted to rip

him apart for loving

the man w/ the heavy

load tied to his neck

to die

that hombre (who

fell) was the first

because the first shot

was from above

splaying the man

walking on water

skeleton planted tape

recorder behind the rockhut

I live in to gather ideas

car sped …

I woke valuing education.

6.Tuesday. m a r t e s / 1519 hrs

1988

prophecy propositioned by Quetzalcoatl

to write a lyric about the sóbbuey

on 125th red line heading south

still on the street

tried to tap a table to find a rhythm

catch a cadence or three

one two onetwothree & I think

I wrote something about

two dogs then a cigarette

burning but couldn’t find

a line that went beyond

mediocre

I desired mostly to use sd for said

told Quetzalcoatl I planned on

using names of places

to sing my praises

of the street I know

Q. recommended puns

sidewalk near where

folks sell cans & plastics

mouths from bags they’ve

gathered the goods from trashbins

cans & plastics from mouth

to bowels expelled crushed

in bags by more folks who load

the goods into trucks’ holes

called me sir & sd do you

have a minute

of course I have a minute

because I have to get to work

7.Tuesday. m a r t e s / 1839 hrs

1803

As I know I’ll tell them

all alright

they nod

& there a mountain

Orizaba I can see w/ snow

that dear mountain

I climbed on top

to piss off I can smell

the chalk & still my mind

further north in Sinaloa

sniffing hard enough I guess

speaking to mostly the mountain now

think I dreamt something of the once

current puns but I certainly woke

not strumming either

but something entirely my own

count puns & poems written

why I should the same joys

I guessed a host a ghost guest

went between walls

of one house walking on one

side to the other w/o exit

origin of her seen

wound intact

& the perturbance & secret ashes

& asked me to shush

& on yr fresh throne where you yr nahua pronounced

showing what stone of a thousand centuries

noise that wrenches air / the double

face

& how many voices

heard in front

of the covered sea

never returning waves

by belt of vipers she birthed

me nomadic

Mexica banished / w/o idols

maintaining me removed

& Spaniards call me beaner

& I read from Spain directly

& as fer ye Messican

or Brown tonge euery thyng

is so excellently done

in them that none cand

do better in the Spanish tonge

contrary euery thinge

in a manner so meanly bothe

for the matter &the handelynge

that no hay nadie that can do worse

Maybe the broken window in the short story is a symbol for

          the fractured love between the father and his son,

          or else the inability of the daughter to express her pent-up longing,

          or maybe it’s the mother’s way of refusing to make dinner.

But maybe not — maybe it’s really about

          the dog, who never quite got along with

          the parakeet, who still secretly wishes it was

          a cat.

                     But maybe that’s not it,

                     either, because maybe that broken window

                     means the teacher is getting tired of us and our

                     incessant need to find meaning,

you know, like that Barthelme story she gave us

to read the day Louis and Karen

broke up,

                     splashed their drama loudly

          across the classroom, de-exchanging love tokens

          in fits and hurls before the bell — finally — rang,

and we didn’t know what to say

and so Mrs. Levinson told us to just be

still,

          be still,

                     be quiet,

                                           and we had to read that story

about the school where everything from hamsters to grandparents,

          in a predictable cascade of unrelenting angst,

                     simply, and without regard for our feelings,

                                expired.


I found a phone that only rings in blacked noise.

I found myself in a friend’s jeans, then his hand.

I found my father asleep. I broke him into bread.

I found mother with a cock in her mouth. Laugh.

I found for the first time the ornament of tongue.

I found knowing is an attic fire that reclaims us.

I found myself, folded, gray, softer, focus on dead.

I found a finger in a jam jar. Loss is too full of itself.

I found my father’s knuckles tasted of hate, prayer.

I found him tongueless, ornamented in thick black.

I found him waiting in rooms made smaller by him.

I found this is the place where I throat my silence.

I found my son in a thicket. Half-thorned/throned.

I found bolt-cutters. I feel better now about mercy.

I found prostration. Still, now, I’ve not apologized.

I found all I’ve needed in the air’s nicked wounds.

I found all I’ve needed in a truck stop bathroom.

I found my want for crucifixion is how I make love.

I ask my father where we are driving
& in his clipped tongue he says,

the fever will break down outside

of Missouri, break down outside

of meaning, which is to say that we’ll

break down to avoid the chapped

runt-mouth of words. Somewhere

outside

of this burnt out Buick, I want

to see it all: the way the homes

would wash away under storms

if it were not for the sidewalks

holding them in their hills; how

a small box of animal teeth

has something to say about the way

we love; how brick and bone; how

I ask father what the street sign

means, how he says our name; how

our name is not bird bone, not

hollow; not hallowed like flint

in winter, like fever sweats, like

child, like what’s ripped; how

he spoke was how I buried him; how

the fever is a kind of life; how he

pulled off the license plates before

we crossed the Missouri border; how

the dead enter our mouths; how

we hold their names like nails

in our teeth; & always how we

remember these things: how father

& son, how we die broken, quick.

Marriage, our problem solving

system, transforms stale breath, stuffed

blue recycling bags, soap slivers,

and internet porn into stale bags

of internet soap, stuffed blue breath,

and recycling porn. Look

at those split wet candy wrappers.

If the problem solving system

recognizes danger, it asks,

Will you act like your mother or father?

Will you smoke cigars for breakfast,

fuck your secretary, buy ten

new pairs of shoes and redecorate the living

room again, unzip that other man’s pants

while admiring your manicure?

The problem solving system

can make you wear a toupee, hostage

your children or dog, stuff

your secretary slivers into a stale

bag of porn breath, smoke the unzipped

living room of admiration, manicure

your secretary danger, dog your hostages,

and children your mother and father

into a pair of blue candy cigars,

your ten new toupees redecorating

the breakfast soap or fucking

the internet dog in another man’s pants.

The problem solving system problems

your system solving till you recycle smoke,

till you breakfast on secretary, porn a toupee,

candy a split — till you’re unzipped

by death, that wet wrapper.

once dirt sitting shiva in a rectangular hole once a sable brush loaded with vermillion dragged through wet fuchsia paint then centuries later a museum visitor asking is he caressing her and the curator saying no he’s stabbing her once dirt hiding its face in the hole dirt praying to be fired and glazed to bear water wine something other than that girl then everyone she knew then everyone

They lowered a bucket of mussels

down to my stomach

where a table had been set

with white cloth and a single candle.

My starred beret drank a glass of champagne

though it preferred water.

Whoever is afraid of silence

will never hear it.

I see night leaning on the sun.

I see a tree leaning on an axe.

If only you’d known you were blessed in this world.

Not everything good was a test in this world.

Movies, dessert, sex — all in the afternoon —

there’s so much joy to be confessed in this world.

You wanted Shahid to pine in tongues for you:

Je te cherche à l’ouest et à l’est in this world.

Washing your feet in half of a broken globe,

he said, There’s no such thing as West in this world.

Locked, unlocked. Fleered, obeyed. Withheld, surrendered.

You often noed before you yessed in this world.

Miss Godfrey, how much of your love did you waste

crying you were the loneliest in this world?

Lonely, the dead

do their best

to entice. They purvey

their secrets

like department store clerks waving perfume cards.

They yell

at your dog, stomp

around, snore.

But ants drown out

all that opulent sound

jingling the spare

change in their pockets.

How noisy, the dirt.

My late note to Solace reads: Thank you

for the asphalt park on the corner

of Huntingdon and Trenton, where

the skaters rail slide all summer

and their boards ignite tight fires

against the block’s brick and cement.

Thank you, too, for teaching me to live

with the voices licking their way

through my walls and the ones without legs

or wings or ribs I could duck into

to bury a left hook. I can’t murder them

all — not that way. The best I can do

is listen to the hundred cities humming

in my blood. Any veteran of the set

will tell you: if you let any two songs spin

at the same time, there is a point

at which the music will simply line up

— if for just a moment, sometimes longer —

and even when they drift back into their own

galaxies of noise, one enormous

arrangement of metal, wood, and space

clattering into the other, out of time again,

when the downbeats stumble into

the gaps and breaks of another track,

the two simultaneous grooves are what

great dancers learn to move to, swing

and stutter. You just gotta let vinyl fly

long enough. You gotta trust the music.

The body finds it. And I’ll confess, it’s hard

to feel my way into all the two-step

twitch and hip-drops wound up inside

all my sadness, hard as it is to be

a 45-year-old man and weeping

openly on the wide city block where

I’ve made (again) a new home

on a sky-blue day when the apricots

seem to bounce among the topless

boxes crammed into the bed

of the vegetable lady’s pickup.

She’s shouting JERSEY THIS and

JERSEY THAT FOR SALE — as if

she means it, as if to revoke all

the apologies for the place of my birth.

I’ll be the first to admit,

I have never been beautiful

except when no one could see me —

so beautiful that even I couldn’t bear it.

That’s when I began to dream of ways

to float from a silver maple or gather

myself on a road like one hundred thirty

starlings then simply burst apart

before the grill of a fast moving car.

I left Brooklyn and counted each river

I crossed. I know all the bridges, most of them

by name. I owe my madness

and its memory absolutely nothing.

The sanest thing I do these days is kiss

my beloved as long as I can, from her shoulder

to her chin. I lied. There was one other time

I became beautiful. I was far away

from everyone I loved, though I was in a room

full of curmudgeons and stranglers,

technocrats and blowhards. It struck me then,

no matter which way I turned or what

tic on the compass I followed,

I was approaching something that didn’t

kill me. I was nudged nearer my brothers

and everyone else who long ago accepted

my fevers and grief. I was budged toward

at least a few hundred drunken

comrades of foolishness, captains

every one of them, whom I laughed with

or danced against in some shared mourning,

each of us lost at one time or another

in one of seven kinds of bewilderment.

It’s an old curse of mine: to be without

a nation or a home. All of my sorrow

and all of my comfort remains

in this fact. No matter where I turn,

exile’s the zip code, and every step I make,

it looks like I’m always headed back.

When I fall in love again I will have another heart

and a second set of eyes which is one way

to watch the woman you love          grow old

The story of my heartbreak started like this:

someone gave me a key that opens many doors

I traded it for a key that opens only one

I traded that one for another and that for another

until there were no more doors

          and I had a fist full of keys

At any given moment only part of the world is gruesome

There are three pomegranates in the fridge

waiting to be broken open

When I fall in love again

my beloved and I will spit seeds into the street

until the birds come to pluck them

When I fall in love I’ll count the tick

of little pits in city puddles

I’ll forget the dead

                                   and count the doors instead

I saw him change an F into a B by the lockers.

He caused the lines to curve.

He made bridges where there were none.

He was the one who poked a hole in the Barbie pool.

When the girls filled it, there were sudden tears on the old carpet,

all the dolls on their backs, expectant.

He used to wait under the basement stairs and grab ankles.

It was a monster, he’d say.

He helped his baby sister hide food by the water heater.

He swept the dried rice and cereal.

When their mother found all those fast meals, he stole a Sky Dancer

and propelled it into fluorescent bulbs. The shards came down as glitter.

This is the man who used to play in the dirty stream where the Sears used to be.

He showed me the frogs.

I followed him to a magic dumpster filled with day-old pastries.

There were newspapers and dog shit inside.

It’s sleeveless, upper back bare but I’m eight

and not fleshy. Skinny and free to show skin.

I want perfect bows. I straighten

and am cowed, the knots too tight.

Try again, disappointed in the new wrinkles.

My mother’s hands smell like lemon detergent,

her palms a little moist. It’s August, my birthday month,

everyone’s necks and backs of knees slick in the afternoon.

I run to show my brother, and the-one-I-must-call-brother.

“I like it,” my brother says.

The other says, “Go out in that dress

and you’ll get split like a watermelon. Down there.”

I can twirl and balloon its full skirt.

I take full strides. How could I rip anything?

Fall on a big rock? Cut myself down there,

though it’s never happened before.

First red dress and difficult to put on, take off.

Red cotton with peacock feathers all over.

I leave the bad feeling of the boys’ room,

think of my flesh as a broken watermelon,

seeds making pupils on the feathers’ eyespots.

Pink flesh and black eyes on my flesh,

like the time I dropped a melon on the front step

after carrying it alone from the car.

Me and my mother and brother ate it anyway,

spooned into its split. Left some for the ants.

The one girl who runs faster than me smokes twigs she collects from the playground:

this way, my mom can’t smell the smoke. Do the ones that have buds on ‘em, she says.

It’ll get you high faster.

Two men.

Fat. Drunk.

White. Old.

Hey, girls. Come on, don’t run. Don’t run from us.

We’ll catch you, wait ‘til we get ya. Ha ha.

I can’t stop myself from looking back.

There are girls tossed into ravines and stuffed under bushes.

Where to hide, where to hide as I run past the other girl, past the swing sets,

the playhouse where the older kids pee when they can’t hold it.

Twenty-two, I wear six pale blue stones on one finger. Twenty-two, I drive breaking women to the psych ward in my dirty white Corolla. Their clothes I carry to the trunk in plastic bags. How little I know, a southern girl working mental health outside Boston, an hour from Cambridge where red-winged blackbirds dart over my head as I run early-morning hills in the park. My boyfriend still asleep, his cat waiting patiently behind the bedroom door to spring and bite my feet. How I hate the couple living above us. How a man who knows everything tastes like cement. In Medford, Nor’easter clouds fan out in the sky. In Cambridge, our landlord drinks coffee on the porch, walks his daughter to the Quaker school, asks me to breakfast again. When I try and rearrange my face or the facts of looking up into a sky, nothing is reflected but the rain puddles on the paved path. Twenty-two, I learn how girlhood makes a place in the brain that the brain carries as the body moves on. Our couples’ counselor mimes for my boyfriend: This is what it looks like, saying I don’t know. I help hospital-drugged Cassandra into my car. Forty-five & she will never forget her father. I count her pills into plastic cases as she tells me of things I can’t see. Spiders. Clapping monkeys. How often broken is just broken and remains so. Our neighbor’s grill, left again in the drive. The old widower, dozing in his car. Come here, I call to the birds as they flicker and disappear in the marsh reeds. My boyfriend works all night and sleeps well into the day. I wait for weeks but he never wakes my way, over and over the pale northern sunrise turning the sky to wheat. Waiting for wings there are only a handful of things I can do. I move the six rings to my other hand. Leaving through the side door, I go for another run. Twenty-two, I pick Cassandra up at noon & help her walk her dog. His daughter on the tire swing out back, our landlord asks me over for a drink. But I never take my eyes off those red wings blinking over the reeds as the girl swings higher and higher into the emerald trees.

Palaces are the places I have not seen in years —

 

My head against yours, our sleeping hours overlap.

 

Daily the dying oaks blend into brown brick.

 

Daily the monk parakeets scavenge black seed.

 

When quarrelling one no longer reasons well

 

Or so she reasons, the message altered by the ending.

 

When I wake and worry into the night, the wave

 

Gathering more water, I know my 19th-century

 

Self is still catching up. Still tanning

 

On the porch with you, pouring over

 

Pictures of pretty girls while hoping our faces

 

Might freeze into theirs.

 

When her husband died, my grandmother threw

 

History away. This is a palace.

 

Like swimming with you in the outdoor pool

 

Where I dive for a heart of oiled feathers.

 

Only watching the cat lick his belly in the sun

 

Will make the wave put down its water.

 

Citizen, how do you lose a country?

 

How do you get it back?

 

Is it a bouquet of rough-edged tulips, opening for days.

 

Is it a palace, the one-line note from my father.

Citizen, in my haste to reach you I skipped

 

Past the attic fan

 

Drawing in night’s cooling air.

 

Past my mother, tossing

 

Gin-soaked ice cubes to the dog.

 

There are times life is beautiful

 

Many years after the facts — traveling far from their origins —

 

Make a way back to you.

 

What to do with a couple of little girls

 

Who want to be Daniel Boone

 

Except let them go on?

 

Sometimes you have to climb a hill to get to rock bottom.

 

To get to my sister and me, tumbling into the creek until our father

 

Yells us back up the bank.

 

Even then, we believed in conversion.

 

Believed a rocky bed and the sound of water

 

Could save us if they wished.

 

Tonight I mistakenly chill the red wine

 

Because the bottle makes it look white.

 

The dog rests her chin on the gnawed sill,

 

Worrying over the soul about which it knows nothing.

 

Dear Citizen, when they ask if you repent, say What?

 

Reach for the wheel and slide over.

Fresh paint and new sod but still set all wrong: the park across the road goes too quickly under. You live in an ecotone, a co-worker sighs. Cut the boxwoods back — people will hide in there, the gardener says. My neighbor, Army back from a war, tells me my dog barks if someone gets close to the house. I don’t ask how they know. Blossoms blaze in orange along Ellerbee Creek. Always I am late for work. Three blocks away, my uncle grew up, my great-aunt died, and my sister pulled figs from broad leaves. I hang a birdfeeder in the mulberry & wake to see it covered by raccoons. A snarling knot, this ground is a hunted one. I pet the dog, who must be lonely, following me around. Tonight I pledge to never open the front door, but I do, to a man in a torn blazer selling an old bottle of detergent. From a van in the street, his friends wave, all smiles. I shake my head but there is no shaking behind it. Land of transitions, you go forever on — boring jobs, uncertain boundaries, dogs not saying what they see. You live in an ecotone, my co-worker sighs. But I want this to be where I want to be, living with a foot in prey and the other in hunter. Living with dusty drill bits and ten sets of curtains. With leftover pizza & no tarte tatin pan, with the overlapping nights never long enough to get all the sadness done. Buying the heaviest desk I can find, a woman walking by helps me drag it inside & I set it in a right angle because Happiness in a corner is a German saying & set all wrong, the sun never reaches in far enough. My air conditioner gives out in Durham’s first humid week. My boyfriend and I tangle in the car, his boot nearly kicking out the glass. Finding a pill in the floorboards, I consider grinding it down. The dire wolf come and gone, always I am late for work. Wrecked by Iraq, the veteran helps his grandfather up the steps. That we live in an ecotone is never something the old man will say. Waving to me, his hand shakes behind the wave, like an owl waiting in the mulberry for the last mouse to start for home. Three blocks away, I first ate huckleberry in a house now filled by strangers.

Divested of my objecthood, still I think it tender —

 

How Candide scrawled sweet Cunégonde’s

 

Name in the trees. Small porcelain selves, what to do

 

With the particularly cohesive dust we are?

 

Sol fecit means the sun made it.

 

Made it like my sister, crawling down the laundry chute

 

In a bid to elude cowboys and Indians.

 

My sister who becomes the geologist

 

Watching our grandparents’

 

Ashes as they catch in rhododendrons

 

Growing thick at Sandburg’s Lake.

 

At higher elevations, a loose dog becomes

 

Two crows stalking through a winter-bare field.

 

A woman spreading her legs becomes she’s asking for it.

 

A lucky penny and a pregnancy test become two

 

Falling stars, ten years later. Oh culture

 

Teaching us to pornographify the slightest smile.

 

Oh culture teaching us to point at our own

 

Bruised bodies and laugh —

 

Descartes said to start with doubt

 

In this country we occupy, whatever its terms.

 

A dancer aimed like a thunderbolt floats gently down.

 

Citizen, the sun made it. Meaning, it escaped.

Home is a bus

          full of scars,

                     hurricane tattoos,

          arms black

                     and brown and purple,

                                women

from the waist up,

          men

                     from the waist down.

On Route 66

          I stitched

                     track marks on a mother

          holding a sack

                     of ragweed in her arms,

                                her face a tattered afghan

I’d stroke in the dark

          when I was high.

                     I rode every bus

into swashbuck then,

                     but I don’t remember

                                the stanchions.

          I remember the manager —

                     a storm cloud

                                who washed his hands

whenever he touched the passengers.

          He was all about efficiency.

                     In this life there is nothing

more pathetic

          than a businessman.

 

✼
 

          A man in a turquoise sash

                     speaks incessantly

                                about his catamaran:

a Stacy Adams shoebox

          he plows into the flank

                     of the Sandia Mountains.

A man who fishes for ears

          is often lonely

                     but there are too many

          liquor stores on Lead.

                     He has an appointment

                                with the kind of wind

and heat that cleanse,

          and pity he doesn’t know

                     how often they go

on vacation.

 

✼
 

          I pull the stop cord

                     on Copper to hear

          how the metal

                     veers carefully

                                into soft vein.

A mother rubs dust

          from her baby’s throat.

                     Two boys gulp water like radiators.

          Heads are gauzed, necks

                     emblazoned with warring

          versions of the Virgin.

                     I wear red to match

                                the seatbelts: fifty sardines

tasseled with blood.

 

✼
 

                     I used to be Mexican-

          American, I used to be

                     Hispanic, wedded

                                like an unwilling bride

to maracas, chimichangas,

          and Cinco de Mayo.

                     Then I took the bus

to Old Town.

          A man with a grocery bag

                     leaking hatch chiles

          stumbled into my lap

                     and said I smelled like rotten

                                eggs. He flashed a forearm

tag of a Karankawa bride.

          Dissolution often happens

                     on the fly.

A year ago, when the 54

          trampled an octogenarian

                     at the depot, I smelled

          the Gulf of Mexico.

                     The wheels turned

                                over the curb like hands

making bread.

          I left a makeshift prayer

                     in the gutter

where it still swells.

My mother cradles

a sapling between two

fingers.

A spent cannon.

She worries

about her teeth.

¿Y quién tiene la culpa

de todo eso?

Before she was soot

she was powdered

milk, her mouth

a foundry

of plum trees.

Now that she is gone

the confessional is glad

to release her rumor

back into the world.

✼
The day she combusted

her bedroom window

opened its mouth

to exhale.

Everyone in the room

cocooned.

Night reminds me of cities

with no cores,

how anonymous

conversation can be

without compass.

Every belief, even passing,

like cellophane.

Everyone who passes

that window

sees a shroud:

they say ghosts.

I say a reminder

to breathe.

when you left, the hours

circled like galaxies

in our washtub

I stripped the doors

so they had open mouths

but couldn’t speak

where you hid

a trelliswork of scarves

silk-screened with la calavera

catrina I folded myself

into a fox-faced bat

to neutralize the dark

you used to say every man

carries an irrefutable argument

for his own disarming

I was blind, then loss.

Now I carry a door frame

wherever I go.

I placed it next to a quarry

and another blind man stumbled out,

his arms flailing like broken horses.

I placed it next to a slumping

cloud in a field,

but only wind knocked,

calling to itself the open and close

of other doors.

I hung it from a clothesline

but the wood limped

in memory of necks.

I stood it in a graveyard

with the other doors,

but the dead misremembered

the door as arms and quickly fled.

Soon I discovered that a door frame

is useless without belief.

As crucifixions are.

Songs not hammered out of joy.

The carving of shapes into wood.

Its inevitable creak.

The gerund of my daughter, this June day in the backyard pool splashing she seems to forget the space between earth & sky. Afterwards we walk along the splintered plywood of the pool where wild strawberries grow, we bend to eat the berries, afterwards her face covered in tiny red commas. We’ve become exiles from the ordinariness of our lives. To daughter with her wild nettled hair. If only my grandmother were still alive to teach her to speak with crows. Or the ancestors from the North of Ireland. The windswept cliffs of Donegal. Or the Jews who dug the black earth of the Ukraine. This blood in us that seethes like centuries of genocide & violins. This world of pass-ports & police dogs, stun bombs & Coltrane. That café that was blown apart in the movie my parents took me to see when I was small, The Battle for Algiers, the bodies of teenagers, how it terrified me how my parents said that murder was necessary for the struggle. They were young & still believed. As my daughter now runs with her sister across the sun-dead grass, I cannot even wish the bastards pain, the ones with their yachts & ledgers, their skyrise plantations, their necrocide, the ones who for whom the Drones drop missiles from the sky. The same sky which stretches above our eyes. We are not refugees in the green & orange light of dusk. We are punctuation marks against the silence. One day my daughters’ periods will flow, they will shake out & off their locks. And they will rise, four fisted, side by side, together fierce as Shiva. A line of crows gathers to watch us from a telephone line. I know my grandmother is there, how she could speak to crows, the deep guttural notes she composed & always the black wings would rustle & they would answer Ka Ka Ka opening a window to the world beside this world. This is an ache beyond form we carry in our skins. The way animals can tell when a storm is coming, or the way our cat can see the beings who live in shadows. But death is our domain. We daughter nothing less. We can kill over a shiny bauble. We can kill just to see something die. When I couldn’t get rid of the red ants with water, I poured gasoline into the dirt & lit the match. My daughters danced like dervishes at the flames, like Celtic warriors, like the two princesses who when the Romans were going to defeat them waited till they could see their eyes & slit their own throats. As the dirt burned the tiny bodies into ash. We are the myths we carry. But the Gods are not beyond our bodies, blazing the night into a chorus of croaks. The frogs calling to each other from the drainage ditches along the railroad tracks. Tracks like a lattice of infinitives to climb. Around the planet the amphibians are dying & no one knows why. They are the first to go & then us. It is night now. We are no more than a biography of lilac leaves my youngest daughter ate. My daughters are having dreams of tambourines & pulling the wings off of bees. My oldest one snores, like the dog. You see I am trying to tell you something, but no matter how I start it, I never quite get there. I return to what is around us. But joy keeps interrupting the familiar phonemes of grief digging my fingers into the earth.

Under the oak tree, the shadows of church going women hallalujahing, the Bingo players ecstatic shouts, all from the shades. The lungs begrudge me a smoke or two for letting them still breathe. I have nothing more to give away, except this evening’s light as luminous as the last supper, our bones they speak in orchestrations as we were, I bend to shoot & the small crackling like the branches of a camp fire to rise like an ember in the flame. To hold the darkness of the branches in the backyard. Or a cold beer. I drink nothing less than the blues. I have no other habits left. Though sometimes at Wegman’s bakery I stand there sweating, inhaling the breath of just baked bread. The only citizenship I claim is the mountain & the great lake. I have never saluted a flag or said a pledge, except perhaps The Leaves of Grass, or to Thoreau’s diction to always resist. What do we care if all that is left is ruins, it is where we have always lived. Once though when I was small, & my mother took me to the coast of Maine, & I saw the wild sea roses rim the road & cliffs like a thorned crown. Or in the marketplace in Cleveland, the old Hungarian woman who handed me a great length of sweet sausage wrapped so quick yet carefully in white paper & then the day’s newspaper tapped together with masking tape. Is that our true flag? The untamed & the stained? Who are our people those who emerge with poor unturned faces from doorways & windows, then run shouting despite the evidence each day I am waiting for a sign, a spark, I test the direction the wind might turn, & what will come with it? A Puerto Rican girl with barbed wire tattoos & a Social Distortion shirt, her plaid skirt hitched blatantly above her knee, a Pakistani boy dribbling a soccer ball, not looking up for bombs, a bald white man laughing, chasing his wind-blown fedora? All of us tumbling down the Avenues & roads looking for something, even the stray black dog, who trots around the corner, sniffs the air. His long & lopping expectant tongue. What does he taste? What does he imagine he will taste? & like birds who cursive across the sky, who are we if not something written with the body’s ink across the page of the workday’s dwindling hours, some testament to survival? Step by step, shift by shift, we pass even the saints. We become something closer to our dead. I ask for no wager except that others who come after to suffer a little less. In this life is another & another, & another that is this human nest. This daguerreotype divine or damaged — for what is damaged is closer to divine. I look up just in time to see the wafer of moon dissolve into the mouth of the dark.

The aria’s bittersweet beauty. Bittersweet as the smell of sunlight sieving through the waste water treatment plant, bittersweet we are not beautiful together & the smell of the refinery burning its Coke, trainloads of Coke crattling along the tracks where I walk. What are the odds? What are the odds of a blue rose, the clouds blowing in from Canada would spell the exact letters of your name? The pronoun for openly weeping now. For forgetting what are the odds that I’d breathe the opium of your Petite Poppy Perfume, your Peacock Dress would spread its tail & turn the afternoon papis, azul, that the mountain range would rumble like the 12th street train carrying its load of abandoned what’s-come-tos. The off duty heartbreak of the officer we talked to fishing would be adorned in a Hilo Aloha Shirt? Amid the detritus & dung, the debris & the desolation, there are Slavic accented women painting Ukrainian eggs on 4th street, as the wind tunes & the refinery smoke makes the children cough the dust of unread books, there are Pin Tucks & Petals Nightwear, there is sharing a sandwich, two tough too-loud white workers on break from building a Retirement Home, the faded Cloisonné Shamrock that adorns one’s shirt, & the large one humming Danny Boy? Are we all pushing the dollhouse furniture against the wall, & us running as the sky begins its notes & we spread the demitasse of our palms to catch & sip like old Italian women discussing the old country, the olived hills. One of us wearing the Arabesque shawl of the rain, one of us bare backed, waiting for the sparrows, with their tiny unsonged throats.

We are rain to old wind to record player to wounds. Kim Gordon

booming the bass on your headphones. Turn up the blue dial

or the kettle, spoon. Take off your hairnet after your shift, loading

the machines at the plastic plant. Everyone has eaten their Twinkies.

Light up a Menthol outside in the rain. We are out of bounds. We are

off to the pool hall, the bar, to The Man, to the dealer, we are rolling

    and pimping, we are smoking, we are popping, and basing,

     grabbing our gamble. We are oxidized,

weightless, and wasted, we are rumble, we are starting to rise, we are

the guts of this fucked up city, we are witnesses

to what we will raze—

What does it mean to spit in the face of the plastic virgin on the street corner shrine? To think about the contradictions of this town, latticed bridgework outside the refinery where men frail into their own hands. To die at the dye-works? All the ghosts. What held them together? They were drafted, Joanne the bartender at Milachevskis tells me, nodding at a group of men in their sixties arguing, old welders long laid off. The metaphysics of their slumped shoulders, blue collared is the space of their breathing. I want to know where it went one says — touching his friend — turns takes his own head, and mumbles, I’m done. But his friend orders another round. Fragments of a conversation, the not telling, it means? Our own self held by the other’s face? What is that isn’t self portrait? That is what is impossible for the critics to understand, in the end the explanation is its own failure. It was the philosophers who wanted to rule. They never reckoned to be the polis one must drown in the currents of its streets — the call of the idiot on the corner chirping like a sparrow, the asthmatic brother coughing while waving his crutch, the barefoot girl jumping hop scotch on the sidewalk outside of the funeral parlor on 10th street where someone is shouting, Shadrack arguing with a parking meter, a child’s shoe like a bad omen — obituaries taint my skin like the light from bar signs, enter my eyes like credits on a movie screen. But do not workshop what the act of worship should be. When I was out walking away from myself and most alone on the East Side above the refinery and the dirty bay the dark sky thundered. I looked down, down at the dirt lot to find this eulogy being scribbled by the pencils of the rain —

Conversations

of how to defend

front porches

with strategic

grenade patterns

continue after

the frizzy haired

gypsy, limp

hand-rolled

cigarette hanging

from her blue lips,

fails to convince

that the medicinal

herbs she has piled

on a wicker platter will

ever cure what ails me.

Real life is lived

in the chemically recycled

details; toasted carcinogens,

meat flavored nitrates, artificial cherry

cough syrups full of red dye #4, handfuls

of over the counter muscle relaxers, &

plastic Batman cups full of liquor

& carbonated high fructose corn syrup.

Even those defective childproof caps

serve the important purpose of making

one feel better.

Life, my herbal bag

holding friends, should be lived

like an unpinned grenade

near the porch swing.

We exist as a squib —

one sizzle,

a flash of teeth,

then you’re out.

Seven thin concrete slabs with the Virgin’s visage

guard the east exit & I need no review mirror

to tell me the Virgin has turned her back to us.

Joe, the homeless vet that rides my bus sometimes,

balls up his dirt crusted fist & pounds on the hood

of my Olds as he crosses between idling cars. White

smoke blooms from the cracks between body & the hood.

“Your car’s too goddamned loud,” he shouts towards my

cracked windshield, then spits on the concrete near my front tire.

I nod & yell back “What’d you say? Can’t hear you over the engine.”

He pushes his face close to the slit in my front window

& says “I ASKED FOR A GODDAMNED CIGARRETTE.

YOUR CAR’S MAKING MY LUNGS JEALOUS.” I laugh

& show him the empty pack riding shotgun. He snarls & shakes

his head, starts knocking on the car next to mine.

The heat is intense & I’ve stripped every layer of clothes I can

without getting arrested. The car has no air conditioner, the side

windows’ glass has broken off the busted tracks so they refuse

to roll up or down on command. It shouldn’t be legal to keep us

in traffic so long during desert summers. Kendric says people

die this way. Marco, the paletas pushcart guy weaves his way along

the median, selling cold sweets, water, & large bags of chicharrones

to the victims of the evening commute, our tires stuck like they’ve melted

permanent to the pavement, only those on foot getting ahead on Guadalupe Bridge.

My jaw’s locked & I grind my teeth, drum my thumbs against the

sticky driving wheel. Once again I wish my stereo still was still mine

even though I maxed the speakers out trying to hear music over

the loud clacking of the engine. Today Carlos is sitting nearby in his

low riding Lincoln, playing Tejano to drown out his boys fighting in

the back. I can barely hear more than the loud bursts of bass but I watch

teenage fists fly back and forth as Carlos shakes his head, rolls up the window,

speaks & motions with his own fist in the review mirror. Everyone stuck in

Tejano hell or maybe just this particular traffic purgatory, their hearts tired

of pounding, tongues swollen all thirsty & hot, spending the rest of eternity

on the overpass of Guadalupe Bridge.


smell the earth

          with a flick of tongue

                    creep along

                    stomach full of fur & teeth

                                               scales begin to rip

                                               & blood drains itself

                                                on the talons of an eagle

                                                              he moves you

                                                              toward that familiar beak

                                                                              pisi1 breath

                                                                             & blank black orifice

                                                                                            jutting from his white feathered

                                                                                            face

                                                                                            you land on the cactus

                                                                                            red petals blushing out of the

                                                                                            space of struggle

                                                                                                            pisi mi?aru2

                                                                                                            writhe

                                                                                                            spit venom

                                                                                                            curve your body back

                                                                                                            toward musty white

                                                                                                            feathers

                                                                                                             & strike

he forces a guttural tongue

inside your back

gurgles a reply

        after sensations fade

        bloody scales drop over

        your deadened eyes

               it’s happened before

                          will happen again

                           [everyday a re-enactment

                          of the creation story]

                                          & each time

                                          you will forget

                                                         awaken in the Sonoran desert

                                                         each day to give birth

                                                                              to pass egg after slimy egg

                                                                               from body to dank earth

                                                                                                & later find part of yourself

                                                                                               encased in an eagle’s entrails

In the West they are shooting

wolves again, threading them

to the ground with bullets,

then picking them up again,

admiring them for their coats.

It is Fashion Week in New York again,

spring coming six months early

under runway tents where loose hems

of dresses brush against the steps again

& the models rush to fit.

Manhattan photographers shoot.

Montana hunters shoot. Little

escapes the shots, & everyone is excited

for their new collections.

Collecting water, a jar on a hill in the rain becomes a cistern.

Collecting coins through the day, a pocket becomes a bank.

The earth collects the dead, & so becomes a grave,

& everyone is excited for how quickly it ends.

The jeers turn shrill. Arousal is never enough.

Sometime in August,

the rain we needed,

the binge,

pummeled the roofs,

pooled in the roads,

and all the sentries perked up,

admiring valley walls fleeced

in what-would-be verdure,

tasting the plums

sure to thrive

in the pledge of some

tomorrow afternoon harvest,

apple carts and all,

bursting off the horizons

of the hilltops in estrus —

until then barren

and sown with the strange

seed of men on watch,

guarding against typhus

and an army that may

or may not come back.

The rain we needed came

when we didn’t need it,

couldn’t use it —

when the army

was left to seed,

pairing farm women

with the wrong soldiers,

each man with an ox

and a borrowed ploughshare,

while in the distance white cities

stained with urine and vomit

seemed to eager

for as much lye

as the ground could take

but we confused precautions

with cowardice;

without a decorative sword

no man is an officer.

The rain we’d needed

fed whole valleys of mud,

fields swollen with bracken,

and the feeling of weight

in the air and the chest —

so much swimming done

in crossing the square,

in bargaining for an egg,

in marching down roads,

the routes to kingdoms

unburdened by such freedoms

as only the dead know and bring —

cisterns bulging with brown water.

In the yard an idle freight strings out

its list of anvils, the gondolas dark, brakes

mute, the coal drag waiting to smolder

around a bend in the line to another crossing.

Grain coffins, parcel containers, flatcars, & carriage rumps

attend. The track bed settled & still. There is no sign

of who is the monitor among these pigeons

clapping over the yard & lighting on its steeled ribs,

no mark of a surveyor to note how it’s all coupled.

Like how a spider feels for vibrations, long filaments

reach out to tell when one is coming,

& this a harbor to take them in — these engines

which would haul out of this world

to a depot as it was or a station as it could be,

to dustbins, to mail hooks, or some Nevada

irrigated by iron & lined with catenaries no one

can see by daylight or otherwise,

                                                     since it is a future

dried with only itself in mind.

But for this, where is the late watch? Peering

to the point where the rails appear

to converge, awaiting ditch lights

which will swing forward & announce another berth?

The yard bristles to hold them,

the undercarriages bearing one way

or another. They are matted black

by a grease that can be smelled from here.

You say you’re a hedonist.

You say God doesn’t exist.

You say you like things when they’re new

and that you’re sorry. I’d rather

know nothing. Not about you,

not about me, not about Nihilism or Dionysus.

All I know is that two people can disagree

about everything and still end up at lunch.

It’s my birthday. Thank you for the meal.

I’m looking at the sea on the wall and

even though it’s a copy of a copy of the Aegean,

I wish you would grab me and take me to Greece.

I see you hanging a freshly killed lamb

from our open window, letting the blood

drip down the wall onto the cobblestone.

We are eating dolmas and roasted eggplant

in a small room where you tell me all your secrets.

You want to apologize for leading me on,

but I want a different apology. An apologia

for how I think of you: nonstop Godhead.

And I’m not sorry you’re here and in front of me

and breathing and eating. If you’re Bacchus,

where’s my wine? Where were you when I was naked,

offering a thousand dinners in my tiny kitchen?

How’s my birthday lamb? Oh, brutal. Delicious.

Now someone else is kissing him

on a wrought iron balcony

above a karaoke bar,

and it’s not animal,

exactly, not pretty either,

the drunken howling behind you

as you act like you’re not watching,

like you’re talking on the phone

on a wet, Texas night

instead of doing

what you should have done before.

Now it’s raining harder.

Now you’re driving home at 2 a.m.

on a road that’s slick as sex

and you can still hear your friend David

saying there’s no way you could be

in love if you’ve never been loved

in the first place.

Now you’re curled in bed.

Now the sun drifts to your knees.

Now you’ve discovered

humiliation is physically painful:

the crown-like stigmata of a peach

that’s been twisted, pulled open

and left there. The juices must run somewhere.

You can’t help but imagine the knife in his body,

her body, the pink, cloudy aubade

you were waiting for.

A moon shaped like Billie Holiday, trembling

because there are problems other people have

& now I have them, too.

I’m wearing a cherry-colored cardigan over

a navy print dress, on purpose.

People think I’m sweet.

I try the Ancho chile pork ribs, in case

the man I once wanted might still

rub off on me.

I wonder if I’ll ever know about flavors, what

tastes right. In the overheated kitchen,

I chat briefly with a series of

30-something year old men — all slender, all

bearded, lustful to the point of sullen.

I hug & compliment

their pretty, female partners as a way of saying,

I am beautiful in my harmlessness!

Outside, people.

A circle of party chairs. I don’t care much

for a stranger’s guacamole. The man

I once wanted is grilling

these beautiful peaches. He offers some — I’m

embarrassed for the charred

scars. I try not to touch

his hand. I try to touch his hand. On the porch,

another man I know is kissing

the shoulder of a woman

whose fiancée is here somewhere. Guess what,

he says. You’re the only one who cares.

I wouldn’t have guessed:

Judgment is a golden habañero margarita

with wings, wet & cold

on his chest. So

many people are tender from the right angle.

I’m hungry & confused. Save me.

I love a good barbecue.

I’m mostly water.

There has been family swept under by raw currents.

I’m from planters by the river.

We dredged riverbed bones.

Water is faces lined blue.

Red horses bay bodies hooked from fish line.

And what was sown, brown hands dug free.

I’m mostly other people.

Family is pulled pail full from source.

I’m from river people.

We prep the light from matted hair.

Water catches flame.

The black horses hoof rock, halving them like thin, infant skulls.

And what was sown, brown hands dug free.

I look up my webpage

and it says, Sorry,

what you’re looking for isn’t here.

The girl of your dreams. Wads of cash.

Your mommy. What is here

is Facebook, your new best friend.

When the story about the woman

who bit her boyfriend’s tongue clean off

broke, I thought, Sweet,

and wrote so on Facebook, but

got only two Likes, one from a girl in Biloxi

whose ancestors, I heard, cannibalized

— she’d stare at people, then snap out of it,

saying, Sorry, I’m hungry —

and one from my husband

who Likes even wolfscapes.

It’s like getting a laugh, he says

on the phone from his office

to me on the phone in mine

though we’re just down the hall

in the same house.

Yeah, I say,

until you get the laugh’s for someone else

and no one’s heard you

because no one knows you.

My six-year-old dates a seven-year-old

when he logs on to Club Penguin from home

and she from her mother’s iPad

so her avatar penguin and his avatar penguin

can avatar kiss — who needs to talk,

to forge feeling and story

into meaning and symbol,

a longing scrubbed in light?

At the quote unquote home where my sister lives

with the other quote unquote clients,

they sit around a large ashtray

in a green courtyard, the birds singing,

looking off into middle distance, dragging on smoke

in long breaths of thought

listening to voices in their heads

quip about who’s the real nut job

or who needs to jump in front of a train

and real quick before the Jesus in the TV

takes all the antipsychotics, sedatives, and hypnotics

so no one hears one more voice.

Hell, if it weren’t for the ashtray

they’d never see each other.

Before the internet, my college roommate

would get as close to the actor on TV

as she could to a human ear

and whisper the punchline

before he said it, and if she guessed right,

would pat herself on her own back. Back then,

I used the paper version of Facebook

to find my RA’s number

to record a message on her answering machine,

my voice in her empty room

like a lost kid stuck in a dark well

calling and calling for help. These days,

Mickey’s on TV blinking at my son

who’s trying to guess the circle

from the four shapes Mickey’s holding

to save them from whatever on-screen trouble

he believes they’re in, too much ice cream

and no scooper in sight. What a fool,

I think, Mickey’s making of my son,

and then, There is no Mickey.

There is, though, a Bradbury story

where children create a virtual African veldt

in their playroom, then send their parents in

to the lions. Awe-some,

sings my student for the sixty birthday wishes

on Facebook she reads to herself

as she walks to her room alone.

Who knows what’s real. When kids play at the park

calling out, I’m here, come get me,

hiding behind trees, who knows if they’re playing tag

or war with their semiautomatic bee bee guns

and camouflage pants tucked into their black lace-up boots

pelting each other like carnival ducks

that ding and fall down when hit

but come right back up quacking.

Mylene pours the wine while Lauren deals

the cards and Andie reads the question

as Caleb cackles, Oh no she didn’t,

before we slide our picks across the table

from which Afton chooses, Two midgets shitting in a bucket,

to complete, Santa surprises bad children

not with coal but with blank, over

Surprise sex exclamation point, or AIDS,

because she does not wish upon bad children

pedophilia or sordid death, even from Santa,

a humor as black as a gun barrel

she may as well herself shove into the dark

mouth of the child. It’s funny, right

until it’s sad — or true? And then what?

Where do you draw the line

between humorous and offensive?

Steve told this one for years to entertain himself:

Go to an art show, he’d say, and admire a painting

by a woman, stand back, cock your head,

and when the painter comes by, say, Did you paint this?

And she’ll say, Yes, I did.

It’s just beautiful, you’ll say. Thank you, she’ll say.

And then you’ll say, I’m really impressed

by your talent. Can I rub your snatch? Irony,

that bad guest at the party, who farts

and won’t excuse himself, or won’t

lay a napkin in his lap, gets put out

in the rain, without his keys, learning his lesson,

though the conversation inside

is so terribly witty, so downright clever,

everyone’s too busy listening to the noise

of their own guffawing to have anything brave to say.

Every youngest martyr a flower, how foreshortened

the seasons of her blooming. Petals and pistil and

dust to dust. But in tales beautiful cannot stand

the loss of beauty. What then for the teller?

To halt progress, to arrest the chance

of rot. A thousand year sleep. Death

by poison apple in the age of her youth.

Better to be carried off and lost or placed

and displaced in a coffin of sheerest glass

than to wither even once, anywhere the scribe

might scry a story. To love a perfect face, a perfect age:

We measure grace by looks and by her pleasure

in the domestic. But every household chore

carries its cost in splinters. The body sags

toward the shape of its task, descends the precipice

of marriage and motherhood, where the story

dares go no further than happily ever after,

fairy tale for avert your eyes.

Her flatness exactly what every father expects.

What every boy demands. A painted surface, a hole

behind the cardboard. Whoever makes her whole

is made up in the make up. We’ve lusted after such

abstraction our entire life. She has a name and

her name is Redacted. We fill every blank space

with ourselves. Whatever lover she was before

we scoop out, set aloft. You’re free, we whisper

above her chains, this series of shapes marching

loose across the page. Until only this shell remains.

Tell me about your appetite, my dumpling, and spare me no bit

of swiss chard or marbled steak or sweet potato oozing

with maple syrup and brown sugar, because I want the weight

of ham on your fork, the way its honey glazes your lips,

and don’t forget the buffalo wings and short ribs — your teeth

grazing their bones, the marrow within, milky and thick, licking

at your palette, and all the carrots and Tropicana turn your skin

orange, but you still want more — more pudding that sets

with a film on top — your drawers of Nut Goodies and Cracker

Jacks will never be too full, and when I come to you undressed,

you finger me like cotton candy, knead my flanks with rub,

nibble away at my excess like the crust of cheese on pizza.

My sweet butcher, cut me into bite-size pieces, collect my drippings

for gravy, and when I’m mixed with your spit, swallowed,

I’ll coat your linings, seep through your pores, the smell

of me radiating like waffle cones and chocolate syrup, until you

think you’re bursting with my taste, but buddy, you’ve had me

before, and we’ve only begun — like a hyena you’ll scavenge

the plains in search of my sun-warmed flesh, tongue my insides,

gnaw at my ribs until your bawls roll across the empty savannah.

The sheets are full of punctuation — dashes

          and colons, once randy, have rolled over

and we didn’t notice, just as we didn’t notice

          when the police chopper filled our motel window

with its search light, the pilot mistaking us

          for meth dealers who stay at seedy dive hotels

to cook up a deal or peddle their wares

          because if we were criminals or ne’er-do-wells,

we wouldn’t define wonky and kumquat

          and cattywombus in the mornings when floor boards

cackle and snap, when stray dogs scratch at doors

          trying to find the welcome mat they remember;

we wouldn’t leave the motel and sit at LAX

          watching the screens announce take-offs and delays,

guessing at the Buenos Aires bound briefs

          in leopard-printed suitcases, and wanting all things

translated into another language, one that turns

          waiting list into lista de espera, espera the feather

of the phrase, tumbling in its descent, lilting

          soft on the tongue the way you used to tell me, breathe,

as if saying it would send air through my lungs,

          expand my capillaries, open my pores so words

like chaparral and chinchilla could fill me, shine

          light upon our nakedness — once again, the sighs

and commas simmering between us saying,

          Vieni con me. Suivez-moi. Come on. Let’s go.

I can’t uncurl crocus-like — my jaw doesn’t slacken

                     at the smell of bees or the clip

of oars through the Saginaw’s pre-dawn stretch.

                     Instead the constant noontime has made me

loose, a running-stitch meant to hold the hem

                     for later thimble-taut handiwork.

I don’t keep well. Can’t move from hothouse pot

                     to window-box because I’ve never

learned the thrift of hard winters — frugal tuck of leaf

                     and sun leaning. The Geranium survived

on alleyway scraps and shrieks, turned ashes

                     to compost in an alchemy of muck.

She still got canned. Let the litany of my petals

                     line your bin — I’d rather be that lonely.

Who holds the gun

& what are its parts?

The eye behind steel,

the magazine that feeds,

the bullet which breaks

into a body.

In My Lai, women

were raped

& shot & tossed

into a mass grave.

The men wore uniforms

my mother would cut up

& resew

for our smaller

Vietnamese men.

My father wore one.

For him, a twelve-year

straightjacket.

In Ferguson,

an officer fired

six bullets

into a young man.

Were his hands up,

raised in surrender?

Can he grow

wings to lift him

over the city,

over a grid

that looks

like history ––

its timelines

& hierarchies,

flowcharts with

arrows which point

from one cause

to one effect?

Behind the gun,

an eye.

In the eye,

a colored lens.

Protesters stood

on the streets

with their hands

up, cold barrels

pushed

into their chests.

Handcuffed, arrested,

their jumpsuits

like orange poppies,

or a monk’s robes,

the brightest

kind of fire.

Can we hold

hands hard enough ––

can we clasp until

our histories entwine

& our voices rise

like bright, beating wings?

I don’t know if he did or did not touch the boy.

But that boy told a brother or a father or a friend,

who told someone in a tavern, or told someone

about it while the men hauled in the nets of fish

from the Sound. Or maybe it was told to someone

on the street, a group of men talking outside

the village schoolhouse, where he was the teacher.

What was whispered about him brought everyone

to church that Sunday, where the preacher roared

his name and the pews cleared out to find him.

He was twenty-one, thought of himself as an exile.

He was boarding with the boy and his family.

The boy was a boy in that schoolroom he hated.

Not finding him in the first house, they found him

in another and dragged him from under the bed

where he had been hiding. He was led outside.

And they took the tar they used for their boats,

and they broke some pillows for their feathers,

and the biography talks about those winter months

when there was not a trace of him, until the trail

of letters, articles, stories, and poems started

up again, showing he was back in the big city.

He was done with teaching. That was one part

of himself completed, though the self would never

be final, the way his one book of poems would

never stop taking everything into itself. The look

of the streets and the buildings. The look of men

and women. The names of ferry boats and trains.

The name of the village, which was Southold.

The name of the preacher, which was Smith.

I’ve never heard

fingerprints

left on our bodies

sing out like how

          moonlight glows

until now

          until all these

stains on glass

touched   crazed

sprayed of

          warmed blood

we’re not blinded

          not sewn down

by grandpa’s cataracts

we’re not dead

are we?

so maybe we are

& instead   like shadow

you’re alive.

This morning

grandpa does magic

a fire for our

wrecked bodies

& my brother still

sleeps on

the kitchen floor

his blanket

smells of wood

his breathing

          like that of a slowed heart

expanding   shrinking

him dreaming

what else but

reservation dreams

the bullet

          in his soft fist

held like a child’s

first turtle rattle

fleshless

          undone of living

filled with

the black shells

of baby clams

about to shake

            ✼
 

O forgive me

& let me wash away

this big chalk outline

around his body

with our faucet hose

don’t move

please   O please?

I don’t

but want to

then think blacktop

& playground

two bodies

filling each other

both warming   cooling

which is it?

Now I’m barefoot

in the driveway

shirtless   in overalls

rolled cuffs   my shy

hands buried away

my brother’s back

inside   stacking Lincoln Logs

like a reservation

cathedral   four walls

bombed out

          the ruin still in his

hands   a grey light bulb

staring at the back

of his head

mom checks

another fresh letter

lectricity’s fuckin out again

& she’s behind

that unlit window

where a long veined crack

splits her along

her wilted dark

cheekbone   just missing

her tensed mouth

               ✼
 

I

          Brother

Mom

          this only family of ours

these clothes of wetted gravel an arm

          of dusked sun

a leg of calmed pine an opened body of field

          a skull cleared of daylight

our hair of fallen leaves our dark backs

          of river wash

a blinking eyelid of sap

          our skin of dying grass

all of us

          husked & humming

               ✼
 

this reservation of

cá’ya payóopayoo

no songbirds not even

the hummingbird

drinking the red sweet

Kool-Aid from our lips

& there it is a robin

k’áw’ k’áw’

pecking worms

out of the still earth

below our naked

headless aspen.

I understood that in the time it took to tie one mayfly I could open the fridge and remove the rainbow he caught the week before, fire up the grill, cook the fish, and eat it alone on our deck, with thyme and butter.

That when the fly was finished, uncannily real, freakishly swattable, another needed tying because the concentration it took was so lovely (and the mayflies themselves so elegant) the task demanded repeating.

I understood that his silhouette bent over light was precious, and the resolve he needed to wade the current, flick the wrist, flick it again until I dreamt of him up to his thighs in river, was formidable and ripe with faith.

And I understood that the man I loved thrived deep inside the fisher man in the swirling cold, the tidal stream, and for one moment away from the world and its demons, I could almost touch him.

Still, I left the quiet of his dying, where he glowed bright with purpose, and drove madly alone down the Hudson before he had a chance to bait his hook with mayflies, tree frogs, bloodsuckers.

I too am scared of endings.

Vultures gather like smoke over us.

So bruised it seems the whippings

burnt us, birthed us black. At night

we exchange melodies on rose-oil breaths

to survive the smoke by becoming

each other’s air and painting the face

of heaven so fine no one will worship

the garish sun and its demands for labor,

and labor’s demands for dark skin

to bare its harsh rays. Let’s dance

into our own shadows, vogueing

to the beats of rhythm’s prayer,

werking this earth’s axis like

it’s how we pay our bills because

by it we pay reverence to each other,

twerking into night’s curtain

between days, bouncing our behinds

into its dark matter where

flesh like ours safely blends in

and is no longer just our own

but one with the universe’s endless sky.

I had just moved to the Upper East Side.

It was raining really hard so

I looked out my window concerned

for my new city, but oddly

rain just poured

on my building. This confused

and depressed me. How typical

for the heavens to single me out

for their wrath! Then I realized

it was just window washers.

And I felt relieved, and suddenly

unspecial.

A daughter lifts away, an intricate

set of homemade wings

sewn to her back.

The mother spreads her arms and waits — hoping

at the top of a hill — for a mend

in the empty break of sky.

Then it’s only the beginning, a mother still

grounded, hunched over,

searching the grass for feathers.

We lived our first existence as if on an island —

the waving flag of a companionship

always sinking. From our hands

we rubbed salt into the pink slits of salmon,

picked lemon seeds from the skin,

pulp sludging our fingernails.

One sour morning I fished a softness from the water,

a weight resembling the drowning

infant of our past. Others gathered round to pay

respect to the dying or already dead —

and with only ourselves to blame

we dredged the bottoms of preserve jars,

sun-colored honey the only sweet that would keep

until even that emptied.

No one wept when we washed away,

no one had to. Why go back for something as abstract

as hope as love or need? It was animal the way I couldn’t

conceive anything beyond that fish-smell, that

citrus prickling as paper boats, cuts so fine

I almost never noticed we were bleeding into sand.

What else but ourselves could we hold

when the world began again? Our sendoff, our present —

each ensuing breach.

Because the beginning was before honey

and the orchid — because there was an August,

a prairie August with impatient promise,

broken porch swing, vines that wrapped

around the ankles to knees to thighs of figures

not yet stationary though there was white

already blossoming on her tongue, brittleness

broken over the leather case carrying his knife —

because I knew the sound of stripped speaker wires

made my veins ache — because I knew going back

might be painful — because the needle is broken,

scratching new noise into vinyl and nobody listens

enough to make out the difference — because I went

to gather lemongrass for the one I had to leave

behind, willow branches for the one who bruised

my windpipe, nettle for the one who couldn’t take

me too — because I let grapes go bad as the property

foreclosed and don’t own that noisy house anymore,

or the space where its metal swing set used to be —

because everyone is so polite — because the apiary,

the stone garden, I can take care of them — because

I want to be a workhorse for my sorrow every day —

Fuck, Ed, you’ve done it again —

fallen asleep on the floor

at the foot of your bed, no knuckles cut

how I do, but a night enough

roughed up by this heartbroken landscape.

You don’t need the reminder, any

precision is a luxury easy to lose.

From down the hall, I wait

for the trumpet of your sleeping breath

to smooth before I come to check

on your glasses. You rest: light overhead

left on, one bright bulb a courtship

to stoneflies, neither shoe

kicked off completely,

bartender’s apron as blanket with

stack of guest checks paper-clipped

beneath a Never-Gonna-Make-It note

slipped from the pocket,

this study of gins and histories

their garnishes can tell but you can’t

quite yet. Like a good friend,

I take your glasses, prop them on carpet

just beyond arm’s length.

Lazy roommate — the lights, the shoes,

they stay how I found them. While you rest

I thread fragments of seasons spent

in wanting to make a Heartland

from desert that leaves bodies coraled,

bleached, windblown:

I write the next rainstorm beside

a nearly dried up canal. Salt from sweat

patterns around jeans at the knee-creases,

sunshine saturates my pores,

disorients to a point where risk of water

becomes an afterthought to my heels

pressing against the riverbed’s warm mud.

I write the next rainstorm

from the passenger seat of a sedan

in a parking lot behind the bar

behind the Sizzler, shitty whiskey better

as antiseptic for perforations

on my palms formed

when cacti thorns, burrowed in

to break a fall, are plucked, pulled,

pulled out. I write the next rainstorm

with the crunch of a black blizzard

between my teeth, hum of so cold, so

cold, in my ear, the granules

in my mouth could be ice chips

broken from the block you’d been working

for hours: you had to ring the doorbell,

dexterity needed for a key

and midnight-dark door handle,

that was the luxury.

Boy, you didn’t know you’d been lost

until your name called out over

a PA system at the summer park —

Please come to the announcer’s booth, Ed.

Seems someone is looking for you.

A blue bike rests, wheels

to the riverbed, rusting

in silty Milwaukee water

near where the Hoan Bridge

spans, sometimes buckles.

In early thaw, blocks of ice

still frozen to the seat and

handles make for the body

of a harmless horror who pedals

towards harbor not as recreation

but a bright gunshot, the ardent

bullet discharged from a soft throat,

the rifle pointed out a passenger’s

side window rolled down

to let cigarette smoke clear

the truck’s cabin. Eventually

and with frequency sounds

of hot metal through a doe’s torso

become silhouetted in noise

of whiskey sipped against

our lips wintered without ChapStick,

without the milky skyline

of an unmade city — the scaffolding

for Hoan’s repair, small plywood

squares painted into hearts by

schoolchildren, the hearts ticking

across framework of the bridge

reinforced in thirty-foot increments,

the welder working to tighten the harness

around his waist, his eyes prayered

towards his rusty hands,

the shapes of people walking

away, the shapes beneath water-top

of people’s scraps maybe salvageable.

I’m still not sorry.

I. St. Brigid Watches Her Insomniac

How often has wakefulness wrested her

to leave the apartment for a 24-hour chapel

nearby? Twenty-nine unsettled nights now

and she’s ready to pray: after bar time, without

shoes so she can feel warm desert asphalt,

she genuflects before the light at the crosswalk

turns off its orange hand, lets her proceed.

Midnight-to-noon a Midwesterner living against

wheatless elevation, some nights she waits

for one, two cars to pass, pretending the road

is countryside and this 4 a.m. will become worked

by farmhands. Tonight she walks through

the church courtyard, pretends herself ghostlike,

fills her perceived transparency with piano scores,

still frames from silent films, melodies —

collage-cuts pasted to skin with the images

facing outward, backlit by a bit of whiskey and

a cigarette as it ashes.

 

II. The Insomniac Tries, Then Prays to Her Saint

Wait, and —

          or, start over.

How am I supposed to do this?

Dear God, it’s true: I don’t take

          those capsules for sleeplessness anymore,

                     but fill prescriptions all the same —

for the language of side effects,

          an education in chemicals, reactions.

A doctor recommended I test these within

          my bloodstream but, too,

                     I would have to open up.

I meant to plant pills in the vegetable garden,

          but then the tabby cat started coming around.

No doubt he’s sad too, but certainly

          in different dosages.

What wasteful thought, a prayer for

          shrubbery from the seeds meant

                     to lessen longing.

Almost, St. Brigid, I can keep time by phases

          of dawn until there is no darkness

                     in any direction.

It is nearing nautical, 11 degrees

          below morning’s horizon.

I know I’m not translucent; I happen to notice light.

Do other lives react to strangers’ kindnesses

          some different way?

A person offers space past the waiting room

          of melancholy and I bow my head,

                     appreciative, but shaking.

Oh, no thank you, I’ll save this possible comfort

          for a night more desperate, for —

                     what if there is, only, one offer

I can welcome myself into?

The bed has shaped to my silhouette, not my muscles,

          but no, thank you,

                     I’m yet just a bit more than bone-tired.

Brigid, if you were beside me, when would you

          first notice how starless the sky has become?

I think I misunderstood how long I would have

          to live with the mistakes of me, aftereffects

                     of a body fallen in on itself.

Maybe I’ve begun it, prayer: tiredness is a symptom.

I ask for us all to try open everything tonight.

Her voice was an earworm in my head

over and over a constant cerebral crawl

I-told-you-you-can-not-trust-Jake who I lent

the 100 bucks that I could be

taking her out to dinner with

and we’re sitting here with me waiting

for Jake to call and I trust Jake but I know

it’s a shame when you can’t trust

the people you should be able to trust

like when somebody dies isn’t there always

someone in the family overcome with greed

and you don’t see it until the strike

has been made because who knew that crows

can weep like the rest of us who knew

a crow could cry crocodile tears

isn’t there always someone who has stashed

all the jewelry taken the credit cards and all

the trees off the land of the dead person

isn’t there always someone who leaves

us barren so they can wear a garment

made of scraps of scripture and bits

of cash isn’t there always someone slick

and can’t be trusted like I trust Jake

because I know he delivers

like he the last living bluesman

but I told him please be on time.

1.

Everyday day my god is the same

light that breaks through the trees

and holds the water snakes

that hunt the creek in a moment

of abeyance, a submergence

of their natural demon selves.

Trauma healing is what I’m selling,

a repair to whatever damage

is wrapped around our bones. I believe

in everything. It is in the word.

My fetishes; prayers to god, handmade

from whatever was near: a blue jay

feather, a shiny black stone,

a twisted knot of sassafras root,

two packets of reverent dirt

from my grandmothers’ graves

wrapped in the red from the flag

and dangling off my rearview mirror.

In the beginning the word was god,

and the music thereof. The spirit, believe it

or not, is a laundrymat, the washers humming

to that woman folding clothes from the dryer.

 

2.

The water we drink has been blessed,

and we have spent hundreds of years

in the accumulation of false facts, a rot

to the magic of the ancestor tree

where I can go to shake a lucky hand.

I have what you need for the proper

offerings, links of iron chain, fresh tangerines,

hand-rolled cigars and silver crosses.

What else have we ever had

that was stronger than a mojo working,

stronger than our faith? All the words

written on the thin pages speak of it.

A joyful noise to praise whatever

done to have you here, a god promise

received at night, maybe a solitary flickering

white candle with a drop of lavender oil

to sweeten the air for song, go to the barn,

blues stacked by the bushels.

Let me put some light on your head,

an old gray fedora, comfortable, warm,

softly pinched and styled in the belief

that with my god word is bond.

The loon’s eye is a carmine moon.

Is a Mars.         Stirs

in its orbit as the wind stirs the loose face

of the lake into haloes whose

arcs swell against each other until they disappear      or

are blown into new diagrams,	battle plans, lessons

for a war that cannot

reach us here,              in this pocket of pine forest I tuck you into.

Hush.          Thrush

and snail, moth and bat,        are reconciled, held

in the same dark mouth.
                                                          When you ask for a story, I

hum the names of lunar seas — Nubium, Imbrium,

Vaporum, Crisium —

which are not seas, whose

water is a dark silt,       basalt

shallows empty enough to look like

a nose, eyes,

a mouth.
                          When you ask for a song,   I sing about the hole in the bottom of the sea,

a lesson in

microscopy, in vertigo.       O

Little eye,        little eye,     there’s always a further layer,

an infinite splitting,     a tunneling.         Sung,

this is

just soft enough to sleep by.     Is almost comfort.          Almost rest.

The loon’s eye gleams and drifts on the lake like

a broken beacon

above a slow drain.    Like a body orbiting a black hole.          Wool

being drawn from a cloud to a thread to the pupil of a needle’s eye.
                                                                                                                          Hush-a-bye,

hush-a-bye,       I

didn’t mean to make you cry. The lake is a lake,          the loon a loon,          the eye

was only ever an eye.
                                                 A red-throated

morning yawns in the sky.


Compass-       less,

our here

was an everywhere, was one little room —              an atom blown open

into an infinite net

with us always

at its center.

                     For

a while the sun was our bellwether,

then it was sequences

of clouds,       then a sparrow’s wing arrowing

east across a field, propelled

toward infinity without ever reaching it.

                                                                  We were lost, cast

like chaff        into an undefined wind.

We spun in

circles through empty lozenges of farmland, spellbound

and blur-eyed as the grass rose

like a wall before our

hands again and again,         uniform in every direction, margin-

less.

        We spun until we felt our blood pull, centripetal,

into our cores,              until we were an orbit, a ring tightening

our everywhere

into a tiny, incalculable frontier.         Then set adrift,           aloft,

a molecule of the wind’s howl; an owl’s afterfeather landing along-

side a wet field of foals; shells

quietly crumbling into their surrounding seas —       always

less,     loss.

Children in

the wilderness, in the cornworks and pasturage and among young

birches thin as rib-bones.       O world held

in this thistle-packed ditch, this rough hatchery.      Bee-

stung children howl like foxes, wild at the mouth with

their own pitch.         A curtain of pollen shakes itself loose across

their lips, slips

away in a warble of vowels,     pulls

at the air.        The future is this

force. The future moans like flies from an unseen

source, worse

for its furry vagueness.     Moss-

kneed and shoeless, the children startle real

foxes from their dens and bend toward them,     lonesome.

My father, not so much a disciplinarian

as he was a chiropractor’s moat.

VA clothing allowance in one hand,

Velcro neck brace in the other,

the umbrage a heating pad made

the day his sciatica decided

it was a periwinkle blue.

The union steward, more handsome

in pamphlet than person,

a Knights of Columbus flyer

lodged in the mailbox pulpit,

faux-sworded men smiling

on our address,

a crown of golf tees

circling the water softener,

the gutters tattered in repose.

Their leaves a cuneiform gentler

than spray-painted chrome.

My letter-carrier father,

treasurer for the Sons and Daughters of Italy,

his filing cabinet the Dante of workman’s comp.

Foreclosure, not so far off.

C is the call sign for dry ice

whereas D is a Mason jar

shattering Boca Raton.

E escorts you to Oktoberfest,

pieces the Biergarten together

one Ländler at a time.

F, omitter of facts:

your ancillaries swapped Judaism

for Christianity on the ride over.

G attends Ladies Auxiliary meetings,

nuzzles a to-do list

in flesh-bandaged bones.

You wallpaper a monastery

in B, bind books,

polish chimes,

lather

marigold-embroidered

towels with it.

These are the key signatures

of a mariachi band playing

the Guadalajara Grill

Monday nights.

Sounds your working ear

still recognizes.


— When you leave for work, you slow-growl and grimace. You tug

          at my beard like an angry harvester. You are a teacher of children

and loathe my morning boner. When you say you love me, I say,

          Be careful: an anti-poet. The A/C sputters its scorn in the corner

like a phlegmatic uncle. (We are unmarried and swimming in sin.)

          Outside, the fallen sycamore limbs lie prostrate like lost remnants

of leprous Nephilim. Ballad of bric-a-brac: cars skirt and dodge

          glass shards, green shutters, shingles scattered on the hot blacktop.

A chainsaw chorus sings its hegemony: such a congress of frogs!

          By the pool, girls rub and bronze each other’s bodies, their hands

like lithe charcutiers, as swarthy boys breach the chlorinated water

          with corkscrews and cannonballs, with their Bud Light abandon.

(They are such satyrical animals. They are constantly cornholing!)

          And, at last, the last raccoon scuttles home from its nightly smut

and garbage; and, at last, the fucking daybirds chirp loquaciously.

          I know there’s something in me wants to war, wants hate, wants

havoc, like an island of violent antonyms. The past repudiates me

          perfectly: my guff, my lack of good parts. (I gave you no children.)

This was the year 2012. This was the year we lived in mid-Ohio,

          where the days pressed like endless ampersands of & and & and & ...

O, repugnant morning! O, reader! Let me keep nothing from you.

Imagine our surprise at the bonobo, trading sugarcane for sex — his thin erection like a dowsing rod for monkey cunt. How cute: the grinning dolphins, their blowholes. How proud: the he-lions and their epic butt-fucking. (The earth is such a special place! I am not good enough to describe it.) You read that one should squint at art, which encourages connection between the what-is-there and the what-isn’t. And because you always believe what you read, and because I always believe you, we obey our orders. At the threesome of deer, your half-closed eyes reveal a struggle: an erotic karate. To me, they become Duchamp’s Deer Ascending Itself. These sculptures are wire and newspaper, covered with masking tape. Graphite captures their lust like an angiogram. They have glass eyes from Germany, made to look like a human’s. (What do they see? They are so fragile.) On the way home, you tell me you don’t want to be my wife.

I imagine you cruising the boulevard at two

a.m. in your dead mother’s car, watching the girls

sway out of the bars, hands resting on the soft curves

of their girlfriends’ waists, mouths open and laughing, your view

of the tops of their breasts and pink push-up bras enhanced

by their mirth. They are bending for you. Long, tanned legs

engender a gentle swing of skirt; their hair begs

to be touched. Dick in hand, you quiver at each glance.

Their brightly colored faces trail like sparklers

on a hot night. Lithe bodies leave a primordial

scent of amber and cloves. Their eyes, their skin, fire

only for you. You believe everything is yours,

and you take it. Pink and pliant, your mouth, your tongue

like flayed salmon, gills flushed with blood; your long fingers,

your sex deep within body after body. Their flesh sings

for you. Naked, you drive and watch, drive and hunt.

The hole inside you is deep and black. I imagine

blue lights strobing, the officer’s face as you roll down

the window, dilate into that bright light, a hint of frown

furrowed between your clear eyes, your wide sheepish grin.

As you confess, I imagine your skin lit up blue

like lividity, your body dead as the soul

you keep trying to revive, paying the ferryman toll

after toll in skin, but still drowning.

The wine is pears riddled with bees

like bullets, thick cysts. It is grass,

a mud-caked cleat to the mouth.

Even the oysters disappoint,

their ebony edges curled

tight, dry as cheap black lace.

It’s really a matter of seeing differently, isn’t it? During his lecture at a small Midwestern art school, the visiting New York Times art critic said once, on his walk home from work through a Latino neighborhood in the Bronx, he happened upon a woman standing mesmerized by a plastic — or was it plaster, he wasn’t sure — statue of the Virgin in someone’s tiny plot of grass for a front lawn. You know, a typical Virgin. He watched the woman’s mouth move but he couldn’t hear what she was saying; he only knew she smiled when she turned and walked away. So he stopped at the same house after the woman had gone and looked at the same Virgin. She was as you remember her: head cocked slightly downward, the bent arms’ invitation subtle, number of folds in her robes indivisible by any other number. She will not meet your gaze. It’s almost as if she both loves and is ashamed of you, as it is with so many mothers. The New York Times art critic knew that, because the woman before him had taken the time to stop and look, and because he had taken the time to stop and look, they’d both, perhaps unknowingly, deemed the Virgin art. He was, at the time, bewildered by the idea that someone’s yard decoration, a factory-made hearth goddess, hollow on the inside, could be art. To be fair, everyone needs parameters, but in his mind, the New York Times art critic had drawn a widening spell around the world of objects. Would there ever be an end to all this art? The question terrified him.

It was a few days before the lecture when a student in my poetry class said to me, You can go outside, see something, and know for sure someone else has already seen the same thing. I liked the idea, even though it hurt to think about. But it’s really a matter of seeing differently, I said. Then, in the car on the way home from campus, I thought about the unexpected profundity of his language: outside, and something, and someone else. The usual smudge of street and buildings and people I passed became everything as something and outside as something to be aspire to, as if we are all inescapably inside. Think about it: we both enter a garden. You see the coxcomb. I see the coxcomb. Who saw it first doesn’t matter. We are one in the coxcomb (in Swahili mfungu). Hegel saw Napoleon ride into town on his horse Marengo simultaneous to others seeing him, or maybe even later than others saw, since Napoleon’s mother, I would imagine, saw Napoleon first. What matters is the seeing. A man, a horse: these are things outside, someone else, everything.

Even now, alone in her Siberian prison cell, Nadya Tolonko thinks, in pleasure, of the figure of a horse in a pasture. The pasture is green. It is summer. The horse grazes and, above it, a flying bittern just out of its marsh swells in air. She thinks about the woman (for it’s been scientifically proven now that it was a woman) who painted with her hands — or a snapped, burnt limb — the contours of a horse’s neck thousands of years ago on a cave wall. Nadya closes her eyes and sees her little girl. Nadya closes her eyes and sees horses. I close my eyes and see horses. We’re seeing horses together, Nadya, and everywhere now as I open my eyes are worlds and spirits and horses. They are outside and everything. The rest, in their prisons, can keep.

Miranda July told me, “Someday you’ll remember Miranda July telling you.”

Miranda July told me, “Someday you’ll have a child too and someday you’ll remember Miranda July telling you that someday you’ll have a child.”

Someday Miranda July will tell me, “In July you’ll have a child and you’ll remember, someday, the TV set and my face on it, my Chaplinesque face, the kind of face that asks people to tell it secrets, my Tramp-like face with its weird, sad eyes and little invisible mustache.”

Someday in November I’ll be standing around a spread of food on a colleague’s table, plate in one hand, glass of wine in the other, begging the universe for July and someday she’ll come and with her the memory of her. She won’t want to talk about movies or art. She’ll want to talk about babies and laundry.

Someday the tissue connecting me to my future will snap and there will be all this blood, all this blood and I’ll wipe it up alone in the bathroom with the door shut.

Someday in July I’ll remember having had a child and cry.

Someday I’ll remember the remembering and cry about that too.

Someday the Charlie behind the Chaplin and the Chaplin behind the Charlie will step out from behind Miranda July and say, “You’ll remember how we told you; maybe it’ll be in July — your birth month, our last name month. And if December comes, can July be far behind?”

Someday I’ll discover that some people have many people behind them and that some of these people are borne by strangers.

Someday my mother will call me and in the voice of Miranda July tell me about a woman so fertile she’s decided to be pregnant with a stranger’s baby and my shadow will flinch a little.

Someday Miranda July will remind me that it’s my mother speaking and not her. I need to be reminded of that.

Someday Miranda July will call out from the future with her mind that floats in a jar, and with her mind she’ll say, “Someday you’ll remember how I told you, in the beginning there’ll be fighting, lots of fighting, and you’ll feel like a teenager all over again.” “Why,” I’ll ask, “because of the feeling of being absolutely in love?” “No,” she’ll say, “because you’re learning how.”

“A child said What is the grass? fetching it to me with full hands”

It’s wild love elsewise mowed by the young

and sleeveless. It’s play catch. It makes dull thuds.

It’s blades are among us, and having died

as he lived — in the grass — it’s fodder for

our dead dog and Berber in the great room,

umbrage for those whose brick courtyards tousle

in wind and twinkle with cricket and matchstick,

with bottle cap and tick, a harmonium

of spit thread and leaf droning among the slabs,

calling all faithful to lay down and make do.

He Who Would Not Change Diapers carried me

on his back as he cut the grass, they say.

Now my daughter, resplendent on her eighth-

month blanket, with an arm like a slow crane,

scoops then lifts to the waiting garden of

her mouth the loose fringe and change for compost.

If we let her swallow, a lawn will grow;

it’s the pulped guts of grassland beasts left

in the sun to make photographs. It’s more

of a good thing and of course it’s less.

It’s rot begging with small hands to enter

the mall, the Auto Zone, the Venice

of our old neighborhoods, mooring the bee

that bobs at their docks. It’s spangled night

in grey scale, till morning wet with drool.

It’s the cool floor of a tent pitched. It’s go

fetch and hurry, turn russet. It’s waiting,

stultified under snow. It’s slow cartwheels

then who knows — calling her in for supper

only to find a different pair of shoes,

scuffed and grassy, kicked off in a hurry

by the door, and her voice calling for you.

A few teens yell “Fuck you!” at us from the window of a bus with the phrase Teen Challenge printed on the side of it.

A man at the bar says he’s from Planet Subaru. “What do you speak on Planet Subaru,” we ask him. “Subarubian,” he says,

an internal logic.

Inside the hummingbird moth is the idea of the hummingbird,

and inside the idea of the hummingbird is the idea of buzz, of thrum, of uplift.

In the fact of its furred body, its antennae and honeycombed eye, is the azalea, so foregrounded in the moth’s mind it nearly rises with it, is nearly gathered up by its wings as hunks of earth, as animals, as houses, are caught up by a landward hurricane.

Neighborhood suddenly in darkness, a man stops by with a flood lamp and his mandolin. You hear your telephone ring in your kitchen. It’s that woman again. You ask her:

If you were hit in the chest by a flying Slurpee or by a fist, could you learn to love anyway? If your mama said, “Do you wanna go to your room and cry about it,” do you go to your room and cry about it? If a man asked you to kiss him by the blood bank on High Street, would you let him kiss you? If you could see inside yourself so the idea of yourself bares its barbed task, would you look?

Yes, she would answer again, and yes.

Lately I’ve dreamt I’m invited to be an extra on the set of the TV show Girls, only “I’m not a girl anymore,” I tell the producers.

Soon I won’t remember what it was like, but I’ll keep trying to act like one because what else am I going to do?

I’ll say things like tots and Facebook me. I’ll grow my hair long enough I’ll want to cut it.

A woman at the bar tells me she wants to climb a guy who isn’t on her spiritual level. Another man she likes, he’s off with the Sufis somewhere, and that’s better. All that spinning, she says, is so totally enlightening.

She wonders, almost crying, if the best part of herself is gone forever since she’s been unhappy these past few days over the guy who’s gone to the Sufis and because she still lusts after the materialist, while her ego, she says, is caught in the middle, just like a little girl.

I want to tear a page from the book of alliterations.

To get lost in an orange grove where blossoms

abound but bear no fruit. Here, they are losing

their language, but remember enough

to know what’s been forgotten. Still the women speak it

to dishtowels and bathwater. Sweep bits of it off the floors

and call it dust. There is never anywhere that isn’t here.

I’ve learned that more times than I can count before now.

Before now became then. Before then

became us. Before us ever was. I’m told

there was a tree, back when time was still suckling

at forever’s breast, when exile became existence.

The first invention was not a wheel, but a wall to make here, here

and there, there — someday we’ll go back, I promise, Dear.

My father told me every plane was bound for a home we

hardly ever saw. We lived in his memory. He built it from

splintered wood and the resilience of regret mixed with refusal.

But the winds have borne it down now. Every edge

softens in time — we become ourselves, diffuse.

Ingest accents and let them fill us up. Drink deep

from bad habits in the dark of ourselves,

hum whatever is in the air.

A half mile

             down the dirt road

                            to the house it passes

where an old woman lived

             until she died there,

                          the rooms still

comfortable in their cool

              emptiness; then, a half mile

                           farther past her, the farm pond

we find as empty. The widow

             was the one who told us

                                     not to be afraid

             to do it, to swim

                            there alone. She said

                                        she had long ago

formed the habit

             of this water’s solitude,

                           the habit of this

afternoon, all the late

             afternoons conspiring

                           to one: not exactly

swimming, the way

              we suspend

                           ourselves in water,

two old friends

              who would say

                           we are living alone,

divorced and listless in it,

              in letting ourselves drift

                           on what little current

survives the damming,

              the push and pull

                           of the small creek

that feeds this, makes it.

              The water’s

                           temperature is of nothing,

of the womb.

              We love it that

                           we can’t feel it

as anything apart

              from us. We never

                           fail to speak of it. And

never fail to fall quiet

              enough for the beaver,

                           near-blind, to swim

so close to us

              we can feel its wake,

                           hear the fat slap of the tail.

There is the smell

              of a hot inner tube

                           where dragonflies find us,

the blue of a widow

              skimmer net-veined

                           that lights on my island-

hand, its body

             broken into syllables.

             Algae blooms unbroken,

a green roil,

              thunder moseying

                           around the hem

of the water, and I

              have become unafraid

                           even of lightning strikes.

So when, now, this

              afternoon years impossibly

                           past, I learn she is dying,

there is selfish comfort

              in knowing she is

                           doing this thing

before me, the way

              she is in the middle

                           of the pond before I

can get there, not facing the dock,

              not waiting for me,

                           but away, considering

the other bank, a turtle

              dozing on a log,

                           the catfish visible

beneath the log, a snake’s

              head threading the air

                           above its body.

She is unafraid as I

              would have been afraid if I had

                            arrived before her, too timid

to leave the heat-

              splintered dock. If she is able

                           to imagine a place,

I imagine this is hers.

              And this poem is

                           not between us, not

              yet imagined, the living

                          we have yet to do

                                        there in its place. And

the swallows have yet

              to give up the sky

                            to the bats,

and the bullfrogs

              have yet to begin

                           what passes for song,

for descant, and the shy green

              herons have yet

                           to return to their nests.

We have to wait

              for the new moon to rise,

                          red and thin as a bass’s

                                        gill, clean and bloodless,

through which we have

              to learn

                            to breathe again.

Once a year, the carnival people travel

             the county schools and give out free tickets

                            to us children — wheedling power at home.

And so my father ends up in the Bingo tent,

             placing dried pinto beans on tired numbers,

                          winning the free game, a chance at something,

while my mother, joyless, patient, watches me,

              her purse clutched tight against strangers, evening

                           itself. Here, there are the usual gilts

and shoats, ribboned hogs, calves — a ring in the nose

             of a bull: creatures we will slaughter

                          later and talk over at the table, those ribbons

forgotten in a drawer. But the clowns

             are here, the concessions, the smell of burned

                            sugar, seared salt, and we are here beneath

painted lights, a confusion of sound —

             canned song and the screams of country children

                           taught silence — made briefly bold with the artifice

of joy. The carousel I refuse, and the tired

             ponies in their dusty ring of misery.

                           Everything else, the scrambler, the roller coaster

that hurtles my brother through the air — too dangerous,

              too loud — the ferris wheel is the one something

                           my mother and I can agree on, and so

I concede to choose it, the up and over

              physics that no longer thrills anyone.

                           I can already understand the ease of it,

the predictable safety in something

              made with the same materials as the simplest

                           bridge we crossed to get here: steel, iron

rivets, the easy welds, girders, bolts, and cables,

              the soul of a pinion gear the axis —

                           built with the same tools, same labor, the industry

the same. The sweating huckster will let me

              ride longer, no one in line for the spine made circle,

                           its bent taken to extreme: its span time —

not distance — bridging nothing much, this day

              with the next, this hour the arc. My ticket

                           was free, to see what I always saw —

but aslant — from the bright gondola’s cradle-sway —

              the same fields, fenced horizon line, stalks of corn

                           and wheat, tobacco, soybeans, closer and farther,

to feel the breeze that comes along the river, the breeze

              the wheel makes itself, the carnival rising

                           and falling that will be gone in the morning.

Motion’s old architecture, this tired amusement,

              nothing to break, nothing to ruin, little

                           to fail it but my attention — that turning

in my gut gravity, like love, immortal,

              if weary, and what the wheel lifts me through,

                           stately and serene, it will resist

with the same resolve in ferrying me back down.

That she had earned a PhD

             in mathematics

                            at Universidad de La Habana

is not part of what she tells

             the Pre-Algebra

                          eighth grade, crowded

into an airless trailer-classroom

              tucked behind

                           the high school — afterthoughts,

the lot of us, already taller

             than she is,

                          some stinking of woodsmoke,

some with mud on our shoes.

             We figure out

                            soon enough, though,

the one question that will

             free us from her

                           ceaseless attempts

to convince us that algebra

             is the same

                           as bone-setting,

the missing with what

              is missing, the like

                           with the like. So

we beg her

              to tell us about the night

                           she escaped Castro,

and she does — on her

              gesturing arm the smallpox

                           vaccine scar the size

of a half-dollar, moon-

              cratered — pointing every time

                           at us as though

we are no longer

              there — telling again and again

                           about leaving with nothing,

the smell of rubber

              and gasoline, the engine cut,

                           swimming all night, breathing

inside a hissing vortex

              of water and salt,

                           swallowing her screams

like ground glass. We

              have never seen the ocean

                           she swam to get to us,

have heard little other

              than the familiar thickness

                           of our own accents —

but by spring, despite

              ourselves, we know it all,

                          every word, well

enough to perform

              for each other even the required

                           lapses, laughing, into Spanish.

And beyond the narrow

              classroom window, the field

                           of broomsedge and sumac

we have paid such hard-

              blind attention to

                           has turned into something

we no longer quite

              see, or try to see past,

                           and that will be our

inescapable —

              and most boring

                           of mistakes,

the like with the like.

When glass or glass water flips the skyline,

lines against the sky, sky against the lines;

when color lines run parallel, the definition

of never touching; when cityscapes get flipped

by nightsticks and Maglites; when lights

magnify the bruise; when suburban grids

sprawl; when sprawl is a face-down position,

fingers itching to escape; when city blocks bruise

orange with street lamp; when engine idle

breathes the metronome for your morning;

when the beat keeper keeps the beats from you

it beats keeping up with bruises; when blue

flashes stutter red, cold-hot on cinderblock;

when your block smolders with the cinders

of slugs, souls flung from their copper

casings; when hammers drive combustion;

when hammers drive the rail tie, when white

is a clean sheet, a pasty face, a mean beat;

when fear rattles off its mating call; when

you think you hear violence; when honesty

loses its fierce stride; when glass buildings

look back at you, the mirror of a city’s

state of mind; when concrete makes love

to busted windows; when orange light dyes

the window shards; when windows

and eyes die; when wardrobes turn orange;

when it’s easier to wear dread

on your face; when dread is a teardrop

inked near your eye; when bruises

remind you of your skin or the dark

of your lover’s eye; when bar bells drop

like hammers in the yard, in the garage;

when bells mean funeral; when shots

wake you from a dream about the first time

you felt the beat of a belly, when you fell

into the beat’s sweet thump, thump-thump?

I do miss the quiet [BEAT] Don’t you?

A form of rhythm like the first sex

Like an echo disrobed [BEAT] twelve bar

Conviction the sick-eyed gap-

Mouthed bass [BEAT] Not the noise

But an arrangement of derangements

Sometimes a tune is born [BEAT] of outrage

Sometimes the noise gives up

Its code [BEAT] and the wind’s scuttle

Makes the reeds in the body vibrate

At what speed is the trigger squeezed?

Is the frequency even? The number of lives

taken is either even or odd. It’s possible

to come up in a place of rift untorn, be soft-

handed in a rough neighborhood, I know.

On the news, anchors straightly announce

fear grips the Southland, a land of Southness,

which is to be under something top heavy,

reside beneath what is plain. And it’s common

to be lullabied by sirens. It’s stonecold

to know the difference between choppers

and a generator, to live beneath the flight path

of Icarus. There are days I crave the grey

of gravel-riddled asphalt, days I want the hot

of blacktop, the soot on my fingertips,

something to wash off or touch the world

with. A car fire keeps the block lit, warms

the desert’s cool. After all, this city

is a desert. What desert city is made

of angels? Some days I ache for the streaks

of Mandarin, the paint of tags chiseled

by gunshot, new language etched on freeways

and overpasses near the train yard — the city’s

Rosetta stone. I am of the Southland, born

from a desert and sent into frozen exile,

left to memory, echoes of echoes echoing.

We’re finding our way south along this Midwestern interstate,

extravagant concrete river twisting through thunderheads —

we are the movie version of ourselves,

all simultaneous orgasm and fuzzy-dog jokes,

bravado in the face of mortality. Strobe-lit corn fields

stretch as far as we can see, clouds

dark as anvils unzip and singe the sky

of our marriage. This road trip

is nocturne, love poem, self-portrait,

rescue mission, last chance —

what if it’s the storm sustaining us?

Uncertainty is not as funny as it used to be.

What we’re looking for is form:

a sense of the proper order of things:

first lightning then thunder —

laughter to measure the silence between.

When did you know it would end as it did?

Ask me instead the difference between snow and sand.

Between wind and blood.

Describe the taste of the first lie.

The pebbled light of winter.

A body departing.

Salt and christening wine.

Did you ever love, truly?

Language is a kind of hunger.

Did you ever love truly?

Do not mistake the empty page for a sign of violence.

Do not mistake my silence for absence.


I imagine, as I say goodnight and drive away,

the couple left on the sidewalk glad at my parting,

pleased to find themselves alone —

though it never was or will be otherwise.

I imagine the turning toward, the embrace,

the first few drops of a new rainfall.

All circulation is a system: predictable, purposeful.

We are in a period of deglaciation,

deep-water masses are mutable,

and what sinks to the ocean floor

grows restless, releases

whatever it had trapped in shallower spaces.

I imagine again the couple: how she holds him —

how they raise their faces to the sky,

what falls, what rises.

How long do I have to go without talking

before you stop listening?

I post personal ads on telephone poles:

Blue Belgian Bearded D’Anvers Cockerel

seeks life partner, height-weight-proportional please.

I have never felt so human. I have never felt

so dangerous. It turns out robots already

work side by side with us in rescue situations,

which of course is always

because when do we not need rescuing?

I imagine myself as a particular blood cell

with a specific role to play —

without olfactory information

I would swim in circles.

Suppose you had gone to Mississippi

for no particular reason: how long

before I thought to look in Hattiesburg?

How lonely I must appear.

who that is bare &

looks again at the raininess first:

street-haunted, other tarot:

night eats spite

from its own hands

hardened wraiths

of burning are sharp in the eyes

no page is

bare ever

the page of this street is

not bare

I’ve come to the right

place to hunt for madness

past a line of burning

mules and

men and cane

now I live

in the South: wake up

sharpened & wake

where is the canebrake

others stilted in the rattle

to speak in my own

ears. I am tired

I want to eat from the ground

wheel of wet-stamping silver,

rain day,

all day green dusk.

am I real?

slip to hide

later. here is the locust

here is the sweetgum

here is the aspen

I am hassled by undoing

as age roots in my body,

rocks the red

deeper.

deep more-startled

red of blood

that in the veins

is not red,

lateness crowds

at the edge of dusk

and the prairie

made of rotting

wood boards

wheel of wet-tramping silver

your year is drawn

longer. we all shelter

in the year

year of green seeing

I don’t know if I’m

enough. don’t know if

I will be

there are a thousand

blossoms in the acre

outside the house

when you have failed yourself

(moon of

scraped corners)

(burnt lamp

and dirtshaken

leaves)

 

don’t ask for help

 

 

 

 

you’ll just have to wait out your derangement

 

 

 

(crumpled dress

of the evening)

(premise of

fireflies scratched

out)

I tried to fish the river, but the water was red,

cattails jerking back and forth on the grassy bank.

In the forest, too many dead geese. Too many thin

dead geese with not enough meat on them to cook.

Bird like this’ll just burn, Eve said. Eve cut out her

tongue last fall and now she helps me pluck goose feathers.

Once, there was that dream where the slaughtered cows

came back to life. Once, there was that dream where Jesus

cut his arm and I got drunk. Once, Eve ate a fish whole,

skeleton peeking out the soft pink of her belly for weeks.

God called me Fish Heart. Lily Mouth. I was an evening sort of girl. He liked me better ripped up, bar bathrooms, bar peanuts, skip the small talk. We’re both Adam. We’re both Eve. In the mornings, swallowing bait, swallowing nails, pulling apart the microwave, two forks and an empty socket. Baby, there is always a limit. Hours spent rubbing my belly, waiting for watermelon trees, or orange bushes, or flowers heavy with green apples. And now, this is what I can dissect: his fingers in the gut of the fish, his fingers in the core of the flower, always pulling. Like it wasn’t enough to feel, like He had to see, to know.


The Stubble Festival

follows the corn

So families have

something to do

Other than stare

at the wrecked fields

as if they had been

wronged by them

The men gather

in embarrassed aprons

around the meat

overcooking into gray asteroids

on the grill

They stare

Radioactive with loneliness

Into the glowing tubes

of sausages

as if they

could predict

which house will be

repossessed

Which will become

bare as a chicken bone

Scraped down to the marrow

I sidle up near Billy

on the fringe

Close to his atmosphere

of tar and roofing nails

I have a thing for him

For the charged hypodermic

in his sock drawer

pushing air

I like cautionary tales

I like the way he twitches

all over

at the percussion

of the sprinklers

puckering his t-shirt

Like an animal

As if he weren’t

hyperventilating

in Da Nang

on our backyard grass

among the concussed glow

of the lighting bugs

failing to find their mark

I don’t know why these women

trust Mom

Her bone rosary

and ever present murmur

Holy Pater   Father of etcetera

pray for us now

at the hour

of our death

She’s someone to whom

the worst has already happened

Even though it was

nothing

She’s got a hand

for the trimester sweat

on their brows

For the breech birth

and the umbilical noose

Sometimes she takes

my chin

Fingers my jaw like a blade

Says Oh yes

You too will be there

Stretched out

Wretched as a frog

With a pin in your spine

My own little grenade

After the movie

After the vanilla shake

sluggish as concrete

And the taste of them

Their virgin salt

I think of the martyrs

How Miss Raylene goes on

about the science applied to them

How they got to be in gold books

afterwards

wrapped in crimson threads

with those wide sleepy eyes

that see nothing

Billy’s carpeted van

has the portholes blacked out

And reeks of oils and velour

We listen to an

electric guitar

dripping platinum

body fluids

While the radio DJ

chokes on his own tongue

Gutturally muttering

about how Charlotte

smelled like a pony anyways

and will get hers

Billy crushes out

a crooked clove

And grins his lop-eared grin

Asking what I’d like to know

I have no idea

I look out at the salt flats

where the irradiated

cowboy actors rode their coughs

into an afterlife of white sheets

Billy says the dust

from the tank shells

left his squad twisted

like something from

a comic book

And all I can say is

You read comics

Billy snorts

Sure It was either junk

or comics back then

But each was better

with the other

All the guys had

their own magical ways

of not giving a shit

But you   My darlin’

You can’t fool me

I tuck my sweaty hair behind my ear

Oh no

Yeah

You’re all big eyes and slang

and crucified unicorns

But I can smell an open hymnal

on your sweet breath

Miss Raylene’s house

is hexagonal

like a hive

She says the hippies

woke up the huge ferns

that flank the porch

to watch over it

All I feel is the cut breath

of the quarry

close by

I bring an algebra headache

and the fishhook

in my brain

from Mom’s insomnia

She moans

all night    Blames

the whippoorwills

The birds that sang

in the shocked dark

when the gates

to Eden were shut

She says

there’s always at least

one person in the Old Testament

to despise

Til Jesus wiped the blood clean

with the rag of his body

Miss Raylene’s parlor

is masked

in black and white

photographs

Old timey people flinching

soundlessly

under stiff hair

Gamblers   Scoundrels

looking waterlogged

and suspicious

I thumb the glass face

of one

while Miss Raylene

gets ready for a date

She glides up behind me

Whisper soft

in painful stilettos

Before I taught

I used to know all

the hands and cards

Two Pips

Little Slick

The Man with the Axe

A whole book

of charming wrongs

in the Alps of Dorf Tirol   I lived with the squawk

of a rooster crowing beyond sunrise   wobbling   bobbing

his neck in stretched undulations   his vibrant comb rubber-like

waved as he chased things   things that were not his   and

he spent most days chewing the bumpers off cars

nipping and tugging   seduced by rubber   the taste of excess

                                  had claimed him

in the way it claimed me and catapulted

my tattered bags into the mountain’s air    where

fluctuations in pressure turned porch steps into rapid

ascents and hallways into small invisible vacuums   vacuuming out

all the density of parting   and I’m not fond of too much

too fast   the swing set    the subway   carnival rides   anything

that recoils   pulls back   swings heavy with sinkage and swooning

                                  so I’d wander off

while others talked of whatever people talk about it     it sounded

happy and I’d wonder about the wandering and where it’d take me

and why it took me into a renovated barn enamored

with Italian and German farming equipment    I thought

of my parent’s house      the backroom embellished

with my grandfather’s farming tools     butter churns

horse bridles   a weaning mask and no one asks why those things

are suddenly no longer lining the walls and no one asks why

there are pictures of San Francisco     we’ve never been to San Francisco

and no one seems to notice how where we came from so easily slips

away into some new kind of obsession like the obsession that rooster had

with all things that were not his      abandoned wine corks     leaf scramble

the fine   fine taste of rubber

The oyster must get tired of waking up so hollow

          brackish and briny, gathered

          from bed, pried open and shucked

and don’t forget the delicacy,

          it is after all merely a bone, a delicate bone,

          jawed and clenched, locked down around itself.

It has been said that to be open is to be dying.

          I have decided to try again.

          You watch my face as the oyster slides down,

texture stealing language from my tongue, congealing

          and collecting in the back of my throat,

          yearning for cling, and I wonder what it would be

to die from oyster choking. In this moment, you register

          intention as if you and the oyster had it all

          worked out, this slow dying off I should have,

as you chant Oyster, Oyster, and I think of how the oyster

          relaxes, opens hingelike, pumps colorless blood

through three chambers of the heart and how threes

          are about as much as people can take,

          and how I should like to become calcified

and shell-bearing, how I’ve always wished to sink to the bottom

          of something vast. The freshness of the water, the fresh

          water wipes free the mantel and all that is behind the head is visible.

I’ll begin to doubt most of what’s happened here

          and you’ll be mostly uncomfortable. I’ll think

          of encasement and that hollow shell and whether

it is to be returned or burned and slaked

          and if there is any better thing to describe

          this discomfort, this constant

sliding down.

One day, a man decided

he could walk across Texas

and grew old trying, lost

his way, ended up twisted,

turned around on himself,

reaching out an arm, then

another, and then another,

until he was only arms

pointing all around

at the horizon — his skin

hardened, but his body began

to snap, and could be picked up

easily by the hands of

children at their games,

pretending at divining

water, writing curses

in the dirt, later

dropping him into

the fire, not all of him,

only a piece, a broken

part of him he knew

would only just grow back,

and he would let it — his heart

burst into sap, a dark

seen through, slugging down

toward feet that have forgotten

where they were going.

They were the only men in the house,

and stood firm, one hand raised

saying farewell, the other idle.

I’d make each bed, wash dishes,

set chairs back in place, then dig

under the sink where their masked faces

waited to be pulled out. I fought

with them all afternoon, took turns

playing villain, playing good,

letting each one win, then starting

over. The light in the garage apartment

turned all summer, flickered

light and dark across the floor

as on the leaves outside.

See? It’s a joke.

For some people

it’s in the alliterative d-d-d,

it’s nostalgia for that ancient porn

Debbie Does Dallas. Some people

laugh and laugh. See —

police search the apartment

but don’t find Debbie. Because …

Debbie does the drawer! She’s crushed

into a trundle

under a bed. She can cry

out. She does not cry out

(the officer may not be the officer).

✼
What about the one where Debbie does

a dog crate for 40 days?

Are you hungry, the “boyfriend” asks.

This fucking thing can’t be hungry —

he knows that. It’s a joke.

So he sticks it and sticks it and sticks it full

of dog biscuits. Laughs and laughs.

But all jokes aside, he knows

it’s serious business. The breaking down

biz, the wising up biz.

Want a thing, buy a thing. Be the one to sell.

And the object can’t object.

✼
Bend over, says an old man

the first time,

I want to see what I’m working with …

The object sometimes doesn’t know

what it is, what to do —

but it will learn. Its tongue hits the roof

and an open-mouthed hum, a sort of “nnnnnnn”

precedes an “OH!”

But, no no no no no no no no no no no …

the object can’t object. What’s it for?

50 men a day or more.

Getting “the girlfriend experience” or

getting in getting off going home.

✼
Most of them were married,

with kids, says Debbie

with a cup of cocoa, debriefing.

And every single one of them,

I asked — why

they were coming …

but they never had an answer for

me.



The first sin was a pimp lie to a girl dazzled

by the glamour love

of a god — by the glamour

of a grown-up rave —

of knowing, that is having,

it all.

          Then the pimp made Adam

into Eve’s first “drake.” Knowing

these facts — you know history …

But I should spell it out:

the players — repeat

                                repeat

                                           repeat,

get shit, then

justify. If you want to

sell yourself, says the snake

of her shattered soul, that’s empowerment.

And the snake’s got something —

she could be the Power. The new knowing

“daddy”

leaning into Adam, hissing,

Who’s your daddy now.

But, Adam can’t think or feel

he’s helpless, so he smacks her.

Open your arms, Charles Ramsey.

You’ve kicked wide the house of horrors.

Kicked off a steel door-sweep and set three free.

Now this little pretty white thing

is rushing you —

you: the savior.

Hug her!

Even though you’re a man. Even though

you’re: a black man.

(I’m a man, you add later.)

This stringy, greasy girl clutching her lovebaby

girl, doesn’t care — finally

a neighbor (just like you)

can hear her scream

like a car had hit a kid.

Even if

it might be: just domestic

violence. (It wasn’t just

by any stretch.) Open your arms, Chuck,

to those girls — to that dead giveaway

who can see home past

your gap-toothed grimace

your half-eaten Big Mac

your history

hitting the ex — you

are not the monster.

You make good in Cleveland.

The red maple leaf

through the barred window

blazes my eye

open, a bright thank you

on its dying lips.

So much goodness awaits;

icy skies cut-glass clear

above our heads, the meal

that will surprise our tongues

as we begin to know each other

over brunch in Brooklyn.

May whatever we discover

drip french-toast-doused-

in-maple-butter-syrup sweet.

May the short burst

of afternoon light

flood us with wonder

long past twilight's

periwinkle dream,

day and night slow-dragging

as old lovers remembering

the first time, the sun burning

opposite the complacent moon

until she ignites.

We are out of wine. And that’s a problem

whether you are in Puglia or Pittsburgh.

Watman has a seawater risotto on the stove

he’s feeding dandelions and periwinkles,

and has the look you see in the Pacific

Northwest — Totemic, ocean facing,

as if to send the monsters back to the deep.

Skoog is picking a Stanley Brothers song

about sinfulness on the banjo while waiting

for the okra in his gumbo to break just right.

He’s singing about the hills of Virginia

but somehow predictably the flotsam of

Bywater and Katrina float into the verses.

Got a good thing going when Genoways

shows up, a wild boar in the bed of his pickup:

The only sustainable operation this side

of the Poconos, but smells like frack sluice.

We’ve been at it since late morning

and the day’s rolled geologically along,

our loved ones scattering themselves

on the nervy periphery of this story,

because the evening feels immortal

and it is ours to let come. And we love them

enough to forage from the keel and underbrush

of our lives this good meal as our friends

ply us with jars of drink and stories

about other people sitting around a fire,

another circle, their songs as good as ours.

It isn’t true, of course, but that’s not the point.

The truth is we are out of wine and someone

needs to make a run and scavenge the deli’s

racks of the underwhelming but drinkable.

Stay close to God is the kind of thing you hear

before you head down mountain roads,

where you count the car-bludgeoned trees,

It won’t be me, because it’s my dream.

And in my dream, why should I get out

of my boxers? Why should any of us

answer the warrant? No one will wander

farther than earshot: Kitchen, porch.

So we can holler and laugh and grow

serious regarding missed cheese,

corked wine, a goat being lovingly

slaughtered in the yard, if love and brevity

and mercy are delivered workman-like.

There are facts not to tinker out of:

Tar Sands. War. Water … We know this

though we’ve never been in the same room

together, just figures floating in the ether

of our making. Stay close to God

No one’s really a believer, but we believe

what wine says to glass, this blessing

of knives and rafters, shank and catgut,

the body’s comings and goings, prayers

that return our friends wonky but whole.

Let us loll our heads to the clonky god

of togetherness, these simple pleasures

laid out on a lead-heavy door converted

to a table, the openings and closings,

a lifetime of sentences and alibis.

If desire foams over a sea-wall, this is non-negotiable —

                    let us cease quarrelling about whether jacaranda

ignites lavender perfume under a pilot’s skin

                    distilled of night blindness and vertigo,

whether you dreamed of a flight rotating counter-clockwise

                    on a runway, other side of the bay on fire —

of royal empress trees neither royal nor empress —

                    whether what we love will last our whole lives,

those fragrant, ornamental groves of water-loving blossoms,

                    or not what we love but rather, how —

whether we carelessly toss los cigarillos in gutters,

                    save our ash-petaled lungs, or dash to hills

seeking only what we know of tenderness in jacaranda heights, —

                    deliverance.

A tulip dress is the sea in your closet.

Say if in another reality you

doused yourself in gasoline,

setting the world on fire in front of you?

Even the birds of prey

fled to another corner of the universe

by changing into constellations —

not one those birds sang. A bronze phoenix

scaled in boldness —

this immolated body rises from ash

to the tune of a lovely stranger in flames.

A tulip dress is the sea in your closet.

A lonely man sets himself on fire —

a furloughed woman drives right into the armory.

Santa Ana winds rise in a heat wave.

Ginkgo leaves, dying green to green,

burn in the autumnal dark,

so do not risk a cigarette.

I hear the buds of a Chinese Bee Tree

drum the sidewalk in code

as black phoebes in the eucalyptus,

mottled sleeves of risk-averse

paper hazards

cut their wings in relief at nine o’clock,

ninety degrees, ninety-one —

while we drone on about a debt ceiling.

As the heat rises, so does the aversion to risk,

whether to rise or fall

with the wind

pushing the value of currency out to sea.

From years without to years ahead —

We spent so much time

waiting for the universe to say yes

when it already said yes

with a left-handed concerto

for a pianist with the last name of Wittgenstein

who lost his arm in the first world war,

with adverbs in the lights

over a tear-gas field, of mottled sycamore —

of minor firefly prophets.

If only we could read this axiom of yes —

if we survived locust-years without, then

let us survive the years ahead.

1.

After the snows and large predators are gone,

girls shed their husks in the railcar. What’s a little tongue blood

as she covers your body in rural oil? — an ache inside a mountain

calling her name. Some things come back each year and

some don’t. There’s Sal — I’ll never see him again,

and Angela. And the wolverine with her pale stripe.

Dear dead dragonfly whose thousand wings sunspot my skin,

I’ve stacked my tears into cairns, dried them with your dust.

2.

We’ve all heard the flowers wilding in cattle pastures,

seen the paints at New England Ranch, thanked the mill

where this forest splits into board-feet.

At the edge of town, they’re boxing up the graduates,

they’re having a cake raffle and charity choir concert —

but the mill, my god, the mill still smells sweet as surgery.

This is reality; I’m fine with it. At twenty-nine,

I’m reaching into the holiness of my past like a midwife.

3.

The engineer brings his smallish engine to the door:

turn this on and forget to breathe.

The scientist brings her little pill to the door: swallow this

and forget your meals.

The neighbor’s dog comes to the door

and barks and barks until the man’s hungry

and out of breath

from running the numbers through shit-smeared cattle chutes.

4.

From a room with pine-scented pine beams in a house

with blinds of peony blossom, I look outside to bucolic ranches,

forested hills — beauty seen through simulacra of beauty,

but all rendered a bit too darkly: appaloosa and bay

rolling around in the neighbor’s appliance-white trash;

on the highway, classic cars with blood-dappled fenders.

Well, somewhere a famous orator at an oak podium

says something about looking closely at something.

5.

I slept through my twenties on a grassy hillock. I lolled

on the great tongue, and I fed while being fed upon

like any other animal. I was made into sound. Then my sound-self

regained physicality, like the trumpet in a resting measure.

O! Bloody chorus chained to the bone stage,

please be intensely quiet, then steadily crescendo.

Ah! My lovely whip, bit, and branding iron, tell me:

what’s the strangest music in the human body?

Bad body is a hemorrhaging Rothko.

It drags like a laundry sack smearing

its unshowered oils across the wood floor.

Down the hall, bad body takes a break

like a bone. It balances its head

with a throbbing. Bad body complains

even the wind hurts. See how its hairs

rise when you get too close —

you are a zap of static. Bad body is so

negative. Bad body won’t get dressed.

It stands in the open hallway

refusing to lift its arms for the shirt.

Refuses to lift its legs for the shorts.

Bad body says maybe tomorrow.

Bad body says can’t you see I’m fatigued

in red and redder and black camouflage.

Bad body says don’t move, just listen,

just stop, wait a second, give me

a second. Bad body swells a bad grenade

brain, now cupping its ears from the ringing,

the ringing, the ringing.

Though they say to lie still, your brain can sometimes still

            be a slime of what it was if you have a night start in the bore.

You might be a firework of broccoli curds, an umbrella of orange

            segments opening on the screen. Your brain’s lit band

might bell like a pepper, But where be the seeds? you will ask

            because the images will look like danger. A wart of garlic,

a nightmare of Brussels sprouts, an onion supernova — all of your brains

            will excite in the magnetic field. On the narrow slab you will not dare

close your peach pit eyes to the banging. And then you will.

How to explain my becoming another person?

In every shell I heard myself chasing

my brothers on a bicycle, the street and house-

lights blacked out as I trailed, water

rushing into my hollering mouth.

I listened

as my feet sank deeper into the sand pulling out.

Because my child

will be called an anchor

               with hands at its throat,

                         every month

it fans like dry rice bumped

                                     from its sack.

                         It fans from clouds

               down a mountain

                                     creased

with snow. A cone

                         of continental deposit.

                                                  It rebounds light

                         like an ammolite

                                                  heirloom.

                                                                           It fans like a root.

Like paint pulled by a brush over

an edge.

                         It branches like a line;

               it sinks

                         like a crater on a graph.

It waves like a name                    away,

with my hand.                             A land bridge

               dispersed from my body

                                                  into water.

The fluorescent light is covering me like a hood of silk. It smells of sweat and medicine. The fish tank in the hallway is a risk and a gesture. A box of wonder — we are trusted not to throw ourselves against it.

✼
Once, when I was small, my mother lay on the carpet and asked me to walk barefoot up her back. I grew very light, hovering above myself, and made the journey. I had to balance my distance from her body. When she rolled over, my feet became birds in the golden leaves of her hair.

✼
Outside, the boy with the twisted body is leaning on his cane and smoking a cigarette. The sky, the snow, and the smoke pass gray, white, and silver around in a circle. In an hour we will go back inside the building. We’ll climb the narrow stairs, as if venturing into the attics of our lives.

The counselor is passing around a black, velvet sack filled with questions. What is your idea of a perfect evening? Who is your biggest inspiration? He’s beaming, waiting for our answers. Beyond the window, autumn toys with ideas of heaven. The trees become fiercely talented and focused. Then winter.

✼
Some say love, it is a river, I sang as a girl in school assembly. We sang standing up. I was ready to faint all that year. For five days each month, my blood came as bright as plum juice. When I finally fainted, it was as silky as I’d imagined, as if sleeping and waking were two sides of one pearl.

✼
In any group, I want to know: Who’s the mother? The boy with the twisted body, he’s the angel. The Vietnam vet is the son. The nervous old lady is the baby. The counselor is the meddling neighbor. Now that I see a family, I can breathe. The leaves are crimson. I have something to tear down.

The story begins with a beacon

in a tower of brick.

Or it begins with a man,

you’d call him the keeper,

who mostly refuses

sleep to listen

to the steady crash

of the Pacific or the red buoy’s

sad clanging inside the mist.

It begins with brick,

wheelbarrows of bricks

someone must stack

into the shape of a story.

The night was too black

for stars. The light

failed; the man slept. The rest

you should already know.

How silly we were

to trust in man, but who

hasn’t made that mistake?

Inside the mist, the red buoy

clanged its sadness

as the man slept;

that’s how the story begins.

My daughter can’t understand

why, when I press the button,

the parking garage door doesn’t budge.

The car stuck. The park too far

for her small legs to walk. These things

happen, I say. It’s no one’s fault.

In the apartment courtyard, the tenants are gathered —

one complains he’s missing the Laker game,

one can’t charge her cell phone,

another's laptop is dead.

                                            The power,

of course, isn’t the problem — we’re each unprepared

for such sudden loss, loss

that will last for the foreseeable future.

We’re unprepared

for our little disappointments.

Normally I might not pay attention

to sunlight pouring into the courtyard

but this afternoon, I do —

probably because it’s already nearly gone.

None of us mentions the night,

but I, for one, would like to

be expecting it, when

it comes.

The longest-haired son filmed

his father’s last hour

without pause

then gathered us around the iPhone

to marvel at how a pulsing Adam’s apple

stills.

Doctor’s claim: Pain.

Drowning in his own saliva.

But we, small family,

can only guess his last breaths: a song

hiccupping heavens? Four breaths, five breaths —

gone. We keep to ourselves

this quiet, hand-held footage.

Trashy lover, I jump

at the thought of you

hiding in mom’s dark shoe —

Oh terrible thing, called once

by a crazy lady Our Fear of Spirit,

survivor, city dweller, we all

want you gone — wings

smeared across the sidewalk.

Roach, to love you

multiplied feels impossible,

but I can rest at your feet

curled in death & watch

the amber glint of your body

frozen by flashlight. Let me

tell you a story: one summer

I grew brave, lifted your shell

from a Chinatown windowsill,

carried you one floor up,

just to know I could,

then placed you, crumbling,

deep in some forgotten corner

of the landing, where the Super

might see you & sigh, might

sweep you away, or let you

be, unbearable memory.

Sometimes a first kiss is a matter
of one olive caught between two tongues,

or a sister’s spying eye

behind the wood door. Sometimes

the kissers stand on roller skates

laced tight around their ankles

and hold each other’s shoulders

for balance. A kiss is made

wilder by sundown, after school

once every bell has rung

and the ghosts of closing drills

linger in the halls. Sweetest if

a teacher tells your mother

who pretends the schnitzel

isn’t burning as you burst

through the red frame.

On a survey of the Platte

and Missouri Rivers,

keelboats made from willow branches

and buffalo hide,

braced tight and larded,

           waltz the rough current’s

           white hell

           that topples a flatboat.

           Snagged and sunk

           the year’s profit of furs

           flail into the water.

Crescent watches

the men kicking

their slaves and youngest apprentices

           into the waves.

He wades thigh deep

to pull a boy

up and out of the ebb.

Half drowned and wrapped

in a water logged fur,

the child nearly drags him down

into the river.

He digs his heels

into the sand bed

jerks and hauls

until the boy is

born again on the bank

           from the robe of slick, wet fur.

The men drag the drenched pelt

up the trampled bank

as the boy sputters and quakes.

Anxious to turn his heels

on this scene,

Crescent drops his papers

at the quartermaster’s shack

and rides out early,

cutting north and east.

Bluestem grass and wild rye give way

to the girdled stands of trees

           marking a new township.

Rigs of land

broken in by settlers

rattle past like wooden dominos;

           middle children ever raking away

           at new dirt lawns

           pause in their labor to wave.

In his last bonded year,

the frontier moves

at forty miles an earth spin.

Crescent marks his future striding

beholden to his papers still,

but with the river damp

steaming off his shoulders

and the very tools

for measuring

the skin of the earth

           in his saddlebags.



Indian Apple leaves a remarkable down

on the prairie, so unlike anything

from the Volga grasslands to

the basalt columns hemming Ireland,

that all similes are rendered null and void.

A buffalo needs two shots

through the lungs to be brought down.

Imagine the surveyor’s staccato cry —

caught in a wave pressed into igneous slab:

the earth’s colicky sobs.

Northwest running meridians

and east–west base lines with corner markers

made to be lost or obliterated if not chiseled deep

into the vernacular rock.

My father moved patiently

cupping his hands beneath his chin,

            kneeling on a janamaz

then pressing his forehead to a circle

            of Karbala clay. Occasionally

he’d glance over at my clumsy mirroring,

            my too-big Packers t-shirt

and pebble-red shorts,

            and smile a little, despite himself.

Bending there with his whole form

            marbled in light, he looked like

a photograph of a famous ghost.

            I ached to be so beautiful.

I hardly knew anything yet —

            not the boiling point of water

or the capital of Iran,

            not the five pillars of Islam

or the Verse of the Sword —

            I knew only that I wanted

to be like him,

            that twilit stripe of father

mesmerizing as the bluewhite Iznik tile

            hanging in our kitchen, worshipped

as the long faultless tongue of God.

First, setting down the glass.

Then the knives.

Black resin seeps

into the carpet.

According to science,

I should be dead.

Lyptus table, unsteady

boat, drifts away.

Angostura, agave,

elderflower, rye —

the whole paradisal

bouquet spins apart.

Here, I am graceless.

No. Worse than that.

Short work a day’s malaise

has made of me! Thus far I body forth

what you see before you: crank

of sickbed arts, toilet articles, nighttable

tumbler of ice, a black cracker, white-hot bulb

peeping from under its ruched shade, irritable

minority of which? (or another?) one

bookish hallucination I might pick.

You at the doorknob. Burglar

of practical whereabouts & scenarios. Must I look a sight?

Grown into my room like the tight

sleep daddy wished his favorite

girl, with window leaves & the long

lobes of light the cars hurled

bungling along the walls as they passed out of the neighborhood

& beyond ken —

you, there, bidden intruder,

signatory in & out of my body’s modest

down-to-earthly log, boost

me into the chilly stirrup whose horse, too big

for me to see, too strenuous to hold, bolts off

in a shudder of hide to the high

screes rumpling their rodents & pinched herbs

into rime crystals & glare,

where the archaic maggots squirm

my pupils until my stone skull

sutures fault to fracture in figments

of speech running me ragged to ricochet

& then by tomorrow

morning switch, drop me to bed alive,

damp & muttering probably still my beady numbers & sorrow,

nevertheless bones reknit & chuckling over their pink marrow.

Even as you forget me more, so little

else crowds in. As you

forget, oh, everything, item

by tidbit, I can’t begin to recall what I

did either with my own dead. How

to not-catch never a glimpse at the no window?

Welcome myself to the cellar.

Lush cobwebs shimmering in festivity

will do for a mind and the occasional

furnace huff will do for the mind’s pride.

Virtuous old tools & blunt eccentric

might-come-in-handys nuzzle my touch at first

but not after the time — once too many — my manners

omit to compliment the housekeeping the small

meticulous vermin do. Thereafter, slights

& shrugs now of negligence, & you

— who were dear to me, who settled my fingers

in fine dust — flick irritably away.

I walk through a bald field blooming violet onions. I will know I am absolved when there is no more dirt underfoot, when I have flipped the earth and the river runs above us, a glassed belldark sound.
To find: liver, lung, womb. A lens cut from vulture eye. This is what it is to miss a thing.
At the McDonald’s, a man in a parked car will talk himself awake. This is another kind of hunger.
A prayer for the king: forty pears, all bloomed from young throats. Long life, a sea of rice, a thicket of braids.
Problem: Four boats arranged in a cross drift away from each other in opposing directions. What theory states that, all conditions remaining equal, they can reach each other again on the other side of a perfect globe?
To understand a map is to shrink the world; to plan; to color.
Can you smell the vinegar blood in the babes, stardappled. The survivors ride the beast train toward the North, over those rolled off onto the tracks. See their legs, scattered.
Olga in Minnesota: to be with her mother amidst rags of spring snow. For now, she is curled in the glovebox of a Chevrolet Cavalier.
Bless you, all that meat and milk, threaded. Pass, you fairer animal. Not you. I have seen the door in the water.
Solution: Magical thinking.
To panic is to feel all your wildness at once.
A flock of geese felled to the open plain, the lush grass confounds even the birds for passable angles.
We the holy, are never really still. Agitation pulls even at hanging planets.
Four sirens twist their voices—four dead in the desert borderlands.
In this dream, I am on a plane. I wake up to the pilot smiling down on me. No one flies the plane. Or, I am flying the plane.
The threads fly loose on each body, some sown to others, some not. But let’s not take this metaphor too far; we are better than the obvious.
A hero is a plane of being.
I think of a girl at space camp, perched above a better telescope than she has in her room. Tonight, she figures space as a map of horses. Blur, focus. Blur and focus. Tonight, the clouds will pull apart for her. Tonight, we will all dream of horses.
My ancestor says: Later, when I arrive at your house, I will hang a crown of flowers at your door. And yours. And yours.
And: Sometimes I choose to come through your television. In sleep, you will mistake me for dripping water. You will think you heard your father. We visit each other in these ways.
Plan B. From the moon, the earth is a crown of dark marble.
There are varying kinds of tragedy that produce the same outcome: paperwork.
And even if we were to save the trees, the hunger would still be so great something else would need saving.
The heads of violet onions, rooted child fingers, blue-leafed lips. An orchard, a mass grave.
I give you my coat and scarf in offering. I have no choice, I was born to saints in pilgrimage.
Papery purple skin.
Thesis: I swallow a bee for each ill deed done. I am a hive walking. I strain to hear you over the regret.

How quickly links move me through our country, first

thin reports, then the crowds redacted by smoke —

how slow the time for the boy left in the street.

I want to say it sears the mind, the burnt-out

canisters shown lying around their feet, shot

into people’s lawns. (Go home. I am home. You

go the fuck home.) To do that, to stare into

submission while looking through the narrowing

scope — but not visible. How else to explain

that the eye rests there, holds fast the line cutting

against their refusal? Bring it, you fucking

animals caught on the hot mic. We see you.

We see you, the cameras would say and still

they advance; one shouts a barrel in a face,

eye against eye and the fragile feel of it.

No eyes meeting real eyes, though, just the gauzy

film like cool milk poured into burning orbits,

like something smeared out of an infected root,

while the bewildered mouth’s pressed into a plea —

“I can’t breathe” — under the civic body’s brute

enforcement. Justice? Look beneath your boot’s tread,

but see, there’s nothing to take back, nothing left

to exchange. That’s the lesson’s broken-glass edge,

that out from this lens appears simply a shape,

a description and you invoking it, where

he resists, charges, grabs at his waistband, and

you rest your cheek as in lining up the sights

or in going to sleep. He will never wake.

There’s a moment in the Herzog I love

after the bear has been opened, after the trash

bags are filled and emptied on the table,

then the bodies accounted for, divined for

the bad faith of each puncture, each defensive

laceration, after the tape is heard (no visuals

to stage at this last encounter) and the heroics sung,

the appropriate morals unspooled for us,

when our singer — the coroner — comes

to the end of his rehearsals, his dumbshow

of instructive gesticulations, and the scene

should be over but the camera sticks,

asks for one more testimonial, the tender

indecency of a single sincere moment

when he doesn’t know what comes next,

or what he should do now with his hands.

the bed-ripe heart & brain you harbor

has no sad theories — no bedtime stories left
 

I hold the scriptures in the waning light

& the view of your bed-body bleeds small

     & you insist the roaming human has no limits —

whose error & insect approving — then our language

unassailing — fleshed & assuaged!

     This automated heirloom & torpor…

the morning sun a missing thing —

the night we can never fully come out of

Once more the Sanger coyotes plotting moon belly-deep —

is it you in this shade & demon     fasting sword in bones now

 

     bully me     your allegiance

 

 

     How spring warrants new species     the ficus father planted as a boy

when a pair of shoes was still a dream over the Xiangkhouang plains —

     aubades unable to cue     & to cure     the color of your descent

 

              olive     garden & dung

 

so we reach for our waists & sway…

 

 

Is it you in this space & hole     whetting with hands borrowed from height of iron

     opium flayed presence     my persistence that does not obey     are you

inside —

 

     our blood & oil for clan     first the muscle     evening news

          & the last to hear

Perhaps is a new and sudden way of being.

Like satisfaction yet begun or some other kind

of kindness:

a more gentle one?

Night makes us all into the middle

of something until we aren’t

anything anymore. The sky

isn’t any color here. It’s okay

because consolation is color enough

for your cheeks, wind-bitten and glorified

by the light of the wine in this glass draining

toward a better time, a better space. I invented

a notion of hell and you invented a notion of hello.

Amazing similarities and bizarrely coincidental snow.

Like a twig falling from an oak’s tallest point,

I keep wondering when forgiveness

found its way into this world

in a time before bargaining and beckoning.

It’s quiet again and now the sky is a tangled

mess of rags seeking out the bored and unwilling.

I’d like to make a map not of the land

but of the path I took to arrive in this place,

a map with no idealized purpose,

a map of a thousand airless pines.

To learn a language or to marry

a form to another is without

guarantee or concern like a rock

in a snowstorm

depending upon your finding

it to exist. Time passes

strangely in every town

you enter but what

if you do not

find yourself there?

How sudden the faces fall away

from your mind, from any mind

with so much upon it

and so much without it?

In most (if not all) instances,

the mind would prefer

to sleep and saddle the world.


Your syntax disrupting

even the bluest

of skies, and the deadline’s

urgency could not

even distract the air

with its calming deficit,

with its exact message

meant for you on this day

of this month of this year.

The clouds confused

with the grass, mixed up

(not mistaken) and driving

through the iris suddenly

(a part of you, briefly)

but now behind your vision

(a field, also) and the world

is best known as a bullet

with no direct target,

though we all know

the eaves of our lives

grow extinct as we move

further and further away

from away-ness: distance

a sense worth sentencing.

Boxcars & scotch & cheap

bourbon on rocks, nothing’s neat: we steady

chasing love from ghosts over drinks half-slung.

Last night your sister offered us money

for making the long trip to visit, then the two of you

quizzed your mother on the names of the living & the dead &

corrected every wrong answer.

Your mother kept calling me your husband instead of your son.

How can family be stranger the closer you become?

We ain’t slurring yet, but well on our way

when you ask do I remember your sister’s name

scrawled in concrete in the backyard: Siri was here — 1968,

& how the yard & the slab & the house

got up & left us one day & if you had more time

you would’ve burned the whole fucking city down.

You got me here so you wouldn’t be lonely,

so one day I could conjure your mother’s best voice —

my one good trick.

It’s been forty years since you’ve spoken mother, sister

into faces that owned the words. One last round, let’s swap

another story in this shit Virginia bar without a single-

malt scotch. Grab a few tall boys for the nursing home:

your mother’s lonely, your sister’s on her way.

Not every mulatto is created

equal. Some get heckled

on subway cars, lynched or celebrated

in tickertape parades. My mother can’t speak

a lick of Korean and doesn’t

give a damn, never says mulatto

but calls both of us mutts,

though I can’t pass for shit but black:

ask the audience as I stroll in

late. We could use a Hines Ward

to show us the way — tell the boys

shouting twigi on the subway

all of us are animals, are hybrid

of body, of place. Mornings

I dream of kinked hair and cry.

My mother’s mother forgets

who we are, speaks Korean over

our heads, lost in language.

My mother only nods,

exhausted. I know few words,

my tongue full of friction. Say

omma, I say, raise us

back into memory,

into word, into place. Once

a woman pressed into the pink

nailbeds of my fingers,

told me she could see

my blood. My mother

is mistaken for Hawaiian,

for Indian, for everything

but what she is. When I tell her

I’ll have no children,

she says then I guess we’ll be

the only two left. Somewhere

we are understood. My mother

opens her mouth.

I drank that blue a while back, but I give you

some black, give you some gold, while my mother,

bored, says show me some poems. So I show her

some poems, hand you the bottle. Thank you,

son. You keep calling me a word

that I don’t think is yours. Even though

you married into blood, blood

we ain’t, and that word sounds too foreign

from any man talking to me. You talking

’bout weather? Complaining about rain,

saying the sun don’t like me today.

Because you didn’t raise him, my mother once said. It hurts

being so brand new.

Some nights my father calls her, nostalgic & drunk.

You say That nigga wants his family back

and we laugh it off. Though you’re fast asleep

beside her when my father asks, heavy with longing, Why

doesn’t he call me back? After so many years

there are two men who want to fill the same space.

There’s no room tonight, but here you are

drunk on scotch and talking ’bout how some nights

you’re on fire and you wake up howling.

You need Jesus, my mother says. You look at her

thinking of the baby she lost and how you cried.

Wanting to relieve your pain, she told you it’s better this way,

’cause if you still wasn’t working, I’d have to choose

who to keep, and you’d be gone. You wanted to argue,

but she’s done it before. She’s laughing now, reading

lines from a poem: You want a man strong as gin —

what you think that means, Unc? She asks, already

knowing the answer. Shit, I don’t know? You say,

well on your way and wondering if you’re failing

a test. I’d chime in but I’m busy thinking

’bout the red I still had — should’ve given you

that. And took that gold back.

My adopted brothers split wealth, told me

my hands were never big enough,

arms not strong enough to hold

my own fortune. So during Chuseok

I dressed you in baji to fool

the spirits. Prayed for boys bringing coin

silver and slender as the waning

moon. Most nights I don’t dream

of their half-drawn faces, don’t lament

the old world we left behind. But I want

your name golden, you beyond

every man’s reach, I want blood

to matter. I want America to be

the promise that finally came through.

When Gorsky Press prints Jim Simmerman’s posthumous New & Selected Poems this year, it will have been ten years since Simmerman’s death. And while ten seems like a well-measured and reasonable number by which to release a posthumous work, its numeric value is merely arbitrary. A decade, as it turns out, is merely coincidence, for it simply took that amount of time in order to put out the works.

As I prepare the final proofs to pass to the publishers, I have been thinking a bit about numbers, arbitrary and otherwise. Mostly how, for Simmerman, numbers become somewhat arbitrary too. Never one to be bullied by much of anything, Simmerman wrote in beats, in sounds. Early in his career, he’d write in syllabics some, influenced in large part by his teacher, who would later become his friend and contemporary, Phillip Levine, who wrote a good bit of his poetry in syllabics. But Simmerman reasoned that syllabics really didn’t measure much. He conjectured that it likely takes the same amount of time or duration to read a four-beat line that bears seven syllables as it does a four-beat line written in eleven syllables. So what are you measuring then? Not much. And not much was never a good answer for a Simmerman poem. In Simmerman’s best work everything much mattered. For Simmerman, the beats, the stressed syllables, made the musicality of the poem’s line. These were units by which he measured verse.

This past decade, in preparing Simmerman’s book, I’ve been reminded of this lesson fourfold:

The first beat: Transcription. Simmerman’s first book, Home, came out with Dragon Gate Press in 1983, and the typewriter on which the manuscript was composed sits, a heavy antique, in the corner of my office now. The act of transcribing Simmerman’s poems turned out to be an unexpected pleasure. Reading one line from the original, typing that line into a computer; then, later in the process, reading that line from the original and proofing with the electronic text; and finally the proofing, one slow line at a time of the galley proofs, made me read anew poems I’ve known well (and as was often the case memorized). There was no cut and paste job to prepare his works, and the unique technological transfer of 1983 work to 2016 allowed me to feel and consider again the precision and duration of a Simmerman line.

The second beat: Enjambment. Early in Simmerman’s career, Raymond Carver contended, “Simmerman is clearly among the best poets of his generation.” In his high praise, Carver claimed, “Time and again I found myself stopping to draw breath, moved and sometimes startled at the aching rightness of the image, the felicity of the line.” While Simmerman’s beats drove the reader’s ear through the line, his masterful enjambment worked with the reader’s eyes and expectations. To look closely at the way Simmerman breaks lines is like watching Bruce Lee break boards, in choppy, jumping slow motion on an old film. The act is dazzling at full speed. It’s just as magical at 1/100th speed. No one breaks a line like Simmerman.

The third beat: The Cut. For all of his mastery and the singing of his praises, not everything Simmerman wrote was good. When he died, he left handwritten notes addressed to me and tucked into manuscripts in his house and at his office where he taught at Northern Arizona University. He wanted to make sure his last poems went to me to do with them what I would in keeping his legacy alive. After bouts with illnesses, both mental and physical, Simmerman committed suicide and his going was well prepared. While his mind and body were giving out, he poured his energy into controlling what he still could and taking care of what mattered most to him. First, to his brother, Jeff, and his family, whom he cared for greatly, he made sure to pass on his assets in an organized manner. Second, he donated $100,000 to the Humane Society, to help care for stray dogs, animals that were such a great part of the joy in his life. Third, he wanted to continue to teach and be a part of the world of poetry, even if his body wouldn’t carry on, and thus those notes in manuscripts. To that end, as his Estate Executor, generally, and now his Literary Executor, specifically, I have had the privilege of pressing forward.

While there were brilliant unpublished poems, there were many that just simply weren’t Simmerman at his best. In general, his shorter poems seemed less developed. They were clever, sharp, but didn’t contain the depth, the power and complexity of his longer, later poems. After his death, I gathered up those poems and manuscripts, but I didn’t exactly have the courage to open them up and read them critically. A few years went by and with that distance, I pulled the handwritten notes back out and the poems that came with them. I found some gorgeous poems. I found some poems that weren’t much more than notes. To help me in making these cuts, I tapped one of Simmerman’s former students and the director of Creative Writing program at the University of Nebraska Omaha, the talented poet Miles Waggener. Deciding what to keep and what to leave proved an invaluable way to hear Simmerman’s work at its best.

The fourth beat: The Dance. From an Association of Writers & Writing Programs conference years ago, Simmerman picked up a yellow button that read “Fuck Art. Let’s Dance.” He kept it pinned to a bulletin board above his desk at work, and in his lighter moments he’d crack a smile and make reference to it. For all his seriousness in approaching the composition of a poem, it was the joy, the playfulness, and the simple love of sound that drove the success of his poems. For all their technical merits, a goofiness, a zaniness danced about in the line; the work of those feet immeasurable and delightful still magically bops along on those beats.

Over the past decade much of Simmerman’s work has gone out of print, on to remainder bins or pulped to make way in the publishers’ storerooms for the books coming next. With the printing of the New and Selected Poems, Sean Carswell and the publishers at Gorsky Press will be working to keep some of Simmerman’s literary legacy alive and available to a next generation of poets to study and from which to learn. Thank you to the editors at Waxwing for reprinting some of Simmerman’s early works where readers can study the precision, rigor, energy, and joy by which Simmerman composes the line.

My old man taught me the four-beat line:

“Straighten up and fly right,” he’d order,

stabbing his forefinger into my chest.

An Air Force sergeant for twenty-three years,

he never flew anything but off the handle.

I can still see his eyes bugging out

like a chow’s, the veins in his neck

like a relief map of a mountain range.

Bullied his entire life by bad luck

and loss, hasty marriage, a child

he claims was three months premature,

he tried to bully respect from me.

“Pardon my French,” he’d quip, farting,

his hairy belly slopping over a pair

of plaid Bermudas, the crotch ripped.

I remember him squatting in the yard

like a toad to catch the sizzling curves

I fancied I pitched. He threw them back

like a girl. And I remember the pitch

of the fast-talking carny who took

my old man, before wife and kids,

for a month’s pay. He marched us home

in silence, shut himself in the bathroom.

We heard water running for hours.

“Do as I say, not as I do,” he advised.

I did neither. Once, I was sentenced to

comb the yard of rocks, a hundred a day,

for a year. They got so sparse, finally,

I had to steal them from the neighbors.

I was decorated most of my childhood

with the bruises left by his “love taps.”

I was double-fisted in the back of

the neck for arguing with my mother.

My old man stammered himself into rage —

that's when his hands got articulate.

He could hand-tool a belt in half

an hour flat, knock his firstborn son

unconscious, or watercolor a seascape.

At seventeen, my old man overseas, I

ran away. Shivering beneath an interstate

in Albany, afraid to sleep, I tried to

assemble the little I knew of his life

before me. The runt of a litter of six;

born in St. Louis the day his mother

died. His father never forgave him that

and palmed him off on his married sisters.

He was passed between them as casually

as a salt cellar — “A millstone and a trial.”

Then, a soldier. World War II arrived

before his first whisker, and what he did,

was done to him, in the Pacific “theater”

is a bedtime story he refused to tell.

“I made a mistake,” I stammered into the cold

receiver of the pay phone. “I want to come

home.” In the long silence that followed,

I remembered sitting at the kitchen table

with my old man the day I demanded he

send me away to school. “Why?” he asked.

“Because,” and I said it right out loud,

“I hate you.” In the next five years

he didn't hit me, didn't touch me. We

coexisted like two bricks in the same wall.

When he left for Guam to load bombs, I

wouldn't even wish him luck … Though now

I remember the touch of something closer.

It was my old man's voice. “Come home.”

And what can I tell you, old man, turned

out on a pension of high blood pressure

and migraines, your family scattered,

the last ten years faded out like the

smoke tail from a jet? This morning,

for the umpteenth time, I listened

to your dream: to pass the last years

painting sunrises from a tramp steamer,

to watch the swells converge in distance,

to live the past as it might have been.

And so I go again among the small things —

the hackneyed words, the gestures, the brush

of a hand — which I must trust were stabs

at love. Good luck, old man. Bonne chance.

Someone drove a two-by-four

through the heart of this hard land

that even in a good year

will notch a plow blade worthless,

snap the head off a shovel,

or bow a stubborn back.

He’d have had to steal

the wood from a local mill

or steal, by starlight, across

his landlord’s farm, to worry

a fencepost out of its well

and lug it the three miles home.

He’d have had to leave his wife

asleep on a cornshuck mat,

leave his broken brogans

by the stove, to slip outside,

lullaby soft, with the child

bundled in a burlap sack.

What a thing to have to do

on a cold night in December,

1936, alone

but for a raspy wind

and the red, rock-ridden dirt

things come down to in the end.

Whoever it was pounded

this shabby half-cross

into the ground must have toiled

all night to root it so:

five feet buried with the child

for the foot of it that shows.

And as there are no words

carved here, it’s likely that

the man was illiterate,

or addled with fatigue,

or wrenched simple-minded

by the one simple fact.

Or else the unscored lumber

driven deep into the land

and the hump of busted rock

spoke too plainly of his grief —

forty years laid by and still

there are no words for this.

Maybe it’s different

with you. How I grew up

there was always some kid

bigger than me, some lug,

some stupe, some Ronnie Boone

with fuzz over his lip

and those muscles you get

squeezing tennis balls,

skulking on the playground

before homeroom or glued

behind some tree somewhere

I have to pass alone

and — boom — he’s on my chest

like a stump, slapping me

daffy, his knees gouging

gopher holes in my arms

as he croons take it back,

so soft and close and sweet

he could be telling me

a secret or kissing me

on the mouth, take it back

if you know what's good for you.

Some things I did I didn’t

take back. I could

say one, embarrass us

all for a time. Then you

could take your turn, then

somebody else, until

the bullies inside us

get bored and go home;

till we’re each of us smack

on his back by himself

in the same stupid life,

and we do it again —

the whole thing pathetic

as a push-and-go-round

where I stick to my guns,

and stew, and spin — the same

tune repeating itself,

the same verse, the opus

of Ronnie Boone: take it

back, take it back if

you know what’s good for you.

Which I don’t though I do.

What we wondered as kids about the light

in the icebox we’re wondering now

about love. The apple digesting itself

in the pantry. The corpse in need

of a shave. All that goes on when no one’s

around to see it or say what it means.

All the king’s horses dead on their feet,

the fastidious glue of dreams. Last night,

tucked away in our separate beds, did we

fall out of love into sleep? Did the stars

boil down to a soupy incandescence?

Did the moon rot away like rancid meat?

Romance is a perishable gourmet

gyp, like those dyed flakes of fish face

fobbed-off as crab. If the public job of blood

is to bleed, its private job is to scab.

I am from fine china teapots sitting in the china cabinet, full of lost teeth and the victims of first haircuts.

From old, broken gas lamps in the backyard and loose, rotting railroad ties in the front.

I am from wood-burning stoves, dusty picture frames sleeping on the mantle, and my father’s anger.

I am from late nights in my car, broken recliners in backyards, and sleepy smiles early before the sun wakes up.

I always heard, “He doesn’t really mean it, he still loves you,” and “Trust in God with all your heart, for He will sustain you.”

Now, I hear, “You don’t need them in your life,” and “Family is who you choose, not who you are born to.”

I am from late nights of screaming and crying and fighting, days of exhaustion, and pawned wedding rings.

I am from nights of thinking, parties on Friday nights, and headaches on Saturday morning.

I am from the smell of Stouffer’s lasagna in the microwave and cherry Kool-Aid.

I am from the smell of bonfires and cigarettes.

I know the taste of rice and beans and pancakes for dinner because they were the only things we could afford.

I know the taste of cheap beer on the weekends and chocolate milk every night just because it makes me happy.

I am from broken light switch covers and bruises.

I am from kind awakenings by tiny, soft fingers and a little button nose.

Somewhere they tell a woman to accept tragedy with grace

Somewhere a horse falls into a burning trench

The body of the horse does not understand

The body of the woman will not bend

The night falls into her ungentle

Off her bones the night is falling him

She rides the ghosts of all horses fallen

She ghosts the fallen horse all night

The first painting on the walls of a cave was a horse

Over a horse the first war

He was seized from the sky

Taken from the moon’s dark side

Weighed down with bones and revenge

The body of the horse does not understand

Somewhere a fallen horse drinks the blood of a woman

With blood under their eyes they incant their fallen

She will die the next of kin all the horses in the sky

She will die again and again

All the men in the earth rise up from the dead

From their graves they unearth the trenches

But from grave to grace horse and woman will not consent

They scatter the bones on the moon’s dark side

Somewhere the horses in the sky rein down

Somewhere in the cave of her horse falling

Bury this last woman alive


I’m never looking right when the first snow falls.

My view outside the window is broken by the fire escape.

Like most it looks rusted, painted over too many times.

This is how I must look inside.

In the hospital they have to use the smallest needles.

My veins are narrow, closed, won’t let them drink

And I’m punctured so many times, I pass out.

I’ve come to faint days before I know blood will be drawn.

Listening to her read her poems on SoundCloud

Calms me when I hear the sleet, the whipping

Of time petrified on sheetrock as I’m collapsing

Into vessels they can’t find yet

Again. She is the most beautiful woman in the world.

I'm envious of people who learn of her

For the first time. If there’s no more originality,

Only riff

And mutation, then that is the one thing

You’ll wish

You could do again. Do you too miss

The storms that snowed you in

And there was nothing you could do

But fear the end? Those days too

We think are gone. We shouldn’t.

If only I could say I slept. I’ve forgotten

Just when I wasn’t in hospital beds and never

Counting to ten, the nurses unknowing

The grace of it all

As they stroke my head: She’s gone out again.

If only I’d gone somewhere.

If only this was to board a ship

Under the grace of her night

Which brings to life

Those things on a flat world

Of black and white.

At lunch my mind turns to the volcano

newly erupting in Iceland, ranched iceberg

lettuce turning on my plate. Does Cerberus’

better head peak from the ground? A scorpion

tail of smoke pinches the sky from Scotch

coasts to Norse bungalows. Ask the sphinx

a question and you’ll get a riddle. The sphinx

is useless. Ask the internet and the volcano

is Satan’s broken tooth, end times. Scotch

whiskey and I’m ok, it’s only lunch, iceberg

lettuce and dressing and steak. The scorpion

of myth rides the fox across the river. Cerberus

of myth is an unhappy guard, heated. Our Cerberus

is the three heads of doubt — extinction, a sphinx

whose ribs house our feet — futility, the scorpion

riding us across the molten moat — and this volcano.

Come on, death. Come on, massive horizon iceberg

we see coming for decades. I nibble greens, sip scotch,

enjoy the little flames that burst forth. I’m not a scotch

guy, I prefer bourbon, but in a pinch, who asks Cerberus

for special service, a belly rub, to play dead. Iceberg

Alley runs through Iceland, the hot breath of our sphinx

slewing white islands from the north. The volcano

stops air traffic, Europe is isolated. Once, a scorpion

startled me in a cabin, small, black, dying. The scorpion

was highly toxic, but it barely moved. I scotch

taped it to a notebook to show my lover, a volcano

is always erupting on this globe, in our cerebrum,

a fight about danger. But don’t we drive? The sphinx

asked about life, we crawl and stoop, icebergs

on a sea, but the riddle was tough, the iceberg

does not perceive the ship, as the scorpion

does not perceive the sting. Something stinks

around the diner, a dozen televisions, scotch

on the menu for lunch? The hot breath of Cerberus

a little much, the virgins tossed into the volcano,

and when the sphinx asks the riddle will we scoff?

Will we live on scorpion meat and Cerberus’

bark or will iceberg lettuce get us through our lonely lunch?

Pillars rising from the sheets, tongues

unraveling from difficult words and the terror of the day. The clock

says nobody is awake in any

                     time zone, not any place we know. The room a mouth

steeped in hot breath. Come here,

          I have important things to brush past your cheek, I have

                                                                     a melody you haven’t heard

before. Tympanic, yes, and the rhythm

is steady and measured. Festivals have been sprouting

up celebrating the nationalities

                     we admire, the ones we don’t consider dangerous. I’m

          dangerous, give me a chance. The clock

                                is wrong, somewhere somebody

is waking

                     up and getting ready to do something hard,

          say something difficult. The timpani rolls but does not

crescendo. We’ve got weapons we use as instruments, cannons in the big

pushes. That bombast’s for a different night,

these are things that could make another human

                     furious. Saving the big volume, whatever pushes,

          whatever pulls. Millions

                                                      spent on festivals. The room here

is broken

                     apart from that, disembodied, twirling

in the ether. I’m drunk, aren’t you curious

          for a bit of anger and claws? We read that gene splicers

          have created a minotaur, but

it doesn’t last long, only minutes, not  enough time to be used in perfect force.

I used to collect my uncle’s skin

in a cardboard box on the nightstand

after he came home cast in red.

I used to cover him in wet towels, and bring

him freshly peeled clementines

he could eat laying on his stomach.

He told me that the Greeks mixed sand

and oil for sun block, but the sun is different

now, immune to ancient ways.

He said the mixture formed an extra skin

that only sheds when mixed with sweat.

The Greeks would save

these drops and bottle them

as Galois, sell them in the market

as a remedy. If they could heal and block

the sun, how did they help the ocean

when it boiled or the skin, scarred

by that water? Once his burn healed,

I used my nails to trail his back, leaving

white roads in red dirt flesh where

skin could follow. The paths puffed up

transparent. Slow. I peeled them. Slow.

As not to break already broken skin.

I folded them. Slow. Broad shreds,

long and cleaved like an animal’s

raw hide, confined to cardboard

on my nightstand. When the box

was full, my uncle dozed off.

Pink flesh hemmed in dry creases formed

continents on both sides of his spine.

My fingers swam to the Greece of his back.

They were safe there from outdoor light.

I reached for the box to help my uncle heal.

Flakes of skin flew to land and water

like blind seagulls, but the pink flesh

stayed sore and bright and rare.

As he slept, the flakes fell to either side of him

and the carved out shapes they left behind

no longer look like countries.

hair     is flowing ice     is streams

from mouth           is leaving     roots

in another is    a frosted lake full

of dopamine     is dappled birch

is branches breaking     through translucent

skin is veins     rising into rivers     are spit

slaver saliva           serotonin is water

is raining           flesh

into flesh is taste           and all

that can’t be           tasted           is that

tongue      of yours     a tinge

metal     and an open flame     is

a splinter     is the smell

of pine and ironwood   silvering

is a sliver     is passing     a secret

between strangers     or

a handshake     is lips and teeth

is pressure             is an iron      lung is love

in the absent space     between

bodies are the pull and tangle     are

your fingers     are oxytocin     serpent vines

are the knot         my hair cinches         netting

around the heart    is a noose

In the open field, all men talk at once

about guilt. This is a historical feud.

The man with a white tilt slit my

uncle’s throat for singing boleros outside

an open window. Down in the Barrio de

España, the draft, his voice once alto

with the moon. One man two man

that man four. Sons leave their father’s

home. Jealousy is a puncture wound

stretched into a smile. No more sons.

That was the year the flood took all

the women’s clothes. The washing rocks,

the tall grass where Balvina learned

the skip of stones —

                   Hello railroad smoke

                   Dancing through the open window.

                   Open border cross.

1.

We inched our way into cold water.

Up to our waists with fleeting moments.

I wanted to count before diving in

but she jumped before a number

took shape on my tongue.

At the sight of her absence,

my body inching,

making cold and myself disappear.

I am used to the disappearing.

2.

Letters strung by the current

pushed silence instead of sentences.

I wanted to say something evocative

like, “Look at that tree,

how its branches form the shape of a hand.”

3.

We forgot to skip stones.

As a boy I learned to let go

when the wrist flicks.

Many ripples went missing.

I counted each time the river stone

rose and fell.

4.

This hour the river shoves.

This hour the pregnant river spills us.

This hour the river’s mouth is full of vomit.

Marooned on the bank.

We, the versions of ourselves

we hide from each other.

5.

Your body is the needlepoint.

The river: the record.

The music of fragile holdings.

You have given me your back.

The current is steady grooves of wax

trickling around your waist.

An inaudible lyric.

6.

In the idle river of salt

we have kept monsoon catalogues.

One dry calendar crossed.

This day in ink.

By sunset there is a question

rising from the water’s lip.

The presence of a punched tongue.

Say the water’s mirror.

Say dedo and lunar.

Point toward the mole on my middle finger,

the one on yours.

Say fuck

then you and mean it.

Swift and far beneath the air, an electron

embodies presence and haste. This leaping

          lepton — a hurricane can’t keep pace — is never

          still: pin it down, lose it entirely.

          To know it is careening is to become unsituated:

the clocked electron resides anywhere.

I would have told you about metal blades,

          tiny turbines in gas-filled glass tubes — its discovery —

          but I’ve been distracted by the return stroke of lightning,

          the speed of light in a diamond, darting

faster than voltage can caper across vitreous tubes.

Imagine shadows of cathode rays moving in perfect straight

          lines across the glass. These same rays’ shadows

          bend in the presence of a magnet.

          A century of arcs and curves,

torn swirls and swept tracings bending around, shooting

across, looping around again, paths warping in fields.

          An electron on display in school — Styrofoam

          planet, held by cosmic toothpicks, central

          sun-nucleus of protons, neutrons. Skip

across scales: mammoth, mini. Never mind childhood models,

electrons are more like clouds. Suspend oil drops,

          time their earthly fall — pit gravity against electricity —

          find the electron’s mass. Millikan swore

          he had seen it, he could count negative charge

as easily as fingers and toes. The electron’s charge exactly

opposite the proton, yet tiniest fraction

          of the proton’s size and mass. Those trails will tell you

          almost anything. Though we cannot paint an electron

          red let us see it bare: reserved as its contours, saying nothing.

when only birds toll the hour

and barely a hint of our star tints the sky,

I stir breathless and warm,

too foggy to know the cause. asthma maybe,

anxiety my little incubus, or just an arm

resting at my neck. if ever this gasping were enough

to kill, I pray not to wake. death can’t be so bad

without the presence of the dying.

fingers wrapped about my inhaler, I squeeze the trigger once,

twice. life’s breath forced from the chilled rigid mouth

down into the canals of my throat.

how much easier to take a life than to call it back.

at sunrise I wake to nine dead in an AME church.

were I a poet who spoke with the sun

I’d have only curses, why wake me,

why wake me for this.

sundays you whisk barefoot about the kitchen

fingertips gritty with fish fry

the cornmeal batter leaving itself

powdering the hips of your corduroys, your cheeks

blending with your hairline’s sweat.

cloaked like this, in the lazy kitchen heat

you feel most like Momma

guiding the flimsy fillets into the dancing grease

the meat of her fingers almost kissing

its surface — sometimes you even sing like Mo

your mercy lords lying over the humming oil

like hoodoo like blessing like some old rite

of passage. truly it was that first time

when you wanted home

fried fish more than you feared a blistering anointing.

when you decided not to wait on Momma or Mo

but to make a home of your body

the one you carry a little more like Momma

everyday. your feet turned out and bare

hips sauntering like a woman made from the heat

culled from the best of the fat spilling over into fire.

Such patience eludes me — to ease these beaten

whites beneath the denser substance

until the denser grows airy. Part with care, scoop

under, quarter turn of the bowl — grows airy

and rises. In a respite between freezes,

branches in the yard chandelier with rain.

Grandmother baked this cake each Easter

and on certain birthdays. Bloodlines are

mysteries. Her measuring cups surround me

in mute halos of flour. The thin, white sheet

where she’s scripted this recipe bears

no hidden message when lifted to the light:

only two prints at a corner where she touched it

once with a buttered thumb and forefinger. She wore

silk-collared dresses, and sometimes mink, lustrous

atop her skin’s bluish petals. What stories did she

tell herself about herself while she leveled

each measuring cup with a knife, sugar cascading

back into its bowl, flour settling through its own

rising cloud? By bloodlines I mean all of it —

the curve of a little finger, anger — blood

ties and likenesses. With child in San Francisco,

she’d watch drifts of fog haul across the bay until

her window went blank. If she planned escape then,

no one knew. Grandfather wanted everything

crisp, even his briefs. She’d press these weekly

and fold them in exact triangles that slept

beneath his stainless undershirts. Alchemical

what’s twined into DNA — not that gold

results. We never spoke candidly; what she wanted

from life is anyone’s guess. She had no garden

but cultivated a calm disposition, the shining

straight pins she’d drive through the borders

of dress patterns. The only time she fled,

mother was a child. Grandfather took a butcher

knife to kill the neighbor. “He would’ve

too,” mother said, “if we hadn’t gone back”:

Grandmother with her one suitcase. Mysteries

and toxins — “blood ties,” or, once “blood

threads.” Because they bind? She slept

in grandfather’s bed and baked a cake

each Easter for his forty remaining

years. He was not a religious man

but believed in ceremony. An ashtray

on the counter filled nightly. Grandmother

would bear it out before bedtime — ash

fragments clinging to her hands — to empty

at the base of the oleander: forbidden

shrub, of whose properties my mother,

and every child she knew, had been

warned at least a hundred times.

this week, goes the one

commentator. The market

falling in on itself:

a face without bones.

The kitchen radio’s dusted with flour

or dust. It belonged

to my grandfather — a functional

radio, it doubles as clock.

Was existence always such a flimsy thing?

I ask my mother later, on the phone.

My grandfather slept on newspapers

under the bridge sometimes.

My grandfather feared

influenza, insects, losing face.

When I can’t sleep, I think of him

in the past, in the cold.

Window where a radiator seethes.

TVs stream into our boredom
at the airport. I’m watching and the anchor

calls it dismal pie: the jobless lined up —

their dark jackets, pumps, crisp

shirts so correct and out-of-place —

beyond the community gymnasium. A man

sobs into his cell phone.

Arc of the sprinkler

wetting a long lawn.

Three sparrows perch on the TV screen’s rim

here in the terminal. Those birds. How did they get in?

Did they enter through a disconnected

air bridge, flock fountaining outward?

Open, bright, air-

conditioned. Glass ceiling. The scissoring wings.

My grandfather wanted smooth paving

where the oleanders once thrived.

Now that’s a clean yard, he’d say.

I was a child, and newscasts

left no impression but the timbre of voices

beneath Mother’s knife, chopping onions.

I finger the satin

print where, years ago,

doctors cut a cyst away. It’s only

a small lump, I’d thought

at the time, but nurses came for weeks

to fill the closing hole with gauze:

I never once looked, afraid of that

cavity’s depth, the pocket

my own body had concealed.

My grandfather squeezed

the snapdragon’s fluted throat

to make it speak.

If I don’t shop here,

someone else will, I reason.

It eases my conscience. Not unlike

the developer on yesterday’s news:

Why build new subdivisions now?

The abandoned ones,

he said, are outdated. Otherwise,

we lose buyers. Hedging out

competition is what we have to do.

In the desert, a grid of empty,

identical homes, lawns gone to scrub.

A moon appears

over the strict line of streetlamps, almost

transparent, useless as a pressed coin.

A foreclosed home stays boarded up

for years sometimes, but first,

says the assessor, I take an inventory: wrecked

sofa, lace curtains, refrigerator, shoes.

My grandfather lost his retirement

at the races one afternoon. Those sums

galloping off in a cloud of dust. He had immense

faith in his own luck, the next big winner

he’d put his money on, while every bet

ran through his fingers like cupped sugar.

We have ways of reckoning

finitude. I spent my vacation. He saved

himself time. The cost of civilian lives rises

daily. The price we pay.

When I moved to Phoenix

the city was spacious and burning

with light. My loneliness would

interpose itself after dinner

between the wall

and dimming window.

I’d drive anywhere and be

idling in a strip mall’s nimbus.

Other shoppers and I — we were in this

together. It was good. I was always

approved, with a swipe.

My grandfather loved the bright

peony in my grandmother’s black hat

the day they met. If it weren’t for that peony

I might not be here.

In my family, the past was found out,

never recounted: her first husband’s insanity,

the things my grandfather did to her —

My grandmother’s mind

closed in, eventually, a draw-string bag

whose dark, satin lining held

a panoply of stories we’d never heard. Brittle

photographs surface in my mother’s house,

illustrations of a stranger’s life.

My door’s always open, except

when it’s closed.

I stood in the shadow of rising

condos when that old friend proposed.

Tower that might climb forever,

cranes, scaffolds. Two years later

he’s gone. The tower remains,

interrupted, bankrupt. Half of the rooms

are glassed in. Half gape into air.

The man who bankrolled the tower

had thought to make a killing. Instead,

he dove from the upper floor

late one night — or shot himself? (Rumors

are all we know).

The roads unroll like receipts — connecting

shopping cluster to subdivision,

the valley floor thickening with concrete

and plots of unnatural green—and run on,

unconcluded, in lines that buckle with heat.

My grandfather and his cousin

tussled with an axe once

on the front steps. Grandmother found them

swiping and lunging, both too drunk —

what luck — to strike their mark.

Somewhere in Jerusalem, a tree continues to grow.

The seas give up plans to turn blood-red and merely wave invitingly toward shore.

The locusts, then, are never born.

The weatherman tells us to plan a beautiful weekend for hiking.

Someone later sees four horsemen in a small-town tavern drinking beer, too drunk to speak.

Four horses parked outside, still as a broken carousel.

The omen no one saw gives up and goes back home, heats up a TV dinner, and sulks.

The grasses break their fever and can’t bring themselves to burn.

The earth suppresses a dangerous quake with a little Pepcid AC and some ice cream.

Those who had planned to be raptured instead attend that evening’s PTA meeting.

Jesus lets his hair grow long and tries to get the band back together.

Bellybuttons vanish.

In Los Angeles, clouds of smog tease themselves apart like cotton, letting sunlight through.

The Oscars will be held as previously planned.

A crafty dermatologist lances the last boil, and the boil-afflicted take to the streets to dance.

The lepers gather up their extremities and buy up all the units in a foreclosed co-op.

The babies once bound for limbo release their bowels and sing.

Scheherazade was half an engineer —

the whole point of those stories is not to end.

Engineers like up, smooth, solid, stay.

Barefoot in breechclouts, they sling thin lines across

ignorance, tie on heavier cables hauled

across the gap by other anonymous arms.

On civilization’s table Engineering

isn’t the ice sculpture shining where it rises

between the bowls of roses — it’s the table.

Stories want friction, want splinter, want fast, want crash.

Stories need sand in the engine, a crack in the brace.

The point of a movie rope bridge is to fall.

Engineers change genius into thing

in incremental, undramatic steps.

Not many stories about engineers

whose questions changed our hands, which changed our brains,

deeper-pleated them, rewiring their circuits.

Engineers may be humanity’s thumbs.

Or maybe they’re the bridge itself, always linking

the current world to the new possible.

Defying gravity like tightrope walkers

they deflect pressure down the sides of arches,

out around barrel vaults, groin vaults, outward through

buttresses that fly like petrified lace.

They toss steel into the sky where against the sun

on a cable strung between two towers

you can just make out a dancing man.

All over the dome they cling to cheer on Tesla

       tossing balls of flickering light, and here,

dragging Patent, his club, comes Edison.

       No one notices the dwarf riding his back

because at a lumbering run he takes a swipe

       at nimble Nickolai who bungees up

out of danger, dove wings fluttering.

The betting’s heavy, safe money on the giant,

       but some engineers have a lurking fondness

for sparkle over plod. As for the kids,

       well, Tesla was a genius, right? And failed,

so when they fail, that makes them geniuses!

       And who doesn't love a mad scientist?

Besides, check your folklore. Giants never win.

But something's wrong. The lights are fading out

       inside those balls, though Tesla’s juggling faster,

and there’s a growing smell of overheating.

       Just as the last light dies there’s movement from

the giant’s rider and a lightning bolt

       whiteblinds and deafens us

                                       and Tesla’s gone.

The generators hum, a warm light grows

       and we see Steinmetz directing Edison,

Steinmetz of the cigar, the beard, the smile

       who, unlike Tesla, knew how to make things work.

The evening’s going better than you’d think.

       Two beards, two blondes, and now Thoreau performs

his bar trick, reaching into the bin of pencils

       the waiter rolls over for this moment, pulling out

a perfect dozen every time. Applause.

And Clare and Evita one-up each other

       with stories of their corpses. “Incorrupt”

(Clare rolls her eyes) after 600 years,

       demoted to “just the bones,” downgraded again

but! — she raises a finger — still on display!

       Evita tops her with post-embalming stories,

which escalate through kidnapping, attic hideaways,

       counter-kidnapping, standing propped behind

movie screens till kidnapped once again ...

       Clare weeps with laughter. Even Henry smiles.

No excessive reverence for the body here.

The evening didn’t start so well, of course.

       Three Catholics, three ascetics, three celibates,

two saints, one nominee, one Protestant.

       But no one in history ever hated Francis,

who gets Henry talking about animals and plants.

       And really, with allowance for centuries,

Henry and Francis dress a lot alike.

Granted, Henry and Evita don’t click, and she felt

       a little diffident with Clare, given, well ...

But Clare asks with transparent admiration

       about Evita’s projects with the poor

and Francis, with his elbows on the table

       is nodding in recognition as Thoreau

describes pursuing that loon all over Walden

       in his canoe, only to hear it surface

elsewhere, laughing in the starlit dark.

1.

The exactness of the situation. There was or was not a cemetery nearby. The cruiser’s dashcam along the borders of her lowered windows. Motion detected.

2.

She: distributing herself along the bottomlands, highway guarded by trees too thin to be human. A row of telephone poles there and perhaps opposite too.

3.

The trooper’s wound-up machinery digging in her half-moon scars. Witness long horizon and eruptions of deciduous ash, toothy hand of the day recording all accurately but not precisely.

4.

Highway 1098. To turn left or right or around, to pull over, to exit, stay seated, or stand up.

5.

There was or was not a street sign, maybe in the grip of the sky’s alternating green clouds of samara and sun. A short highway fence for someone’s safety.

6.

Spark. Blink. Perhaps she blinked. Perhaps also attempted, did not attempt.

7.

Oversized pick-up trucks roaming without reason. The magnetic eraser of prairie light. To face this feral landscape with only her self.

8.

The loose cluster of the state always editing. The crucial event: a low swinging wind with its video cut.

9.

She: slipping under and beyond the event. With the lit cigarette of her body, refusing to be made into a nothing.

10.

The trooper’s hat, perched low like a dry bloom.

11.

For a traffic signal. Thank you. Thank you for recording.

Here among the chrysanthemums

waiting for disembarkment

we are frayed flags

My folding body touches its peaks

Star lodged in the loose skinned sky

From within, the imperfect and

the not yet perfected

I become a starling

falling burning from the tree

Guts lined with startled

Home tumbles and

yet the walls keep rising

Are you still made

of the fear of heaven

Where is the way back

to your mother’s cup of tea

Brighter sun —

we cast thin shadows

that doubt themselves

Behind us

flowers no longer

bend beneath our palms

My home in every space

between things

but not the things themselves

In the name of heaven

I tack on metal wings and

become gratitude

Cleave to the borrowed

The star was dying, but I bought it anyway from the shop that sold used things. For days it flickered on my bookshelf. Every night when the sun set, it would groan. Some nights it sobbed. The sound was muffled, like the star was politely hiding its head under a pillow. I liked its light, which changed from yellow to pink on my bedroom walls, but its whimpers and hiccups entered my dreams. Each morning I woke groggy with sadness. I couldn’t push the star back into the sky because it had grown heavier as its light dimmed. My brother could have it if he could take it away. Together we rolled it out the window and into the flowerbed, where it landed near the rhododendrons. It made a soft sound like air rushing out the valve of a bicycle tire. For weeks, the star glimmered down there, silent. Winter came and my parents locked my window. I hardly thought of the star covered in snow. When I slept, I dreamed it had begun to whisper urgently, and I wanted to hear what it might say.

If every local mermaid
cut her slick and heavy salt-scented hair. If we dragged our toes through sunrise’s sinewy mess. If we offered the angelfish our dried-out paintbrushes and skeins of grandmother’s yarn. If we threw an underwater dinner party, ribbons of lily roots swaying over our shoulders, and served cavatappi and fusilli rigati. If we tossed New Year’s confetti to electric eels while above us blurry waterbugs skittered and glowed. If we swam into that unbrushable tangle to the bell and the spine. If the skull were made of light.

could you, would you still have chosen.

not that world, or all possible, but this —

pockmarked, peacock agate’s eye.

dear, I say, solder sings it true.

said God: not everything’s stained or glass.

— isn’t a moth always wending, always toward.

(if no light in the world but the)

later, litany’s morning, noon, night, wilderness I believe in.

earthshine’s wafer & wine.

I think — that there — is light.

[a word for sadness that dwells in the small of the back]

stuck in the moonstruck knot of my lower lumbar.

behold how much wood is kindled —

hard-pressed to diamond but, more likely, coal.

by how small a fire —

whenever, acrid, Mercury’s retrograde aftertaste drips down the back of the throat.

and the tongue is a fire —

not by bread’s breaking of.

malum the fruit, but not an apple.

— shriveled figs look like I don’t know what —

hearts can be eaten, but not alone.

[there's the angel of silence, and the body of the one I love best]
when the one’s silver streaks.

(no te amo como si fueras)

chaplets for imaginary saints snap.

(not salt, not rose, not topaz)

less than a year, okay an hour [of light] away from.

(claveles que propagan el fuego)

cinnamon skin you lay me down beside.

(not in secret but between shadow & soul)

sterling doesn’t whisper, can’t, passes through.

(sin saber cómo, ni cuándo, ni de dónde)

tongue who trued me, someone’s speaking them.

(where eye is not, nor yew)

there’s an unseen blue behind every.

(tu mano sobre mi pecho es)

your clavicle a harp of, sweet & of sleep made.

[what desire does not seem]
as of the distance across a sea.

meridians meet ley lines in carnal, I mean cardinal, directions.

not only on the flesh but of, through.

didn’t Paracelsus say the choreography of sky’s sun, moon, & stars corresponds to the stars, moon, & sun orbiting inside the viscera, that other vault, smaller heaven?

blank spaces on maps were sleeping beauties once.

(I’ve known a kiss to wake.)

but not blank or beautiful anymore, the cartographer said—homo sapiens being a fundamentally invasive species — &, what’s more, somnolent.

how the only terra still incognita sleepwalks between brain & mind, neither beginning, neither ending.

as if a gate one can enter, gridlines drawn by a hand that touches to see.

not through any needle’s eye falling blue, nevertheless.

red bird through the human — not eye, but in — beyond.

tremolo, in the gospel desert flower according to Agnes Martin, unbeckoning grass.

white stone, little sister, white flower.

on a clear day where wood, where stone.

“without cause in this world.”

innocence, say, or everyday happiness, even love.

often, untitled, eternity.

The mother is a weapon you load

yourself into, little bullet.

The mother is glass through which

you see, in excruciating detail, yourself.

The mother is landscape.

See how she thinks of a tree

and fills a forest with the repeated thought.

Before the invention of cursive

the mother is manuscript.

The mother is sky.

See how she wears a shawl of starlings,

how she pulls the thrumming around her shoulders.

The mother is a prism.

The mother is a gun.

See how light passes through her.

See how she fires.

I could bury my face in it, the sad sack of a town

with hair that smells like an animal, bury my face

in its dark fur, wrap my arms around its barrel ribcage

and hold on for dear life. It’s wild but it might

let me near it, sad sack of a town, half acre

with tall grass I could bury my face in. I could lie

and listen to it snuffling beside me. For what should I save

my longing? Forget the afterlife, the aftertown:

there is no knowing what happens beyond this

sad animal, this sack of hair. Forget the golden future

beyond future. I want to see all of it here, all of it

through these eyes, in this animal body, while I am still

discernably myself, while my shadow falls

on this sad sack of a town, this dear life.

Life is short, though I keep this from my children.

Life is short, and I’ve shortened mine

in a thousand delicious, ill-advised ways,

a thousand deliciously ill-advised ways

I’ll keep from my children. The world is at least

fifty percent terrible, and that’s a conservative

estimate, though I keep this from my children.

For every bird there is a stone thrown at a bird.

For every loved child, a child broken, bagged,

sunk in a lake. Life is short and the world

is at least half terrible, and for every kind

stranger, there is one who would break you,

though I keep this from my children. I am trying

to sell them the world. Any decent realtor,

walking you through a real shithole, chirps on

about good bones: This place could be beautiful,

right? You could make this place beautiful.

This is not the cupid with bare bum and a quiver of arrows flying high with other putti in the foothills of Mt. Olympus. But a story of the man, grown — fierce as an archangel. This is also the story of a woman who learned lip who learned lava who learned love and lagoon who learned to never fear wheat or wide sky.

The parents were told that unless their maiden daughter Psyche was pushed off the crumbly edge of the tallest mountain on their outskirts of the village, the whole town would suffer famine and disease. This was to be the sacrifice to appease Aphrodite, the jealous mother of Cupid. There was no other way. The surrender must be made. The parents wept and rent their clothes with each of Psyche’s small steps.

Dolomite and quartz pebbles slid from the toes of her sandals — the plunge below was so steep, she could not hear where they landed. With one final look back to her parents and sister, her leg lifted and set down again in a place where there was only air. She bit her lip.

So this is what it means to fall:

          a taste of metal and a rush of feathers in her mouth. Her family ran to her, 
          a sad effort to change her mind, but it was too late. The last sound 
          they heard of Psyche sounded like a sack of heavy fruit 
                                                                                       and something like
                                                                                       a wing?

When Psyche woke up she found herself in a magnificent house. Citrus-smell and each heavy wooden door studded in seashell and coins made of mother-of-pearl. A table piled with honey cakes and bowls and bowls of wet berries. Jams and rolls and sweetmeats and plates of cheese chilling over ice. She ate and ate thinking this was to be her last meal and with a heavy heart full of sorrow over missing her family, she at last climbed up the stairs to bed.

                    Just when the moon and rings of a milk planet sat high and seemed to jump a
                                                      a little in the night sky, she felt a rush of wind —

Perhaps you think this fig

is my heart — shriveled,

cold, filled with black seed.

Today a child looks seaward

to the boats hauling a fine catch

of dogfish. But instead of helping

the fishermen, he kneels,

collects abalone shells in a sack

not for my temple — but to decorate

Psyche’s doorstep. I will send

a frilled shark to snatch him.

I will explain later to the parents.

I tell you this: if you do not whip

knots into her hair, or cover

her toes with weeping blisters

so wet no bandage could sop

the blood — you are not a god

you are not my good son.

All of them collected

in a box with blue ribbon,

like a vein across

her stupid ribcage.

His blocky letters, such

a strange architecture.

What buildings and what

windows make up

this dark village, her heart?

But

there is only one brick,

only one wild(er)ness

that will ever match his —

of jungle and blue skunk

sky. If you try to catch

a butterfly a thousand

filaments of feather

will dissolve into dust

on your finger

and good thumb.

                     Of course when you find a new

& bright beetle without

wings, you’ll get the urge

to pin her to a linen-covered

board. So you do

and you do and you do.

I touched down on the islands in darkness,

the way you first alighted at my door

a decade ago. We were more or less

already broken when my plane arrived,

but my voice could still send you back

to me if I begged enough. And now —

I’ve returned with another man, one foot

already in some other gold and glittered life.

Each fork and knife of coral set before me

at this banquet of dried fish and seaweed

help plump the child already swimming

inside of me. How could I ever consider him

and all his fins another trial? That’s how I knew

there was end to all these punishments:

someone else wrote us a different ending.

You too will find a new love. There will be no

disappearing. And for once, no need for dipped

and deadly arrows in your quiver.

                     Who could have ever imagined

years later you’d dare select a new girl

from this very same cluster of islands?

At your wedding, will she know I was first,

that I was baptized clinging to your waist

underwater? Will she wear sampaugita in her hair?

1.

This was the silken leaf

he said as he twirled a chopstick between his hands,

sliding his palms back and forth against each other.

If she had looked up, the light above the table would have

exploded into rose petals, and she explained this

with a slight nod of her head

but no translator was present.

2.

If one kisses a silk rose,

places it next to a pen

and goes to make coffee,

another person, in another town,

will smooth a tablecloth

and look out of a window at

a blue jay.

3.

The curve of a petal in your hand

curves the sky, as I’ve always

imagined gravity could.

4.

Sunset removes the shadow of

my bouquet from the wall.

Your glass vase glints coral red.

5.

Calyx nesting petals, petals, petals,

heart. A sparrow bumps into the reed screen

and flies away.

6.

Help me with this branch,

she said, holding it with two

fingers between thorns.

He took the twine from her

other hand and tied the rose

where she showed him with

her nod, to the pergola,

so that it arched

over its pond.

You are tall, but I

am Lincoln. I tower over you

                     with my addresses and bolo tie, the worn-out sound

          of my backwoods accent, and my mythic rail-splitting

          backstory.                              Sure, you look fine in flowing

                     maxi-dresses and I’m a depressive,

          but they’re never going to give up one minted cent

          for you. Here. Have two, of mine, my two cents:

Beauty is overrated. In fact, it can act as Satan’s limb.

          It sends emancipation and other five-dollar words blazing

                     through my temple.

                                                      But you wouldn’t understand.

                     Neither would you know how hard it is to drive in Illinois

where all the license plates repeat

                                                      a face like mine

          as they tailgate me and then pass and slow down — I’m cutting myself off

          constantly in the land of me. Revel in your silver

                     spoon, your anonymity, your white-stripped teeth,

                                and moleless neck —

                                                                     Perhaps I should rise above these petty grievances

          and from my own ugliness to my own height, but whether I shall

          ever be better, I cannot tell.

                                                     I awfully forbode I shall not.

The first time it was nightlight, lambent bloom,

the color of a bell. What sound is the shadow

of a man moving behind me? Not click, not

clap, something closer to applause but less

intact. The champagne I drink is a kind of chaos,

boiling cold in the mouth, prelude to oceanblue

blackout. I like life hot and quick, I like to blink

and miss it. His carnivore gaze, those lawless

canine irises (need I even say it?) should have been

red flags. But the tint of my life had brightened

to fluorescence, that wild cast of obliteration.

Morning and twilight burned the same white, both

of us gone feral and sunblind. The last time

it was whirling siren, bloodbath spun with sapphire.

My cobalt face, my blasted alabaster, my ghastly

human scraps. What color is the tongue

of a mother licking back to life her long-dead

cub? Indigo drips of ink spidering a hot glass

of water, surprise vermillion staining the back

of a young girl’s newest dress. Nothing is enough

if you know how much you could have had.

Dear ladder to nowhere, dear Escher sketch

made manifest, thank you for allowing

my broke, hungover body to climb you, an

oblivious ascension, lifting the crescent

of my ass so it doesn’t drag on the floor

like it feels like doing most days, mostly

when the wind carries a crisp apple scent

and in my other life I would have put on

his sweater, cranked the thermostat up

for the first time in the season. Thank you,

Stairmaster, you burned-down house

with only a staircase remaining, for letting me

pretend there are still bedrooms at the top

I can enter, children I need to wake in time

for pancakes. Thank you for making me hotter

in the loneliest way, for your attached screen

on which I watch endless loops of mindless

TV on silent, listening instead to sex-pop

songs with a thick beat, reminding myself

of the task underfoot, believing that if T-Pain

could see me, he’d be into it, maybe

serenade me from the top of the hill

I’ll never reach. Girl it must be a crime

to be as fine as you. Thank you, T-Pain.

Thank you, heavy bass. And thank you, dear,

metal, gaping mouth whose teeth I scale

every day, whose black mechanics are just

what a heartless girl like me needs, you

who agree that the artless progression

toward improved-nudity-viewing is a worthy

pursuit. Dear body, dear ass, dear ever-harder

heart — I owe it all to you, Stairmaster. Don’t

give up on me now. I’m not even close.

In South Dakota or Minnesota, they mistakenly

upgraded us to a suite. We were giddy

with accident, even if the place still reeked

of carpet cleaner and stale humidity. My head

thrown back in the cheap sheets, your head

somewhere between the foot of the bed and me.

We turned out the lights in all three (three!)

rooms and watched porn on your

computer screen: petite blonde begging

for a better grade, pigtails and a prep-school

skirt, only the caesarean scar to give her

away. We laughed that we liked it when

the men left on their socks, when the boom

mic dipped into the scene. In the middle

of the night we went for burgers, so juicy

and affordable they were practically free.

You said you are going to get married

to me and I, mouthful of grease, said

happily, happily. There was no need

to wait, even for morning, so why did we.

If asked, I could not describe the faces

of the ones who danced opposite me,

who tried to make elegies erupt with jabs,

who wished to bust up my face into ghosts.

I listened to what the crowd said, how I needed

to be struck down, taken out,

put in the goddamn ground already.

Said go clean my kitchen.

Said make me rice.

No man loses to a fucking monkey.

Tell these men what I know: the source

of proper form starts from the dirt and I’ve got bones

made of coal. I’m half earth, half fire.

I’m made of teeth and shine. I earned

this space by bringing the night with my hands,

came here with the tide slung over my shoulder.

I’m the one who buried Magellan,

who traded missionaries for knives.

I’ve got each one of Rizal’s bullets,

and I’ve brought them back as fists.

They came with names like Frankie Genaro,

Johnny Buff, and Jimmy Wilde.

These are those half-devil/half-child fists.

These are those 300-years fists.

These are those what-do-you-mean-$20-million fists.

In the end they called out my name: Villa! Villa! Villa!

Maybe I did leave my jaw to rot

for too long, should have taken

the hospital bed when I had the chance.

Didn’t they know I already had a mouth

full of poison? Instead, they said

I left too much to grit and alcohol,

and no man can expect to live like that

for long, but it wasn’t all about living either.

Gratitude arrives with a hole in each hand, with metal

recycled from television sets and car fires.

This is the closest anyone has been

to my bones, shrapnel that makes its own music

as it passes through my body, a country

of volcanos and sugar and kidney failure.

The nails are not enough to sustain me. Devotion suspends

but does not give permission to float.

The Health Department insists on tetanus shots,

that each spike be sterilized before it penetrates, blessings

pulled from a jar of liquor that also purifies.

This is how I was meant to be born: my hair made

from clouds the color of grease and the smoke

I carry everywhere. When they raise me

up, all the incense rises to my lips. I have the best

view of the sky, of the distance prayers

must travel and the dust they leave behind, of the type

of bird that swallows them on their way up.


How can a string instrument whistle or something like a whistle? What if my mouth was full of strings like an instrument? You’d hold my neck so gentle like I’m alive and I am. I’m not going to make a metaphor about how you can “play” me or say anything else about how you might touch me if I were an instrument. I love you. Your name is as familiar as the backs of my hands, so I got it tattooed across my knuckles. I set my hand on top of the symphony program and take a picture of my knuckles and send it to you. The people here are old with combed hair and are nothing like you. You are something else, indeed. I’ve never seen a mandolin in real life until today. The way that guy moves his fingers must please some lover of his. A mandolin and a vagina are different. I’m not assuming he sleeps with women, but I sleep with women, which is why I wrote vagina instead of dick. I’m a proud lesbian. I write about sex a lot because I think about sex a lot, not because I’m having a lot of sex, but because I have sex with you and you live far away and I think about having sex with you when I’m not, which is often. In the program I keep seeing the word allegro. I don’t know what an allegro is but I know what Allegra is. I have some problems and one of them is allergies. I look up allegro when I get home. It’s a measure of tempo, a fast one, 120-168 beats per minute. Here is where I bring our hearts into the poem. I have an allegro heart for you. I have a heart tattoo on my pinky knuckle following your name. Here is where I play you something with my instrument mouth, where my heart earns its keep.

I fold my grief into a bird, admire it, but no matter

how I fold it, how I try to make it into something else,

it still began as grief. It is what it is.

I crumple up my grief and it’s a smooth toss

from kitchen table to trashcan. I throw away what was

once beautiful. The smoothness of your hair

in the amusement park parking lot, of your leg

touching mine before the rollercoaster went up the first hill.

One way to keep something forever is to keep it forever.

My grief is in the trashcan, but still lives here. My grief pays no

rent, comes and goes as it pleases, even when I try to confine it

to here or there. My grief takes and takes and my grief

brings it all back. The smell of pine every December

and I miss you. The perfume I bought you that Christmas

called Unbreakable and I left you. They say if you love something,

set it free. I say if it comes back as everything but itself,

that’s grief, that’s this big old bird. I stick my hand in the trashcan,

refold the thing, open my window. You are a bird, I say.

Get out of my house. The wind is really going.

I put my heart into the bird. It is inevitable

the way we put our hearts into what we make. My grief

is out the window. Come back, I say.

claire, close your eyes. try to see. every woman

you’ve ever loved has been inlaid with scales

& ash. here are the matches. gather some tinder. strike

your teeth until they spark. you can still hear her name

on your tongue, clean as the sound the axe makes, then muffled

like the year between you is a closed door. listen closely. even you

can whittle your selves into something another can use

for heat. claire, be brave. your people will be back

with their stamping & their songs. they will build you

a birthright, then tell you to hold it with all your limbs & veins.

look for the blood beneath the story. when they say land,

reply: history. to tribe: history. to song: behold this symphony

of synapses. every day goes right enough to pin this animal body

to earth a little longer. remember the cat who brought you exquisite gift

of corpse after corpse. you should be so lovely.

one day you will lay down this body & walk off

into the night with only the wind whistling

your human name & a mouthful of language

seeking a mouth

I unwound my tongue into a river &

on the far shore I feel the O of a gun pressed

to my mother’s breast like a baby’s mouth.

When the soldiers came she said all the trees

turned white, leaves ghosting to her lips. A white hand

folds away her tongue like the laundry &

I realize the hand is mine. I see a tree wearing

my face, it is a soldier who will marry me someday,

in his branches a girl is waiting to be sung down. Sundown

the rivers boil & my knees grow into their silence. My

brother drinks my milk with a mouth curdled

like a dying animal. We pray only to the god

that was never meant to save us. Sundown

& my mother complains of blindness, says she can’t

see anything but a man-sized tooth rattling down a road, the

sea sunk in one swallow, the river flooding back to the mouth.

One day she will say her children have joined the sky, she

will rake the clouds for a slim ghost. She will speak of the north,

the Heavenly Horses that sweat blood. The Heavenly Horses

quit the plains long ago, floated away like my face, like

the neighbor boy who tried to kiss a gun & was sealed into

the skyline. When the soldiers knock I open my mouth as

wide as I can, watch myself flush all over, redness

surfacing like another body in the river, faceless flowers,

my mother chews flowers to sweeten her milk,

wishes the shrapnel could sweeten her blood. At night

the bullets navigate us like saltwater fish.

Mother guts a fish in a room without windows,

with her thumb belly-deep she tells me about the

Horses, their lips fish-thick, their front legs trimming

the wind, their tongues jarred like fruit in the lap

of a man whose new wife swallows his crime.

The Heavenly Horses, she says, sweat blood

so that nobody can ever see they are bleeding.

Meet me in the wood means wear your whitest pelt, water it. Water means belly up in some sea, salt mating into sweat. Sweat means don’t let anyone see you like this, don’t let your hands disrobe into fish. Fish means jawless, means your name exists in no mouth, an emptiness you can dress in. Emptiness means light coffined in your bones, a body razed for the sake of cleanliness. Cleanliness means new ways for the body to become dust. Dust means your knees learning each floorboard. Floorboard means mistaken for skin. Skin means bleached by your butcher breath, the teeth-lined sidewalk & its whiteness. Whiteness means tongue coiled in the mouth like a whip, blue bellyache, this violence you’ve learned to call song. Song means father birthing brother. Brother means cutting off hands like roses for a stillwater vase. Vase means light through glass, all bent, motherhood. Mother means exit wound. Wound means temple sweating with sores, a grocery store pregnant with the sea. Sea means spillage. Spillage means someday your obituary will be folded into a boat for someone’s bathtub, someone’s child, you look for your children in the water then the sky, your children teething the stars & unmaking in their white shadows.

Every time a factory is named after me

I lick my fist.

I dream about a girl floating in my arms, about

plucking

a dead bird from her eyes & slipping it into

my mouth

like prayer. I dream about american cars & a

man with a tattoo

of the character for lice. He says it means army

& I say

I want a tattoo of every hand that has ever

touched me.

I want to be always in the way of something:

my father licks

every door he sees, orders a rubber knife for each

thing he eats

that was once alive. He spurts a fish from his lips

& names

her my mother, releases her to the bottom of a sink

where she glows

like teeth in a toilet. Every day

breaks

like China, dust behind the factory glitters

my mouth

into a fish that leaps from the sky & stabs the sea,

faces

spilling like salt into each new wound appearing

& reappearing.

the man told me he was almost dead,

and I believed I was everlasting.

He sent me, graciously, because I asked,

(I was away for the summer and missed his touch),

an unclothed photograph,

standing in front of a curtained window,

the white curtains tied back sweetly,

and a ruffled valance.

His face, weary, sad, his shoulders thin,

thin arms, soft chest and belly,

nothing in the pose to accentuate

anything in himself but who he was.

There is nothing in him of pornography.

I have never, myself, been capable

of such a photograph.

He sometimes spends the day in bed,

worried it’s too late for him, and therefore, us.

Of course it is too late for us.

I feel stupid denying it.

To love a man is to love a corpse.

To love me is to love a cadaver,

curled up in its bed, hands folded

under its chin like a sleeping child,

naked, unguarded, my lips slack and blue,

my breasts and belly soft as his eyes

in this photograph

in which he shows himself to me.

I can see it, I swear, the conifers

and fat bees, ferns like church fans

and then the sea, its flatness

as if pressed by stones

like witches were, the dark

sand ridged by tides, strewn

with body parts, claws, the stranded

mesoglea of the moon jellyfish,

transparent blob, brainless,

enlightened in its clarity. I stand there,

I walk the shore at low tide,

the sky fearless, not open to me, just

open, there it is, the wind, cold,

surf’s boom drowning out thought,

I can photograph it, I can name it

beautiful, but feel it, I don’t know

that I am feeling it, when I drown

in it, maybe then.

Press a foot into this beach and blood
will ooze up instead of salt

water. If there are poems

let them come in sick

waves like pushing contractions

for a birth I did not have

the strength to finish.

Cut me, cut me! They cut me

stem to stern and out

came a little drug addict.

Do you know the houses

here are built from shipwrecks?

That the non-denominationals

host a vespers service in a chapel

whose weekly whitewashing

will not staunch the bleeding

of the wood? The mad

reversals: fawns are carnivores,

coyotes whine for edible

flowers. Each morning glory

a tsunami siren. Cut me!

The ocean too is red though

it thought it was exempt.


That all at its essence is dove-gray.

Wipe the lipstick off the mouth of anything and there you will find dove-gray.

With my thumb I have smudged away the sky’s blue, and the water’s blue,

and found, when I kicked it with my shoe, even the sand at its essence is pelican-gray.

I am remembering Eden.

How everything swaggered with color.

How the hollyhocks finished each other’s sentences.

How I missed predatory animals and worrying about being eaten.

How I missed being eaten.

How the ocean and the continent are essentially love on a terrible mission to meet up with itself.

How even with the surface roiling, the depths are calmly nursing away at love.

That look the late nurser gets in its eyes as it sucks: a habitual, complacent peace.

How to mother that peace, to wean it, is a terrible career.

And to smudge beauty is to discover ugliness.

And to smudge ugliness is to be knocked back by splendor.

How every apple is the poison apple.

How rosy the skin. How sweet the flesh.

How to suck the apple’s poison is the one true meal, the invocation and the Last Supper.

How stillness nests at the base of wind’s spine.

How even gravestones buckle and swell with the tides.

And coffins are little wayward ships making their way toward love’s other shore.

If you stroke the cheek you touch the skull.

I learned this early, but you’ve heard

those stories. Heard them

all the way from Michigan to Smoky

Mountain National Park, where we slept

on the cold, hard ground,

all the way from Michigan to Long’s Peak

in Colorado, where K-Mart

sleeping bags couldn’t stand up to the cold

so we heated rocks on the campfire

and embraced them all night like paramours.

We were so far up and so cold

we didn’t even know Nixon resigned.

In the Smokies I met a park ranger

from down around that way. He took me

up a thousand stairs to a fire tower

that swayed over the landscape like …

well, it swayed like itself, like only a fire

tower can sway on its spindle-legs,

in the wind, and while it swayed

the ranger told me about locating a lost

boy scout who’d frozen to death in the cold

and when the kid pulled off his glove —

the freezing often feel like they’re on fire —

his fingers snapped away from his hand

like icicles. The ranger found the glove

near the body with the scout’s frozen digits

inside. Or the woman plane crash victim

whose body lay twisted on the ground,

her scalp and long blonde hair in a nearby

tree-of-heaven. Yep, he said, looking down

over the blue humps of the mountains,

the clouds floating so close we could have

licked them, like deer, for salt. The ranger

could have done anything to me up there.

Kissed or raped me. Thrown me

from the tower. But he was what was called

back then a perfect gentleman. We climbed

down, step step step step, step step step step, that

sort of music, and he drove me to see a bottle

tree in some old lady’s yard. Blue bottles, red

bottles, green, amber, rattling against each other

in the wind. Good clean fun.

No death in it, and no love. You heard

my stories all the way from Michigan to New

Orleans, St. Augustine, and Corpus Christie,

how love came close, and with it, death,

I don’t need to tell those ragged tales again.


The girl fell into the water and we froze her arms and legs. Her eyes were open and she came with us. We swept her under. We left the seagulls and ducks dead on the shore. It was not blood, it was only us in the years of the ten plagues. It’s only us, we said to the boy we took from the sandy beach. Don’t worry, it’s only us. He could not breathe, but we rocked him and rocked him until he was still. They floated together, boy and girl, still and quiet, the water so warm, and we were happy.

Aka Manto

A malicious spirit who haunts bathrooms and asks the cubicle occupants if they want red or blue paper.

I like the flickering fluorescent lights that are always on. When the people say they want no paper my mouth falls open in shock. I get so angry I bang my head on the tile floor.

 

Azukiarai

A spirit that washes azuki beans.

The beans chase each other around and hold each other by the round waist. One bean jumps on top of another bean and they start to have sex. I wait until they are done and then I wash them twice.

 

Baku

An auspicious beast who can devour nightmares.

Afterwards I like to crawl in bed with them and wrap my arms around them. I don’t mind if they don’t call me Baku at first. I am patient with them, stroking their hair and murmuring, not Jim say Baku, Baku, Baku.

 

Ittan-momen

A possessed roll of cotton that attempts to smother people by wrapping itself around their faces.

My mother was an anaconda and my father was a toilet paper roll. He’s been in the wastebasket for some time now but mother and I remember him fondly.

 

Raijū

A beast that falls to earth in a lightning bolt.

The sound of me falling doesn’t wake him. He’s not a boy but he’s small as a boy. I lower myself into his bellybutton, cover my eyes with my tail and fall asleep.

 

Tsurube-otoshi

A monster that drops out of the tops of trees.

I sat in the tree and poured water on the people walking underneath. I laughed and laughed, but when my father called me in to dinner I was too afraid to come down.

I hear you in the dark. I hear you in the forest

and underwater. I hear you dream. I hear your mouth

telling me lies, and I don’t care, wolf.

I don’t care, crow.

It sounds like an ugly bird

crying. A dark beast trying to walk

silently. Creep up on me. I’m an animal

too. If I saw you drowning

I would watch you curious

and afraid, until you were dead.

I think you are offering your mouth to me,

I think it is warm and sweet, but I won’t take it.

Not again, no — not this time.

Don’t let me forget   I say often and repeatedly

remind me        to feed the beta        call my mother

return the defective three hole punch

get my car my eyes my wrist                checked out

Don’t let me forget           I say again and again

you are my sieve            volunteered by me

to catch the hummingbirds’ tongues

             the discs of fish scales

the tiny florets of dense vegetation

                                  I’ve forgotten their names

yours I remember                I keep those in my pocket

even dresses have pockets

              I can never forget your name

because now that you are here I can

       keep

       giving you new ones       koala

swoon                            chestnut breath

              my spring moon

I want to dedicate this poem to my son

who I worry into a misshapen form of worry.

And to worry itself, how it hangs

like a blanket over the head of a horse.

Why do they blanket the heads of horses

standing by themselves alone in a field,

not seeing, but snorting and roaming,

their skins seeking each other’s aloneness?

I have no idea. I have never owned a horse,

though property is no giver of ideas.

Forgive me, my mother has died,

and I am trying to understand, so my son

understands why his father’s saying

nothing in the car, the yard, the table.

My mother has died. Do you know?

It’s like standing in a field, swallows

carving flit and whir and hatch,

then it’s like the field being gone.

No one notices in the clumsy fog.

Do you see there is no distance?

She is not a thing. There are no figures

for this grief, the air tastes of ground.

Have you ever lost all context?

I tack this poem to a telephone pole

that survives drought, survives flood,

though it is made of heat and water.

The other day, walking across the room,

my son looked at me like he was eyeing

a sick planet, then put his arms around

his weeping father, who can’t make it

through a meal without weeping,

as if holding a planet might heal it.

I want to thank him, but only have this poem,

a raft I’ve made from the skins

of flayed horses I’ve filled with air.

It floats between us. It is wrong he feels

asked to wade the river, his love

a busted hydrant on a forever sunny day.

Well, I won’t need your tears then,

laid out in a bleach-thin gown,

hospital bed, hospital light —

one bulb burnt, one flickering.

But I will take them anyway,

as always. Even after tumors

mound in my bowels, look it is you

who suffers, you and your heart

which only hear its own pulse.

You see a crow on the wire;

you caw. A fox blinks in the middle

of the road; your soul stirs.

Living this way must be a curse.

Ancient, meaning original.

But I won’t point that out,

just yet. No, go ahead, walk out

of the room, down the corridor,

when the gray is too much.

Is it already too much?

It will be over soon and your face

in your hands will be your face

in your hands. I have been tending

the limits of your affections

a long time. And I will be there too,

in the pew, beneath the oak, as you clean

salt and dirt from your son’s cheek

with a spit-wet thumb.

You see, you must halve and quarter

the grapes you feed your young son

starting out in this not milk of a world

You must make the world small enough

it can pass through the smallness of his body

without lodging in the throat

But living is sloppy work

and the world resists staying small

Someday you will fail    You know this

And the boy will try to find his breath

And he will look at you, bluing for an answer

What is there to say?     You got nothing

But today is not yet    And not yet means

there’s time to cut the day into some luck

your son can crush on his tongue

Mostly bad. And what isn’t is god awful

coming through the radio. You know this,

you’ve heard enough, but keep it low,

so as not to disturb the island fortress

your son is building. You are acting like

there is a place living hasn’t damaged.

If forest, if ocean, you call it Heaven.

If honeysuckle over chain link, Heaven.

A friend’s word, Heaven. And in Heaven

there is no news on the radio, not ever,

just songs he can mouth all the words to.

It’s not real, of course, but mostly

you play along, as if he doesn’t know

the world is full of terrible things, that you are

not wasting time digging moats, stocking

a forest thick with spells, or, stacking

sand upon sand, sure, sure the seawall’s

high enough to keep sharks out of the garden.

Crosscheck: I need to know if every part of me / can still land, is still alive. I cannot fly / into the nest of my mother’s arms. This evening, there are too many / men on-board this jet. It is true, nobody knows / how to fly a body this heavy. The body goes / where the body goes. I say, fly & it is best / never to question machinery as it works. Still, I worry / my shoulders dip too hard into the mountains / of this man’s chest. I usually do not know more / than a name and age. Tonight, it is Sky, which feels / appropriate, since what surrounds us happens / to be body and more body. Sky, which fills / suddenly with fire, smoke as the sort of emotion / at the end of the long flight. Truly, I am not the young man / who favors older men. Still: the sky never cared / whom I did or didn’t want to take inside. Even in storm, no crippling obligation / I could see.

Moon still loose over the city,

still loose over the fields. Still between

the thin lips of clay. We, still boys

who wanted other boys. Still ice slipped

in the canyons of our mouths, still melting

and melting fast. Still inevitable.

✼
Melting fast, we are born regardless

of the sky, the summer drought

it gave us and will eventually

take back. For now I hold

Arizona like your name

in the brush of my mouth.

✼
In the brush, we are still

beyond the thin

archipelagos of dune graves,

leading ourselves back

to the city we believed in,

but never knew.

✼
We never knew where to find

the spiders, the careful webs

of Heaven for our strange

bodies. One night I swear

I saw two crowns of silk

spun fresh across the sand.


 If this house could stand

on one edge and beckon to the rest of the darker waves, as if to say, here.

A house on the edge is a house ready to unseam itself against the contour of

things unseen.

                                  In the great wind of the ocean, this house might begin to

murmur and speak in all the unpredictable places: groans in the bathroom tile

cracks, creaks at the entryway shade. Heard from the other side, its noises

might carry particulates into inarticulable spaces.


Whereas sound opens up the space behind us, which we cannot see.
Whereas sound is the distance between two ghosts, the effect of two surfaces 
rubbing against each other.

                                                                       What, then, is the sound I make 
to say, here?

When they leave the house,
she will place her arm between the light
                              to still her mother in shadow. As if her body
could approximate the house.

            To love a mother: to forfeit sounds from the mouth: to catch
instead a body’s sideswept pitch: to hold her there.

When the father reminds her to exercise the eyes by staring at the
horizon, it is a lesson in distance.
                  As if he knew how the distance to an object is felt as
                                                                               the distance to one’s body.

Inside the house of his birth years, she unlocked
the door, and amidst the dust of translucent curtain, wooden washboard,
overgrown courtyard, cabinet of forgotten vanquishings, she saw all she could
                have was the nearness of the faraway hour between stale walls.

A family does its fieldwork in the undersides.

She played beneath the kitchen table imagining its legs as the ribcage

of a whale.

                   Keep the stock full. Stay your head even. Hold the loose ends.

Pressed against the colossal heartbeat: a warm thunder.

Held between two skeins, the air becomes a cradle.

it’s been a while since. the last time a body was inside my body. summer. & now i think how lonely i am. standing next to the oven for heat. so much depends on sex. once you have had it and had it well. only the little ruins that follow. i am no stranger to ruin. many a man ruined me for both our pleasure. recent history calls a faggot. what the Greeks called Greek. what our oldest ancestors needed no language for. faggot at the moment. i’m always having this conversation with Sam & Cam & Hieu. my closest faggot friends. what makes a fag a fag. one theory that remains true for us. it’s not necessarily about the sex. being filled. but about emptiness. void you didn’t know was a void. until someone stopped it up. a particular strangeness. i was a faggot in 1st grade. full of so little. one day, in the car, heading somewhere, probably the park, my friend Alex asked my mom where my father was. never occurred to me that i didn’t have a father. when my friend Ben came over to play, all i had was barbies. & he asked whose they were. my cousin’s(?). my girl cousin’s. i hadn’t a cousin to speak of. i knew to hide the void. void i was a more boyish thing should occupy. plenty straight man faggots too. nothing to do with what a body wants another body to do to it. everything to do with how we speak of the miles & miles of grey we know is in us. pulsing grey. hungry to be filled with a landscape.

\\ // \\ //

i try not to see myself in the broken humidifier. nor in the molded potato. the freezer burned chuck roast. i think too often of the old women who come to the gym in corduroys. what roads have led them to treadmills? i want to say. they are faggots. i want to claim their strangeness. particular it is. their well ironed gym clothes. the women, some in t-shirts, most in sweaters. shiny foreheads & creased pants. cycling through the body. stopping for water. stopping to chat with Barb. fearing the knees. working the shoulders. stopping to pee. braving the knees. begging their machine to master the machines. bad joints & all. i love them. my corduroy coven. little nana faggots. i see it in them. they know time. is not a river. not quite. like a lover. but a thing that leaves you. until it’s gone. that ends you when. emptied. tell me that. don’t. sound gay?

\\ // \\ //

a particular walk. particular wrist. particular speech. particular clothes. particular piercings. particular knowledge. particular was of eating particular things. particular sounds. particular motions. particular eyes. particular beliefs. particular freedoms. particular joy. particular behaviors. particular punishments. particular lonely. particular grief.

\\ // \\ //

sitting on the ledge of the tub holding down the lever so the water will drain. watching a bit of black (cotton? hair? poop?) slowly float towards the soft whirl mouthed pipe & think. if the black bit was human sized it would be a great deal fast. flying. driving. being in the river when the river suddenly takes off. that’s kinda how i came out. half tipsy & sixteen. summer drunk. last day of camp. mama pick me up. grandma in backseat. ride home. she ask. how was it? i say. great. She ask. what happened? i say. a boy came out & no one made a big deal. she ask. how that make you feel? i say. good, cause i’m bi. summer drunk. dumb tongued. wasted pilot. whoa whoa whoa whoa. sweet jesus. fragrant foul. mayday mayday. house turned ash due to sleep cigarette. accidental fag. standing in a puddle, it suddenly became the Mississippi. i moved across a great distance at a starling speed.                               a big deal was made.

\\ // \\ //

i’m disagreeing with how i began. with the sex thing. my faggotness has nothing to do with anyone else. nor their body. though once i made a list of the things i’ve let men do to me. you should have seen it. if i stand in forest no one’s around to see it, I’m still a fag. a black one. a poz one. a son one. a not a boy boy one. whatever. let that not be not said. the body intersects itself. into dust. i wonder how much. i’ll trouble identity until i die. race & pronouns & politics & then mush. we all turn to must. or ash. whatever your family decides to do with you. i don’t know how. much i have to give to identity today. i don’t know if i’m allowed to say that. writing the things i write. believing the things i believe. today, i’m barely a thing. my body is protesting & doesn’t care what i call it.

\\ // \\ //

faggot in some language. ours. means different. any boy shaped child who behaves a way. someone else’s tenderness. revolted toward the child. the first time i remember. being called that kind of boy. my mother’s room. my mother’s mirror. my mother’s dress. spinning. of course. singing some little song. & my mother was smiling. & my grandpa said. that boy gonna be a faggot. & i didn’t know what it meant. but it had to be. akin to king. or mighty. or beautiful. different. the good kind. but when i looked in his eyes. & saw my body upside down.                                                i                                               knew?

I would like to take a moment to thank my mother for never attempting to get me help when I opened a door she didn’t know I knew & became maybe a little closer to the daughter she always wanted as I killed her son to give birth to her son as I entered a land God turned to salt with my tongue leading my feet as I shuttered into a new skin his not mine as I bloomed cotton wood its cummy scent in the air flower like a stale towel boy turned rag turned god she turned to God & thank Jesus Jesus didn’t tell her to beat the boy back in me or fill with me thunder until I hungered only for pussy until I wasn’t pussy until a prayer was nailed across my throat until the sugar in my blood turned to pig skin beer more blood whatever men obsessed with being men think they are made of whatever God they pray to who tells them they must knuckle & skitter away from the open palm of a man shaped thing mouth open another mouth open a boy is a kind of hallway if a hallway could exist without a building a tunnel I guess so thank you mama for not filling me with dirt until I knew what I was but couldn’t be it how bottled water must remember when it was sky & Atlantic how even the smallest dogs have the instinct to hunt and howl how you can take the faggot out the boy but that won’t keep the boy from burning

                   //

she wrote me a little note

told me she still loved me

& was kind & slow with her questions

we  leather   split   back   spit    up   red  pus  keloidscripture

      fresh mouth made on we side          bucket full of   teeth   

packed

                                into    the air

                                                      where      we body     was     oh

                                      savior

                             you are     late again           we ran under

                    cover

                                                           color of     everything     

                                                 in the night

that don’t shine     the wide black     filled with     deeper

stars            & no stars

     but     the moon     gave us up                      great white

eye disturbing

                             the great nigger of night

                                            ogodogodogodogod

                             if you are

          any good                          if the salt must be                  like salt

                                    please                     let we be like the water

          just let     we spill everywhere       darken soil

make a thing

                                                                           grow

                                                                           Jesus

                                                                           you are

                                         too short     a word for god

       if the devil feels       like this       poppin

                 in the places     they popped we open

           make we body feel like it’s coming

off     in steam     make we boil     with no fire     or wet

in your hollow gospel

   we burn          smokeless             our suffering

miraculous dear lord

                                                                                      d

                                                                                      e

                                                                                      l

                                                                                      i

                                                                                      v

                                                                                      e

                                                                                      r

we to safer war          at the end of we blood

warmer shore

                    gift we our body                          we build

you many church

                 we think our body churches

                                                              church

                                                     a good thing to

                                                     own

holy merch/-ant           chant skin

                 rant cotton pant

                             good back good nigger     work song grief

we thief     we self into the moon     ’s roar           let we

death        be nature’s choice

                          we run           all                  the way

                                   to we

              blood dried                 all over glee           sweet

                          lord           what we seen

                          done in your name

by your law

                       we say mercy

                                   we mean monster

                                            we know

     no good     your gospel brings                     we

sing for the lord

                                                                   for the

                                                                   sake of

                                                                   the sing

we don’t know     how   to call on we     old gods

     in the absence of knowing                           we use

your name

I can’t undress from the pressure of leaves,

the lobed edges leaning toward the window

like an unwanted male gaze on the backside,

(they wish to bless and bless and hush).

What if I want to be deviled instead? Bow

down to the madness that makes me. Drone

of the neighbor’s mowing, a red mailbox flag

erected, a dog bark from three houses over,

and this is what a day is. Beetle on the wainscoting,

dead branch breaking, but not breaking, stones

from the sea next to stones from the river,

unanswered messages like ghosts in the throat,

a siren whining high toward town repeating

that the emergency is not here, repeating

that this loud silence is only where you live.

A neighborhood tuxedo cat’s walking the fence line

and the dogs are going bonkers in the early morning.

The louder they bark, the more their vexation grows,

the less the cat seems to care. She’s behind my raised

beds now, no doubt looking for the family of field mice

I’ve been leaving be because, why not? The cat’s

dressed up for this occasion of trespass, black tie

attire for the canine taunting, but the whole clamor

is making me uneasy. This might be what growing

older is. My problem: I see all the angles of what

could go wrong so I never know what side to be on.

Save the mice, shoo the cat, quiet the dogs? Let

the cat have at it? Let the dogs have at it? Instead,

I do what I do best: nothing. I watch the cat

leap into the drainage ditch, dew-wet fur against

the day lilies, and disappear. The dogs go quiet

again, and the mice are safe in their caves, and

I’m here waiting for something to happen to me.

I’m driving alone in the pre-dawn

dark to the airport, nerves nearly gone

when I fly now, gravity only another holy

thing to contend with, what pushes us

down squeezing out the body’s air.

The shock jock’s morning jawing clangs

in its exaggerated American male register

to tell us how the 24-year-old Colombian

woman whose breasts had been hacked

open and stuffed with one kilogram

of cocaine swiftly admitted the smuggled

property because she was in dire agony.

Wounds rupturing, raging infection,

she was rushed to the Berlin hospital.

Her three kids were home in her country

where she worked in agriculture, another

word for cultivation of land, for making

something out of dirt. The rude radio

disc jockey licks his lips into the studio’s mic

and says something about motor boating

her tits jammed with nose candy and I’m

thinking of my friend who’s considering

a mastectomy to stay alive, another who

said she’d cut them off herself if it meant

living. Passport and boots that slip on and off,

a sleepy stream through the radiation

machine. A passive pat down of my outline

and I’m heading somewhere else before

the world has even woken up. I’ve got shit

to do and I need to lose a little weight before

I turn older. There’s the email scan of the bank

statement showing barely enough, the IRS

check, the dentist that’ll have to wait until

payday next month. We do what we have

to do to not cleave the body too quickly.

I wait for my zone to be called and line

up with all the others, the woman’s voice

over the intercom’s buzz reminding us

the flight is full, reminding us to carry

only what we need. The chill rises

up in the jet bridge as does the tremor

in my chest as we board, this shiver of need

that moves my hand to my breastbone,

some small gesture of tenderness for this

masterpiece of anatomy I cling to.

Moon across the sky in the purple morning,

dry earth unfurling.

In another California,

my grandmother is packing

everything she owns into one suitcase,

two suitcases, the water still

in the clay pitcher — water un-wasted,

only what she can carry.

There is no moment in my life

in which this is not happening.

What is happiness? Two granddaughters

in a summer garden —

firstborn, second born — and grandmother

laughing. There is no moment

in which she is not alive

and rising, imbuing these hills,

this morning’s sky with shadows.

1.

Roads clog with people in vehicles crossing the Golden Gate

Give my rage back to me, I know how to hold it

Ghost fog grows and stretches itself through the bars and I’m ready for it

On my radio, the white general and the white general

yank each other into the deep end, good heavens

Don’t teach me to hate my language tonight

Don’t teach me how to hate my words and my language tonight

Tongo says capitalism walks on water, I’ve seen my TV, I believe it

All of the redwoods in the world can’t keep this country from wanting to die

The future has arrived and it’s doubled over

and the best of us are ready for love though we’re burning

2.

Roads clog with people in vehicles crossing the Golden Gate

My family is Eduardo and Mitsuo and Marilyn and Alma

and Samuel and Fumio and the twin who drank himself to death

and the auntie who drank herself to death

and the Issei and the Nisei and the Sansei with their rock faces and nightmares

Undisguise me, said the stone

Undisguise me, said the stone to the desert light

Undisguise me, said the stone to the river

Lay me down under harsh water flowing under midnight starlight

Take my face off of my face, said the stone, shake me open

3.

Roads clog with people in vehicles crossing the Golden Gate

The white general and the white general

teach me how to hate my language on the radio tonight

Which nightmare of a framework makes the human count

Which bodies count and which count against

Grandma met Grandpa in those camps

Let me give your rage back to you, said the poem

Stop trying so goddamn hard, said the poem

Everything that has ever happened to you and your family

keeps happening and the love keeps coming in with its surgery

Get good with yourself, said the poem, get gone

Into the night and into the streets

of the universe I walk with my little

blue heart. I rise my hands

to the fractured light

like the girl I was, aching for safety

and rehearsing my freedom

in the garden under my father’s

sky. I got close to whiteness

by loving my uncle: him and mercy me

shooting guns in the foothills

while the great spirit cloistered itself

in the dying oaks of the earlier

century. Now the air turns.

The moonlight eats us happily

and we’re happy for it.

Little hummingbird ghosts gather

in a field far from here plotting

their revenge. My uncle grows older

and closer to death in a trailer park

in the Central Valley. I grow a skin

beyond my skin, rage swelling me

beyond the perimeter of my known self.

O Ertha: my planet, my brine, my shelter,

let me extract your hidden fossil fuels,

let my engines burn in your biosphere,

let me detonate in your cavernous womb.

O let the whaling ship of my skeleton

harpoon your ancient salty flesh,

let the callous chainsaws of my hands

clear your old growth trees for timber.

O let my industry unlock your minerals,

let me fondle your fetish commodities

until we reach the zone of uncertainty.

O Ertha, ravage me with your extreme weather,

infect me with your diseases, if you must,

just let me exceed my take, my love, once more.

My love, I have crossed so many borders

for a kiss, smuggled by strangers,

I followed dream tracks in the desert,

where there’s no spring, no mercy, only this

mass migration towards your refuge.

My love, I walked amongst labor

that global capital forgot, traversed bridges

of bones, and witnessed populations

collapse around me, with the hope

to become your citizen. My love,

embrace my desperation, my day’s labor,

touch me, as if we’ve always been

interwoven, from our cars

all the way down to our cancers.

I love you where waves shatter sea walls,

where pipelines burst into liquid fire,

where our only reservoir evaporates

into layers of salt and emergency.

I love you where radiant hurricanes

bloom acid rain from magnetic clouds,

breaking levees and flooding cities.

I love you where coastlines erode,

where habitat thresholds are crossed,

where rainforests turn to ash.

I love you where my passion unravels

your invisible ecologies and unleashes

the romance and hierarchy of survival,

our last and permanent address.

The just-hatched chicks were let loose as favors.

Barely dry, they were let loose like favors,

a flavicomous cloud dropped among toddlers.

The birthday boy picked them up and held them.

The party guests picked them up and crushed them.

They forgot about the “pet” in petting farm.

We gathered the chicks in a cowboy hat.

Collected chicks in the well of a straw hat,

and took four of them home to make them fat.

We shouldn’t have named them after cousins.

We learned never to name birds after cousins.

Ben didn’t make it; the others mashed him.

The three grew an aubade of combs: All roosters.

And took to the stew pot our dream of brooders.

This is no Hemingway tale.

The fish we catch are not fabled

and will not make our fortune,

harnessed to nothing more

than some jerk spices

and the bottom of a frying pan

liberally coated with oil

so the flesh will not stick,

as ours does to the sheets

we lie in at night

when the waves have quieted

like overtired children. We cast

sidearm, the way we used to

heave a baseball into mitts,

to avoid throwing the brims

of each other’s hats

into the ocean with the bait,

although this has happened,

and this is what we have reeled in:

sodden reminders of another life

when the mean seats of a marlin

stadium meant a blistered nose

for a couple of days and not this

flooded, floorless amphitheater

where the only entertainment

is skin after peeling skin,

eternal, infinite, varying only

in hit, fight and run.


God who sees.

God who wasn’t there.

God who created hearts to love.

God who strengthens me.

God who is rich is mercy.

God who saves.

God how can I serve you.

God how do I let go.

God how can we forgive.

God how do I change.

God how do I lose weight.

God how long must I wait.

God how can I make money.

God how I hate you.

God how do I hear you.

God of carnage.

God bless america.

God bless america movie.

God gave me you.

God gave me you lyrics.

God why.

God why meme.

God why are you doing this to me.

God why am I here.

God why am I alone.

God why did this happen.

God when will I find love.

God when he’s drunk.

God when will it be my turn.

God when are you coming.

God when will I die.

God who heals lyrics.

God who gave fire to man [sic].

God who provides.

God what should I do.

God what should we do now.

God what is our purpose.

God what do I do with my life.

God what is your plan for us.

God what is your name.

With the flip

of a magician’s wrist

we can rid ourselves

of unneeded things

as though our lives

were a measure

of linen

we could unfurl

and lift

at will

or snap

to let loose

that something

between us

that tipped

in mid-flight

leaving us

uneasy and ill.

Oh, Ghidorah

                          I can taste your sweaty palms from here.

                   Godzilla means heart-

                           breaker in Japanese                     but you’ve never believed me.

           And though you become

                                 a broken tide swelling

                                                                     onto my chest

                                                                  my lips and though

                                              we begin the hot-bodied things

             you whistle,

             can we take this slow?

                                                       But already

                                   my atomic heart has blown

                                       the walls loose and I laugh,

                                                       I’ve never been hurt before.

 You sort the lamplight                   into pants and socks, a tsunami wall,

                                                                            your face, a sluice gate.

     Before my very eyes

you are losing your zephyr —

               no longer the fearsome Ghidorah,

                       just a little man

                                 in a costume           stamping your bat wings.

Down the stairs I hum

the song of Tokyo burning

                                           a tune

                                           that will slink back to you

                                           each time you say,

                    I don't want

                        to be hurt

                             again

In the short dream, she falls down the stairs again and again,

           singing in a bloodied wedding dress, the crowd

breathless. My hands tied, again, to the chair to keep me from

           rushing the stage and kissing her lovely, dead mouth.

I never wanted her more than when she died for a love she pretended

           was real. Desire’s sweetest fiction in three acts

and an encore. In the middle dream, an angel milks venom

           from a snake while I dig and dig in the wet dirt of a grave

to pull free a child. Waxy thing, unwelcome need, forehead

           stained with pink. The child’s birthmark —

her mother’s silhouette. I command my beloved to return

           to me but the child wails and wails, weeping white sap

until my hands stick to her. A contract. The will of the forest.

           A love with a future instead of a past. Like glass shattered

by a high note, it is foreshadowed by music. Like a dog

           bristling between a girl and a jaguar, it is ferocious

and sleepless and bound for tragedy, but not now. Now begins

           the long dream where I believe my fear and adore it,

where I hear the tolling of a song I lived in my early years, pealing

           underwater like a summons. It belongs to a longing

that murmured my name before falling down a flight of stairs,

           that I still seek knowing I’ll find snakes nesting

in the rotted house and the darling dead on my old mattress,

           her mouth bloodless, waiting, impossible to resist.

The ghosts of contraltos orbit the equator,

           blinking like satellites, every message the same.

Seek us. The dead are more real than the children

           making me paper crowns, who remember nothing

of the pillage, the burn, the fever, the benign power

           of health. I cut the blindfold from my daughter

to see if her pupils hold the forecast of whatever

          black light will come for her, but the spirit refuses

to pass itself off as an image. History is more real

           than the sticky peppermints placed in my palm

by a child who does not know I once owned this land

           and everyone on it. The future comes for me even

as I reenact the past with the ghosts in my attic.

           They aria, I applaud. They cadenza, they coloratura,

I adore. Breath escapes, then memory. Then God permits

            the dead to visit — Ah, quella voce — so she can

sing — Let us take refuge here, it is scattered with roses — to the child who

           remembers nothing, not even the love that made her.

Once the river had its fill of miracles, he washed up

on shore and could no longer become a man.

He clicked and lifted his fluke but it wouldn’t split

into legs. A ribereña recognized him by his sadness

and the scars on his back, his nearly visible history.

She touched the dolphin she’d made love to as a man

when she was sixteen, shy, and full of disquiet. Years ago

he'd knocked on her door selling novel wonders — lockets,

apples, French kisses. At her insistence, he pulled her dress

to her hips and used his tongue to write untranslatable

Sapphic gospels between her thighs. Where do you think

you’re going? she asked. To what home? Toward which love?

But his untransformed body didn’t respond. She walked

the streets wailing and striking her calves with a bullwhip,

announcing the death of the last encantado. As the clouds

ripened, we went weeping to collect him, remembering

the slow millennium of post-coital untwining, the water

from his hair baptizing our necks and navels and knees.

The howler monkeys joined in with their ministry

of pleasure and anger and fruit. The forest was alive

with it, the story of the love we’d made. We placed him

in a canoe with his hat and our kisses, imported apples

and lianas, rosaries and fishhooks. His love was

as impersonal as it was perfect, and now it is the tide.

His body rocked toward a future we could not see.

The hollow he left in the riverbank swelled with rain.

Pineboard walls warm to touch, a June

storm coding itself into the metal siding

on evenings we go to bed early. You,

my soul's friend, undress for night

with the relief that means we're alone now,

free as long as darkness lasts.

I can tell

we’ve met the music place,

stillness at the center of spinning,

all the gravities of our lives

balancing together.

Hear the rain rewrite the score in andante,

how the air says lento, lento, there's a bow

for every cello — and thus you are to me.

The long note buzzing low, gold

cutting through a crescendo sky, your shoulders,

your ribs, a piano inside.

I’m watching sun melt in the pan-flat sky,

a spreading oil on the lake. You stop me there

for dinner, the walleye sizzling up

gold, till fork after fork.

We go for an evening dip,

shampoo our hair, drink

the magnet-colored water for luck

or strength of heart, for swallowing dark

as it swims over Canada.

There’s no narcotic, no coffee

to keep awake, no liquor

but the lake, the lake.

Our pupils are widening black seed,

ants at the picnic crawling in

and out of me. Ticks are the cost

of love in tall weeds — I pay it exactly,

conjure smoke from the fire, seep

into our sap. Now the bugs

have us in their mouths, our blood

turned cassis on checkerberries we ate, feel,

distilling in the moss beneath us,

that liquor from the lake.

The lake I once took to my chest

became a fog I walk through, barefoot

and naked in the bottom of the rock basin

where the water is quieter than snow.

Fishermen, boat riders,

blueberry farmers, I find you

when you’re lonely, when you wander

from your homes, swollen-eyed as baitfish.

You’ve forgotten the taste of the water.

Let me lead you to pearling stars

crusted on the night floor.

Let me slit you eyes that never

close, that see through kimberlite and bone,

let me weave you under walleye chop

to where storms beat slow. Let me

suck your currents of warmth, envelop them

with my body long as insomnia, body going on

as far as ripples go.

In the mirror, admiring those pretty-ass eyebrows —

       arched to perfection, enviable in terms of thickness,

               their condition nice enough to inspire somebody’s

                         asking whether by choice or not, if deliberately

                                 done, maybe tweezed or waxed, because they

                                       are just too fine. Flawless. Raised, but in a way

                                            that raises suspicions as to whether the pictures

                                                  in his bedroom hang crooked because of some

                                                       eccentric taste. But they, in fact, are what he was

                                                         born with, among other things, such as a penis that

                                                         runs warm at night or eyes like hurricane spindles,

                                                        that study how men stand like obelisks of rock salt,

                                                   how some of them stride as if their legs are separated

                                             by a big inconvenience, how every now and then their

                                        faces fold over perfectly on the hinges of their noses.

                                  But the men are not looking his way to know they are

                          being looked at, to misinterpret the gaze, to shape

                 their own brows, at once, both skeptical and scared

          of something between them, perhaps an opposite

      charge, feared so much so he utters, if not spits,

   some flagrant word that must be struck down to

protect reputation: hell naw, I ain’t no damn fa …

because that’s truth in the raw, because if he had

been one, stomping about these streets, he might

already be on fire. Flamed by the fellas, in flames,

rather than in this bathroom with unflattering light,

           trimmer hot in hand, revising his hairline a line

               across the brow, booty call due soon to set him

                                             straight.

I’ve been known to walk through walls — with a door, through it,

juggling knives                 without handles, my lifelines all

the deeper, as if traced back and forth in red ink on my palms.

And I’m a loaded rifle with a light trigger,     my penis some

redundant device tucked away into cotton drawers. An animal

is proven by the smell of me;         every tooth in my mouth is

a triangle with one angle below freezing, perfect for piercing

flesh — but I make sure to wear my muzzle.                 I make sure

to swallow when the ache splits me: my head is a bottle of Aspirin

with one solitary pill inside, rattling around           like a marble.

I’ve been drinking more and more water. I still can’t swim.

There is only           down. And somehow, I’m the socket and

the scissors in the same: an accidental harm, like a slip-Freudian.

Their words fly through the window of my mouth like     paper

airplanes into a darkening confusion. The howling wind blows me

fist-like, my bones like xylophone bars, but         as I lay sleep

nothing is heard from me except an acclaimed imitation of death.

I haven’t remembered a dream in five years, but I do know

in the back of my throat a man hangs by his neck, swaying when

I speak; I know that,           like a ghost, I walk through walls.

What might do me in is the telling of a white lie.

Having my gut confused for a knife block.

         The structural failure of my body to process sugar.

The ferry could capsize and my lungs will sponge the river

of its acids. Maybe hipsters have moved into this neighborhood,

made it safe, as danger always begins, or I've breathed

in the legacy of industry for too many years,

to the point this economy of blood must collapse.

There’s the one of many silver bullets that could

take a chance at love and kiss my forehead, the chance

I’m taken for someone with a different name.

Maybe the next great war will pass me on the street and

claim me as a souvenir. I could be seen as a common criminal

and they decide to skip the trial completely; I could conjure

the beast that gnaws my bones just by being colorful.

                        Jumped, as a kind of broom into new beginnings —

                                       yes, I can fathom that, too.

Cars can drive the speed limit or above. The body,

which is mostly water, likewise conducts electricity;

a Taser can be reached for and come up the trigger that

ends it all, and that’s not just a movie the critics clap for.

The catcalling hard hats can miss hammering a nail,

leave a screw loose that would’ve helped bear the load

of light I will lose when it all comes down on me

like an answered prayer with booming thunder and a bolt.

In a moment of panic, I may forget the words needed to barter

for my life; there's the issue of a paycheck being taken away

at-will, me being forced to eat myself to the point of invisibility

except for 32 teeth spread in the dust, ivory of easy poaching.

Planes crash to earth like the rare shooting star. Cells

multiply themselves and build jails on top of dwindling bone.

They can mount their flag in my eye for all I know, but

all I know is that they haven’t yet: call it Jesus or dumb luck.

Someone shot the beagle at close range

          with a crossbow, the arrow stuck crosswise

                     through its body, just under the spine.

          But a boy found the dog stumbling in the woods

                     and brought it in, worked off the vet bill in barter.

          Someone left the cattle to starve in the barn,

standing locked in their stanchions. Someone

          gave the six-pound puppy a good quart of beer

                     for fun. A cat prowled the barn

                               with a loop of intestine hanging out.

                                          Someone left the dachshund in the cold garage

                     for three days, trying to birth its dead pup,

                                          until the stink could not be ignored.

                               Someone put out poison, aimed his truck at the turtle in the road.

                                          Someone beat the draft horse with a loose board

                                                         ripped off the fence in anger.

                                              An angry guard shoves a ragged letter under a cell door.

                                                                             But the letter comes. Someone’s

                                                         ears are filled with the speech of birds. Someone

                                          dreams of flying. Someone shows another

                                                   how to bathe a child. A small dog snoozes

                                          in the sun beside a door. Someone stands

                                                   in the yard shading her eyes with a hand, counting

                                          birds. Someone tries to patch

                                                   things up. For shame. For something else.

                     Someone holds the door. Someone

                                          takes a piece of paper, carefully

                                                   picks up a spider, sets it outside.

The prisoners in a German work camp near Hanover got used

to the indifference and cruelty of the guards who gave them

watery soup and worked them nearly to death and were therefore

all the more heartened by the behavior of a stray dog that had

somehow gotten into the camp and who greeted the prisoners

as they returned exhausted from the forest where they spent

their days chopping wood, barking with joy and flinging himself

about as dogs do. Maybe the men enjoyed the dog’s silliness.

Maybe the dog reminded the men that the shadow of war

would pass sooner or later, that there were things beyond its reach.

In the camp at Ravensbrück, doctors performed experiments

on female prisoners to test the effect of sulfa drugs on battlefield

injuries. Healthy limbs were amputated, muscle and tissue removed

without anesthesia, and then the women were put against a wall

and shot. Before they were executed, though, the women pinched

their cheeks to put color in them and did each other’s hair.

I ask a woman at a party what they wanted, and she says,

“To be fully human for as long as they could, for every second

of the lives that remained to them.” Elie Wiesel says that

“the opposite of love is not hate, it’s indifference. The opposite

of beauty is not ugliness, it’s indifference. The opposite of faith

is not heresy, it’s indifference.” Maybe the women, too, knew

the artillery would fall silent one day, the troops go home.

It’s not a matter of being pretty or feeling good about yourself.

It’s a matter of not going to your death with your hair in your face.

The guards offered them a sedative, but not all the women took it.

They’re not bad. They just laugh and make too much noise.

                         But look at the fun they’re having! Maybe you’re not mad

but jealous. Actually, some are bad, like the bigot

                          in the pretty café in Venice who was paying

and used that leverage to browbeat his guests into silence, calling one

stupid and telling another he was a traitor because

                          he didn’t agree with his host on foreign policy.

So what? If your friends are dumb or unpatriotic,

                          you should either treat them kindly or get new friends.

You should certainly treat them kindly if you’re sitting next

to other people, i.e., me. And sometimes you are

                          the other person, as I was in that snout-to-tail restaurant

in London where Barbara ordered something sensible,

                          like a piece of fish, whereas I got the pig’s head.

I thought it was a metaphor. It wasn’t. It was a pig’s head,

with flappy ears and slits for eyes and little teeth

                          you could see because its mouth was slightly open

in a little piggy grin, as though it was glad I wanted to eat it.

                          There were three rail-thin folks one table

over, arty types dressed in black who looked as though they lived

on air and lettuce who kept pointing at the pig’s head

                          and jabbering away in a language I didn’t understand;

I had no idea what they were saying, but I bet it wasn’t,

                          “O that lucky man, to be eating such

a delicious pig’s head!” And “O that lucky pig, to be eaten by

such a distinguished gentleman!” Once a couple sat down next

                          to us at a restaurant in Florence, and it took me a while

to realize the man was a famous TV actor, but I knew

                          you never got anywhere by saying

“you’re a famous TV actor” to anyone, whether they are or not,

so I (a) addressed myself to his wife and (b) asked her

                          how she liked her meal, not whether or not it was fun

to be married to a famous TV actor. Very much!

                          she replied, and from there we went on

to talk about Italian art and actually made a date to meet the next

day at the Uffizi and look at the Botticellis.

                          I’m thinking that, the next time I order something

unsightly, I’ll only do it if the people next to me

                          have ordered something unsightly

themselves or seem about ready to do so, though how I would

know that is beyond me. Appearances are so

                          deceiving! The bigot in the Venetian café looked

like a nice fellow; certainly his suit was expensive.

                          Not everything in life is a Botticelli.

Maybe we should pretend that it is, though, that all people are nice,

all dishes appetizing, If you find yourself sitting

                          next to me in a restaurant, please come over

and introduce yourself. “David!” you’ll say. “It’s me,”

                          and state your name. You’ll order

one thing, I’ll order another, and then we’ll go look at the Titians.

The first man talked over me, the second

insisted I shut up. I learned to keep words

inside my head, became a pebble gathering

snow as it rolled toward a cliff. A woman

holds onto what is sacred, her lips

dammed shut, mere alluvium escaping.

Men controlled the floodgates of my teeth,

lifted and lowered at will. Another censored

even sweet talk, but then you asked

my name, cast a line into this murky deep

and waited for a bite, knowing a woman

who holds a river in her mouth cannot stem

the flow forever, knowing that each stone,

pressed tight against her tongue seeks release.

Some men seep only the profane, lips

spewing streams of spittle and pollution,

a mad stirring. But not you. You spoke

and dams crumbled. Levees broke,

the runoff gathering in the hollows

of our throats. Such sweet confluence.

Silent screams, your two arms turned

to the eight of an octopus coiled

around my struggling chest, but not.

This is mental, not skin on skin,

simply neurons firing in the fishbowl skull,

carnival guppies frantic then expiring at will.

We smile and float, paint on clown fish stares,

cartoon round, as the watchers tap the glass

until we crack, prepared to gasp for air

but not. Remember. This is all in my head,

a dream or some other mystic fish that slips

its school and makes its way upstream.

Fog. Mist. Remnants of old arguments crust

the sides of the tank with algae, and I am

convinced that I will never remember

until I do. I drag my gloved hand

across the glass to clear it – suddenly,

a visible swath of stars.

She be a moon bottle, drenched in the thunderglow.

     I be a storm with the eyes of a snake, with the aim

of the lousy indigenous headdress of Afrika Bambaataa,

     of a Tyrannosaurus Rex with cracked disco balls for shades

& a grill like Paul Wall minus a knuckles-worth of teeth

     — everything I say is chopped & screwed, saliva gluey

as maguey on my cacti tongue. Shoulders melt

     from her neck like candlewax onto my wrists, singe

a lullaby of grief like a red vein down my arm.

     Her hips hammer heartbeats through glass bells.

She be a moon bottle drenched in thunderlight,

     glowing on the porch like a wolf eye in gloam.

The hot glare of her mouth is a synonym

     for summer. I be a storm with a black nose

digging its snout through wet grass. I fill goblets

     with her brewery. She be the moon in a bottle

I shatter against a stairwell to crush moonrock

     barefoot beneath me, to lick glass from concrete

until my blood fractures in light. She socks

     the sockets of my septum with flashes of heat,

my skull clenched between the diamond-studded

     summermouth of an almighty Tyrannosaurus Rex.

pull my

pull my

pull my

     trigger and feel

     me scissor snicker-pink

down your fingers my jellyfish

head a teeter aglow tender as gun

smoke in the swallow-soft darkness

the pump-pump of your lungs a sloppy

                 pompom pummeling

     through plumes of seaweed

     like a fully-loaded shell

leaving crablegs shattered ashore

     if you eat my body

      fold the pink bulb of me

           between your gums

           you will taste the thunder

i could never sing i am a spark

waiting to dry out and surge in water

     all i want is for you to come closer

let me firecracker

                                       shiver-singe

— Mijo,

     no niegas que vienes de mi ombligo.

I was lethal when you was fetal, scratched

     records when you feared needles.

Never had a mirror near you ain’t know shit

     about your people. ¿Were you black,

brown, or illegal? Gringos saw you as below,

     vetoed your voice as feeble, but we know

you was seeing visions like Ezekiel.

     Ain’t talking spinning rims or wallets fat

with c-notes. You were on the camino

     to be more than how they read you.

     Thought it made you more

than your amigos, smoking blunts, high

     on perico. The difference between Jay-Z

and Beanie Sigel. You let your ego lead you.

     Didn’t look in the rearview. I gave you

knowledge of self. You pushed your history

     beneath you. Followed teachers who deceived

you, surrounded by white people. Like I’m not

     why ya feet grew. You ain’t need me

more than I need you. So see-through, thirsty

     for shining. Punk-ass gave up on rhyming.

They called you rapper before a poet. You never rose

     up to own it. Now you say you made it. Son,

tell me how that life taste. Worry less if you spit

     truth. Keep worrying bout “the White space.”

Keep worrying bout magazines none of your family

     reads. You too grown for rap CD’s and bootlegging

MP3’s. Keep calling your silence ruckus. You ain’t

     the first to punk out. Shit, hella brown poets

scared to touch this. You can fool yourself,

     but you never fooled me. If you wan be anything

other than sucker, you go through me. ¿What?

     ¿you forgot ‘bout Lauryn Hill and Nas?

¿Who dafuq you think taught you how to rock?

     To grit, to hustle, to spit like I do.

I should send Nate Marshall to kick the shit

     outta you. You can’t step to the Queen

unless your record be mean. If you run, my heart

     ’ll beat thicker through your chest

and your brain, make letters go lean and hiss

     incredible things, cuz I’m unforgettable

in the ebb and flow of your indelible vein.

soft bellies of infants come to mind

                                all unprotected flesh rounded to touch

smell of their fine hair like cilia prompts

                                   uterine clench, staunch of breath obstinate

questionings of sense and outward things

                                      a maker central centromere, an X that

forms as chromosomes double and

                                         thicken: a mutagenic sea unseen nothing

can bring back the hour now drowsy

                                            with creative energy we look down from

high cliffs while shearing gusts

                                              ripple a surface nosing the shore falling

back, fading to what floats beyond

                                                the surf, birth is but a sleep and a forgetting

while ribonucleic acid makes its way

                                                   a clipper rolling with the swell, parting

double strands of whatever may

                                                       happen or come to being, to replicate

the moment, a linguistic intention

                                                        letters ACGT have no primal sympathy

no patience for endless imitation as if

                                                          their whole vocation were to repeat not

quite those things that had been said

                                                           before as this messenger along a frozen

sea of beauty in division, snips parent

                                                              from parent prepares for recombination

some fragment a hastening or quickening

                                                               from a dream of human life not yet precise

in the telling rigging chance poetics

                                                                  as sailors might rounding Cape Horn lashed

to the mast unprotected flesh braced

                                                                    for the moment somatic seas clash, stipple

of salt water splendor before nucleo-

                                                                      tides swell and recede, attach disentangle

genetic ropes and leads, chromosomes

                                                                       fading to fetal strands, curling invisible

for now intimations, tangles of heredity

Barbie Chang pokes through her

              mother’s purse

the little brown hearse of lipstick and

              blush her mother would

have let her go through her purse

              because she pursued

her mother’s dreams her mother’s last

              call on her last cell phone

on June 19 what was Barbie doing on

              June 19 she was probably

thinking about the moon she hasn’t

              looked at for 91 months

and how the moon was a medal she

              wanted around her neck

she was probably thinking about the

              Circle of women at

school or circling and striking words

              shifting points of view

thinking about how an acorn with its

              small hat to cover it is

a metaphor for truth now she is left with

              small images of her

mother that come and hover and leave

              whenever they please

little hummingbirds of death such as how

              her mother wanted

a Sprite but couldn’t remember the name

              of it how her eyes looked

slightly crossed on the day before she died

              how she could only

breathe through her abdomen that

              went up and down

like the machine the body isn’t how

              her stillness was

deafening how she was warm for

              so long after

How alone Barbie Chang’s mother

              must have felt doing

nothing but dying her mother actually

              stopped dying her hair

in January stopped being an actuary

              for her money she must

have known her time was limited did

              the diseased birch tree

know they were going to cut it down

              how quickly the air

around it filled in the space afterwards

              at some point we are

all eliminated from this earth at some

              point most of us give

birth at some point we all lose a mother

              at some point we are all

disappointments who can’t possibly care

              for others when our

mothers die we are all lost and there are

              no words for it others

want to name us as grieving some

              even name us heroes

Barbie Chang refuses to start her

              own Circle refuses

to wear a girdle would she think

              about the Circle in

the last eight minutes before the

              plane crashed into

the mountains there are thousands

              of miles between the

land and the sky between the words

              to love and loved there are

little boats in the brain that can row

              nowhere that’s the little

voice we hear in our heads Barbie

              Chang should not

mind about all her kind whether she is

              pretty or not skinny

enough loved enough once in Yosemite

              she stared for hours at

two Giant Sequoias fused together at

              the base but separate

high above the plaque said they must

              be in love she knew it

wasn’t true that they were really two

              trees trying to leave

So I am tired of being a man.

So I go to the tailor shops and the movies

worn out, impervious, like a felt swan

navigating a sea of creation and ash.

The smell of the barbershops makes me bawl.

All I want is the peace of stones or wool,

all I want is to see no more stores or gardens,

no more merchandise, or glasses, or elevators.

So I am tired of my feet and my nails

and my hair and my shadow.

So I am tired of being a man.

All the same it would be delightful

to scare an accountant with a cut lily

or kill a nun with a blow to the ear.

It would be beautiful

to go through the streets with a green knife

and shout until I froze to death.

I don’t want to continue as a root in the dark,

hesitant, stretched out, shivering from night sweats,

down below, in the wet bowels of the earth,

soaking it up and thinking, eating each day.

I don’t want all this misery.

I don’t want to continue as a root and a tomb,

always underground, as a cellar of freezing

corpses, dying of my own self-pity.

That is why Monday burns like oil

when it sees me arrive with my cage of a face,

and why it howls like a wounded wheel as it passes,

and why it makes tracks of hot blood toward night.

And it shoves me into certain corners, certain damp houses,

hospitals where bones spill out of the windows,

certain shoe stores that smell like vinegar,

onto streets as frightening as chasms.

There are birds the color of sulfur and horrible intestines

hanging from the doors of the houses I hate,

there are dentures forgotten in a coffee pot,

there are mirrors

that should have wept from shame and fear,

there are umbrellas everywhere, and poison, and navels.

I walk around calmly, with eyes, with shoes,

with anger, forgetful,

I pass, I cross offices and orthopedic stores,

and courtyards where laundry hangs from a wire:

underwear, towels, and shirts that weep

long dirty tears.

Now it’s up to you, American beehive! Deck yourselves out as officers, nurses! The hotels have turned into fantastical office buildings. Such activity in the elevators and in the accounting departments! One fine day, it was like fingernail flash in a cloud, a thunderbolt: the cashiers screwed up by adding billions of tons; some of them committed suicide; others went crazy; the packed elevators were stuck between floors and no one could make them move. Spirits were still sparklingly high and optimistic but more and more all that was just vocalise and the clucking of hens. Someone even thought of changing the top guys, but no! Each new boss discovered a jungle of mistakes, new lies.

I barely remember

Patricia, the most beautiful,

Hugo, the poorest,

Jacqueline, the prettiest after Patricia,

Jorge, the tallest,

Pablo, who was black.

But I never had lice

in spite of Karina.

Because of a socioeconomic defect,

I can never forget

that extraordinary afternoon

when my mother was able to buy me Oreos.

They were a feast and only a few times was I

that happy.

Now

I am seldom that happy

except those times when I am able to eat

with the same appetite

as that extraordinary afternoon.

My father wanted

to conquer the world

with his long, thick, strong arms.

My father is able

to lift his eldest son

with his right arm

and at the same time

lift his middle son

with his left arm.

My father never

could and never will

lift up his smallest

son.

My father never

could and never will

conquer the world.

At first you don't think
of bearing your father on your back. And after all,

you couldn’t. Much better to begin

with lighter forms – for instance, that

of the woman who wished to cross the stream

without spoiling her dress, or the bride with no veil,

even the riding skirt lifted by the wind.

But some day or other, the old man returns,

and you recognize his whisper in your ear:

“To burn your wings, you must know how to fly.”

What’s a poet in Asia going to do:

listen to the birds, hear

the rain fall against the palms

and grow accustomed to discerning,

seated on the porch,

the changes in the light that announce

the next end of the storm.

What’s a poet in high heels going to do:

miss the train, miss the flight,

miss the Regional Drag Queen show,

exercise his ass and his calves

that have been left to soften

writing so much.

What’s a poet going to do for his lover:

dinner for two

embellishing boiled rice

with pearls ground finely beforehand,
the great Mongolian emperors

found this dish

quite restorative.

I offer these greens to my lips —

The sticky vows of these leaves —

Torn from the perjured earth:

This mother of snowdrops, maples and oak shoots.

See, I’ve grown stronger and blinder

Submitting to the humble roots,

But is this thunderous park

Not too magnificent for mere eyes?

And frogs gleam like balls of mercury,

Their voices linked across the world,

While the small twigs are becoming branches

And mist is becoming a concoction of milk.

i.

when considering use values, one

must always presuppose their

quantitatively determined character, such

as the dozens of times i passed albizu’s

statue without seeing it, one tuna factory,

a ton of sharks that eat from the

discharge, etc. the fictio iuris prevails in

me since i do not possess a thorough

knowledge of sharks, or how the factory

creates an imbalance in the costal ecosystem

[or how i created an ecological imbalance

in my second girlfriend’s family

ecosystem when i ate from the discharge.

the body of a commodity is in fact a

use value or good. the use value

becomes effective only through use or

consumption]. let us carefully

examine this matter.

ii.

an individual commodity, for example,

a quarter of pan de agua, is exchanged

for other articles in the most diverse

proportions. mornings talking about the

unpostponable payment finally

replaced by the acronym i.o.you.

the i. owe. you. this. much. time taken

from my day is exchanged for a call to

the unemployment office that anyone

would say has nothing to do with the

pan de agua or the strong espresso no

milk. nonetheless, what a jawful thing,

its exchange value remains unchanged,

whether it is expressed in x pan de agua,

y minutes of phone call, z i.o.you., etc.,

where x equals y equals z equals zero.

iii.

it must (yes must as in owed), therefore,

possess a content that is differentiable from

those diverse modes of expression. let us take

two other commodities, for example, the

adoquín and its poequivalent: the yearned

adoquín. whatever its exchange rate, we

can create a little formula that reads:

1 adoquín = 1000000000000000 ya,

but these things, being as dissimilar as

august 2 and august 3, as dissimilar as

cnn and noticentro, as dissimilar as

the public financing corporation and

the government development bank, as

dissimilar as spanish and gringo

colonialisms, have to be equivalent to a

third thing, have to be

reducible to this third thing. a

simple geometric example will show

that triangles, like adoquines,

require something in common in order to

participate in numerical exchange. this

something in common cannot be natural

or corporeal. it does not contain a single

adoquín of use value.

iv.

we call useful work the work whose usefulness is

represented in the use value of its product as

useful effect. its usefulness is made evident through

a social division of labor. a set of dissimilar useful

jobs, equally differentiable, radically different,

led tití teresa to work in the tuna factory.

nonetheless, it was not teresa who told me about

the discharge, for she barely discussed work, even

though her clothes always smelled like tuna and she

changed soaps like merchants exchange commodities,

like a multi-membered system changes productive

branches, like one changes one’s specialized

profession when there are no jobs, like one learns

an unknown trade when cans of fish are needed

(you’ll be seventy five cents), like one trains oneself

to bear the stench of a hug when it comes from she

who knows how much is owed and what to value.

Now: Yoga.

Stop it. Sit down.

See in. Or go —

round and round

                 again.

Turn it five ways.

Pain, no pain.

This right, that wrong,

fancy, sleep, remember.

See it. Work it out.

Hear it. Know it all.

See real. Stay real.

Or not. Sleep then.

Catch it. Keep it. Don’t —

lose it. Remember.

Stop it all. Give it up.

Enough already.

Do it — don’t break it.

Believe it. Go on.

No need. No more.

Then some. Go high.

Drop it all. Free it up.

Drop yourself. Free

                          Self.

Fall back. And again.

Don’t worry. All right.

No body, no worry.

Mix it up. Have it all.

Hold true. Stay on.

Remember. See right.

Want it bad. Get it now.

Surrender — sooner.

High, true, pure, free.

No limit. Know it all.

Free in time, of time.

Older, oldest.

                          ॐ.

Chant it. Think it.

Free it. Go in.

Fall sick, feel dull.

Doubtful. Lazy.

                      Unblock.

Put it off. Want it all.

See wrong. Stay gross,

all wobbly.

                      Free up.

Feel pain. Feel blue.

Tremble. Breathe rough.

Mindstuff. Focus.

Focus. Free up.

Match up. Feel it.

Balance. Peace out.

Exhale. Hold it.

Bind it. Stay still.

Watch it. Hear it.

Smell it. Taste it.

Touch it. Steady now.

See light. Focus.

Focus. Get strong.

Transmute. Transcend.

Know sleep. Know dream.

Meditate. Master.

Take it. Accept.

Take on. Reflect.

Word. Knowing.

Sensing. Mixed up.

No doubt. Clean up.

Wipe down. See it —

                          as is.

Follow. Mix up.

Merge in. Know seed.

See light. Fill it up.

Different. Know it all.

No other.

No other.

No other.

Seedless.

The guy who bought the world is totally broke.

What’s the point of such foolishness, simple mind?

He puts on his greatcoat and walks into dusk,

neon lights sing zip-a-dee zap, it grows dark.

He’s used to living in such twilight, behind

frosted glass. He’s beginning to sweat around

the collar, it’s a bit warm. The dinner hour,

time elongates, skyscrapers make a bower.

There are those just on the cusp of dozing off,

there are those who cannot wait any longer.

If nothingness exists, there’s excess, enough

to go around. A crowd mills about somewhere —

still maybe a street ahead of their footsteps,

like that time he grabbed his stuff and headed out

from the hotel and walked the city’s asphalt

till the very clothes on his back turned to salt.

Night has already elapsed, and even I

don’t know how it happened, I didn’t notice

either shade or shadow. Who swapped out the sky?

Was I drunk or was I simply being, since

this existence muss sein? Point to which detail

proves the two worlds differ. How long did it last,

this blink, this dozing off, this single moment

of quick transition, your transfiguration?

And now here you are, the plane having landed,

tires burning, and now the smell, and now heat,

though rather weak — is that why there’s so much fire

and brimstone? A gate, a glassed-in entry point,

and here you are, checking, touching your pocket,

your face — the same. Swollen perhaps a bit more,

otherwise no sign of disintegration.

Truth be told, not a single indication.

The individual who just bought the world

for an overblown price has taken a seat

in a coffee shop and is looking out through

dark sunglasses at the street that he now owns.

At the dazed tourists, the baby in a new

stroller, the waiter bustling like a lone

skier on the slalom of our times, at all

the women with their hips and breasts in motion.

At one in a fur with a cat on a leash.

At cars and motorcycles, the sycamores

unaware of anything and the clouds rushing

along in silence. At displays of jewelry

now his. At the bakery selling what now

is his bread. At the Mr. who sold away

the world tonight, and now through dark sunglasses

from the bar window he watches the man pass.

Trees and grass, where apples lie decomposing

in the evening, and the established garden

on the incline, and the house on the slope

remain, as well as this love. Only curtains

betray a thing or two, but you have to look.

Someone was there — a mother? — who left this one

glass half empty on the table. And a flock

of birds besides, always there till six o’clock.

I can’t sleep. Beyond the wall she lies there sick,

calling out every now and then and scraping

with her spoon, and past the window in the dark

the garden, aching, more swiftly taking shape.

Something made me want to come, to do my part,

to lie down on wet grass, cling to the landscape.

And I kept going farther, drunk just to be

there, in darkness, down, among the apple trees.

He dreams that he is in Cordoba walking

across a bridge, the Guadalquivir whining

and the orange trees in bloom, and an evening

so strong he can smell it and hear the moaning

of motorcycles humming near his ear. Taken

by this spell, already lost, again he mistakes

one alcohol for another: the one in a decanter

and the one outside that so quickly enters

the bloodstream. And the warm city is abuzz

and women soon catch his eye, one right after

another, and thus they will twirl and pester

him all night long. And again he will mix up

his alcohol, pouring love into despair,

and seven times circle by the hotel stairs,

and at dawn in an alcázar find himself again

rocked by the nightingale, keeper of the garden.

I’m the child who plays with the foam

of the ill-fated seas

On that beach flagged by seagulls

I stretch my arms like slack nets

while waves pinch my dreams

and a single tear bursts against the rocks

The reefs poke out at the bank

they come barefoot to dance over my soul

and on their lips they have coral and algae

the swell of the sea transformed to a kiss

So I move my feet

like two old oars

my heart’s an ocean of faces and hands

and unknowingly I enter it

with my sand baggage

clinging to the helm of the wind

to the prow of time

where one voice that isn’t my voice

raises the anchor of this small boat

that recedes with my infancy on board

When I’m buried

I should protect myself

from worms

because surely

they’ll speak ill of me

and spit on my poems

and piss on the fresh flowers

that adorn my grave

if it so happens

that they’d even devour my bones

rip my intestines

or at the height of injustice

they’d steal my gold tooth

and all this because while alive

I never wrote about them

Soldiers on maneuvers sing; they pass through a market town, catching the young lady’s voice but seeing neither dress nor body. Ditches are drying up, granaries bursting. While uniforms have grown less varied, there’s still plenty of work for the seamstresses whose hips electric light has never outlined, women who cried out the first time they saw the ocean. The rooms they live in have little mushrooms growing through the baseboards. To children on their laps these women teach the fable where the grasshopper lives at least two seasons, though naturalists claim it barely lasts a day.

A passerby inhales the odor of stone from a house with its door opened onto a nearly parched public square. He thinks of the draft resisters. Inns come to mind. A police chief opens a slim volume of Verlaine seized in an investigation; eventually he dozes off, head on the wooden table, the book open to a page of the Fêtes galantes. Cumuli scud across the blazing sky. One day many men will stop telling their story for good.

Even when the sounds of war are darkening the world, we might retrieve a trampled postcard, bearing “A Fond Hello” or “Best Wishes.” This one shows the exit of the State railroad factory in Saintes, around 1910: men are scurrying home to their soup with the usual vegetables picked from backyard gardens with rickety fences and small toolsheds. Many wear capes that make one think about the monastic life. The men don’t seem to know the lens is on them. The ones in front look blurry. The surrounding houses must date from around 1880. They’re built to last, but deep within time anxiety is gathering force.

Sensing all this beauty scattered in museums, you’re struck with despair that you can’t hold it within yourself. Outside, you notice tall trees in a garden while a bird from some temperate country flies by. Sometimes thunder grumbles; the paintings slowly darken. For the old museum guards, it’s a diversion; they comment on the sky. Out in the streets, people hurry by huge, oppressive monuments. Rain whips the skylights, high winds break branches, yet the portrait of a nude woman smiles in its black gold frame, bathed in a wavering light.

“Mark my words,” they say, “There will be payback and we’ll see who has the last laugh.” People who go on like that in peacetime may become torturers in time of war, and with marvelous ease. But how to imagine them going to bed at night, content with their pectoral muscles, their genitals, their own odor? The bed groans under their weight. There’s a palm frond stuck behind the crucifix on the wall. They know how to reckon. No letter of the alphabet escapes their sharp memory. When they sit in the barber’s chair, the skimming blade gives their skin a light caress. Behind them is the countryside, stubble fields, frozen wheel ruts. And then you should picture them strolling the outdoor market, string bag in hand. If war hadn’t come, maybe all they’d have done was to rumble on, “There will be payback, mark my words.” And everyone would have made light of this idle talk.

i

stones placed in my pockets stones

placed stones in my pockets but no

I am not the type

to carry them

stones placed in my pockets stones

placed stones in my pockets and were

precious gems but no

I am not someone

who likes

stones

in her pockets

 

ii

there are people who adore stones

but me I like stones

to sit upon

or stones

to step across

there are people who pick up stones

out of the road

to give them the illusion

of weight

there are other people

who believe they can remove

all the stones from above

but then they become sad

and don’t know why

there are people who bear

too many stones

and as they struggle to hold them up

you urge the duty

to bear them

those are your stones, not mine!

I would have told them

but sooner

as later makes it more difficult

to separate the belongings

and there are always those who say

they never heard of them,

Stones? And what are those?

it bloated

those who would

throw stones at the head

and there are also those

who marry their stones

and talk about them all day long

and talk cynically and hatefully

because holy matrimony

does not bend

and there are others too

who fall madly in love

and tread the same stones

hundreds of times

and make a tale of the stumble

and it’s obvious the weight

is the greatest pride

but does anyone know the one

who can live among stones

and dance among stones

and fly with their stones

and walk with grace among the weighty

and walk maturely among the light?

 

iii

placed a stone placed another stone placed a third

stone placed a fourth moved the first placed the

second again due to doubts brought another stone and placed

it and it is not that there were too many stones but that they were

to be placed on the other side was polishing and unloading was

carving into stones was thinking always there is

minimum and there is maximum was opening the hand and letting it

fall was not sinking the boat was not making a tower

of stones was not patching holes with stones that was

an abuse was a punishment that was not a sea

and a boat was a sea of stone and a boat of stone

and was all stone stone but among stone and stone

a crack!

and it was your hardest stone but I

left on the run

Today the wind that I am

is this coughing up of lungs

to take all that remains

of the smoke from a cigarette

 

The rain passes and the sun returns

after the rain the sun is always new

but the sea is stormy

and the wind is alien to me

Between that sea and the sun, there is no way

— I should unpin from all

and cast it away

for a farce:

freedom.

In this unsymbolic walk

walking

is only this.

 

Take.

Extend your hand, grip my tit and take it.

Open your hand. Show it.

There is a nipple in your palm.

 

The tang

of your body

tucked into my pores

resolved in my skin

as a new scent

 

How could the heart

disdain

when the body takes

such specific form?

 

Meditate on the entry to this abyss:

far down

the turbulent seas are red

But my actual body is blue

scratches and in furs and in red

I step on cockroaches or thoughts

I have prohibited considering cockroaches:

I crush them into the floor when they come

and under the sun — I am the fugue

I enjoy

 

I am this body of organs

barely cut and organs

that inwardly

and cooperatively

crave equilibrium

Melancholia perhaps a mode

of equilibrium

But it is not rage

This rage is the body’s

revolt

 

cropch-cratch

 

 

cruptch-tracs

 

 

proct-crachs

 

 

those are the noises

the earth makes

when I chew it

 

 

 

Arrora

 

 

Croptresa

 

 

Amdimia

 

 

Lecumo

 

 

                     rep tila

 

          rasero

                     osuelo

 

 

          oh, please!

          chase me at once!

          devour my organs

          and swallow me

          after tossing me around, don’t throw me later

          the prey

 

                     half-chewed it twists

                                                      turns

                                curls up


And the cock with its slit

throat stands back up

from the bloody casserole,

a carving knife cast aside

into the grass beside a hot

water basin, the dangling

head striking its breast

with every backward

bound across the yard

as you watch and wonder

what it can perceive, as

Lazarus from bible study

comes suddenly to mind, his

resurrection still on everybody’s

lips, though later he died

a second time, and only

the second was real.

How ashamed I felt at the news of your death,

having thought you dead years before.

Unsuspecting, I sat down to peruse

the paper over morning coffee,

and since then, whenever I listen to your music,

mine in the listening even though

my ears are not equal to it, I hope

at the very least I myself am.

You were the greatest cellist in the world,

although my saying so amounts

to nothing, as those three years

in conservatory amounted to nothing:

a clatter leaking through the wainscot

of the corridor, a clamor of dour-struck

keys and sour-plucked strings

discordant behind insulated doors,

the fumes of horsehair and rosin diffusing.

A YouTube interview with you

filled me with disquiet,

not because you moved away,

but because your accent lingered.

So dusk lingers in Budapest:

the flickering light in a tailor’s after closing,

Liszt’s shadow on his Academy throne,

the hiding, the escaping, your murdered brothers,

and the indistinct resemblance between

the echoes of the Metropolitan Orchestra pit

and the mass grave’s silence in your words.

You were the greatest cellist in the world,

you mastered everything except

that one resistant fact, your accent.

You can’t put distance

enough between yourself

and the inner graveyard

of casually missed

opportunities, and so

bear them, tenement

to tenement, like a barrel

organ player who no

longer gathers the coins

tossed from balcony

windows but only bawls

his poison song into

increasingly echoic

chambers, in whose

corners we gnaw

the rank flesh of time

in the belief that

the chunks we choke

down now belong

to us, that the sharing

is yet to come.

Our name is

bodies for the hunt, that’s what they call us

Nothing more than food crossing

a deciduous forest

given over to the wind

I mean getting lost and waiting for the war

to end, one last field of scorched

sunflowers

here in this place we had the custom

of cutting off the king’s

head, sir

It vibrates, the season that surrounds us

there is no abyss

among the trees

this is perhaps

an infinite wood

eternal in its invisible falling

Us. Bodies for the hunt

that stretch out and lose

all notion and the view

we were offered of where

the fog ends

a place unto itself

dominion over this preserve is

what we work for

that is the division

we strive for

with names and shadows linking

skin, the very bottom of every winter

the last drop of an ox emptied

upon the table, over the forest

Thermidor in the bodies that sprout

from a voice without a voice when it dies

croaking from this animal

They speak and upon the marble rests

flesh in a leather sack that drinks it

They write:

we will produce in the heart

we will enter the fields

enter the invisible falling of the forest

so that the shadows might hold up the heart

hold up the fields

hold up all the fallings

and so that the woods an atlas

for the hunt

might bear a trace of them

Thus supplicants speak

in the wrong place:

time progresses against

our hands making them

unrecognizable to our eyes

the eyes of our hands

the ones inside us

our very own birds of light

Like any language, the one that

floats

isn’t selling an object

but rather a relationship, the ways

of becoming linked

an experience operator

reproducing

the thickness of uneven days:

you hear latrines, the grassy

flats the black trembling of

a shot to the stomach

to the tongue

What they call bodies

stripped of hours

impossible shelter

writing of rough spaces

lack of memory

of public life

They write

They plow through our hands

They are visible, the Perseids

pummel the night

once again running down

the names of hunger

taking refuge in the owl’s fresh

kill and the flight

toward another way of seeing existence

so far exceeding

vision and existence

that never shall they meet again

never in the cup, in the well of air

among the fingers intertwined

another dream of life

while the sun, the whiteness anchored

to the cold

The fictional resurrection of that which

does not occur

being against the ground

the mare’s hoof

when it calls

for the sinew of a lightning bolt

The brownish mass spreads

sulphur gum fills streets

and city sewers

and she is the one here

who does not mourn the loss

of present or future youth

of sadness before the ocean

there is not, never was a past

confusion or youth

but for this city

robbery always

human masses that are

repossessed from themselves

and resolve

the signals the smoke the republic

how the ghost scalds the plains

fermenting the lakes or

the dissolving seams of the fortress

anger against anger so that

the jacobean machine

might scratch

this almond eye

so a city rises as a summit

of bones, but it tells

of its own rubble, points out survival

observes a highway against fright

the insistent drumming of the ocean

like children who stray in

in March brambles

the poem also witnesses

the burgeoning of fingernails

language enclosed

because there is an internment of life

atop the moisture that swells

in holes, the very moisture that contains

a violence capable of sustaining

the river beyond geography

and the hearts of the majority

and the budding that announces

a spot for a blue fixture,

a porthole

the blade is drawn and they pronounce

the crown has lost

its balance

breaks down

tramples over hot margins

we feel the exhalation take hold

above all things

above

Behind the door

their fear’s now gone.

On linen sheets

the children sleep.

Creaking handles

and the world unlit by lamps —

windy days

rattling the trees.

In life, fear will never again steal

the moment of dreams, not now.

A tricycle without wheels

casts the shadow

of an old man crouching

perhaps to tell his own story.

Tomorrow will beat against the window

and the furniture will glow.

A shadow will hide

under the gray rug.

Another, inside the kettle.

Relatives shaking out skeletons,

corn scattering to the birds.

Afterwards, around the table,

the girls stunning everyone,

describing dreams

they never dreamt.

In the Chapada everything is big. The sky only ends when you avert your gaze, or when myopia wins. Walk all day and check the map: you only covered enough ground to reach fatigue. The Chapada defies your muscles, your water bottle, your digital camera. The air is too much, it hurts, drying up your breath in this brown June. But the Black River’s water is black and clear, and your feet don’t reach the bottom for fear of plunging. Your voice doesn’t reach the timbre for a cry. To the sublime unquiet of the sky, your thoughts are of no consequence. Just like your life. The savannah sky sneers at witnesses and the sun sets, metamorphosis, blue and yellow catharsis in the Caninde macaws. Someone said that the mountains here are within. You descended into the bowels of the earth, where you dissolve fast as any food. Your skin burns, the night is cold, and the stars pulse the whole restless galaxy as you die once again.

In the Chapada everything is small. Half a meter deep in the river fish nip at your feet and bubbles in the water only last a moment. The current mirrors three hundred small suns. Three hundred million. Pink in the morning, by noon, the mimosa flowers are white. The dust has wings and clings to your hair, and no white on your clothes lasts longer than five minutes. Tiny lunar valleys of rock and sand fit between two footsteps. In the Chapada you are the size of your eyes and of your ridiculous capacity for amazement. In the Chapada you are amazed by the miraculous surface of a flower, too. Of an insect. Of the animal that is just footprint and trace. In the aching muscle of your leg you encounter your soul, that flutters, that escapes the net, that is born once again.

Sins can’t help but burn

in split seconds, a toccata,

fugue of fireflies, end-of-days

in a jar of breeze and cicadas.

Sins adrift in snow, hushed tracks

skid on curves of ice where smoke

traces marvelous geometries.

Between life and death

you’re the one

who floods the known world, springs

summer, fall, and winter, like rain

soaks through the stations of the seasons.

You study everything,

and everything studies you.

Alone standing. Alone sitting. Alone lying down. Alone on the grille. Alone drawn and quartered by workhorses, seeing only their rumps. Alone hanging, ejaculating a mandrake. Alone in the quickness that isn’t, in the minute that isn’t, in the space that isn’t, in time that isn’t, in eternity that isn’t, in the nothing that isn’t, in an emptiness full of mud. Alone in a corrupted chunk of quartz, in an iceberg floating by. Alone in solitude that isn’t. With a moon that was without being. With his footsteps that aren’t footsteps. With this ember that crusts over and burns at its center, and crusts and burns in a dream that isn’t even a dream. Alone in the sleep of the condemned to death.

The faster he walked, the closer he approached his house, the more it shrank away from him, became uninhabitable. The distance solidified behind his footsteps and pushed him forward with the irrepressible force of marching troops. It forced him to enter that minuscule house, which was impossible, yet became possible once the wall of soldiers came to a halt. The traveler, then, shrank very rapidly even as his house swelled visibly in size and in a window a beautiful young girl appeared, laughing at his predicament.

He gasped for air as he ran, pursued by the beauty. He turned back. She came closer, fearsomely ugly. She grimaced in the sun and with the effort of the chase. He was afraid she would catch up with him and grab his hand, forcing him to stop, to promenade regally as if doing one of those minuets more terrifying than a ceremonial tribal dance. He had always dreaded those pompous dances wearing Louis XIV wigs like little mountains of birdshit. The beauty breathlessly followed him, cried, “You’re throwing me out of step!” And because nobody recognized her, the crowd shouted, Stop, thief! In the end there was a wall. They could easily have tracked down the unfortunate man and stoned him, but just then the beauty, catching up to them, said, “I made a mistake. I’m sorry. I don’t know this man.”

If he had come and she instead of coming had gone into the alley and not gone nude as far as the island he wouldn’t have been in the mud till the end of summer step by step and standing on this uncertain island alone amid the enemy willows. She would have had wings. He would have hushed the forest’s edge and the gold and the doe at bay. He and she would be wealthy without that mud on their shoes and without the blood and that seven and that ten and this glass and these clues. They would have been nothing more than hot. A case dismissed instead of this verdict. He would have taken himself down an alley of statues without reading and without dirtying his hunting shoes and without this green from the moss on his moustache and without this bloodstain killing them.

So it came together,

coincided: weakness

after illness, the calm

of gentle weather after

a week of rain, after

symptoms of autumn,

after wind and roving

liquid tons of dark-grey

moisture overhead.

With tenderness I note

how the golden light

of sun sifts through the heavens’

thinning greyness, and with

the change of tone a ray

penetrates the realm

of now-tranquil trees.

How does one tread more firmly,

breathe more deeply, see

things in three dimensions

so as to live and live?

Yellow leaves fluttered from

the hands of a child and a pigeon

flew up — simple joy

needs no translation.

One person settles inside another

and every now and then they speak.

“What time is it?” “It’s half past five.”

They share a laugh, a story, a joke,

maybe just look on silently.

Their appearance doesn’t change for years.

Their hair won’t grow; they don’t age.

That first meeting lingers, endures.

And this time doesn’t pass away.

Drenched in your kisses

the sun & the rain

My pores dilated

like valves

slowly opening

The outside world

permeating

the inner core

You arrived with my reinvention

A universal mirror

reflecting the other sphere

I see you again in dream

dark residence of the dead

where you live & work

Sometimes you signal me

from your astral terrace

Your shadow approaches

casting himself at my feet

our split world shared

When I die

I will join my clay body

with my beloved’s

dead before me

We will merge

one last time

to confront

barbaric eternity

Living too much on the other side of appearances, we awaken sometimes in the margin; spectator to our own pageant. All seems empty then that surges not from the depths and haunts not the source.

Zone of the impossible from where we must return.

Clarity will not suffice. The spirit keeps watch, but as through window glass, and cannot — deprived help — initiate a return. What miracle remains to be wished?

The purity of sunlight, a child’s voice, a kind hand, the spring grass, a distress call or love’s uncovering can become that reason — aligning one shore with the next — why we consent, once more, to our lives.

In the muscle of her heart, quiet lived,

the birth of dawn. The Andean wind

massaged her skin and nourished it with volcanic fire

coursing from the heartbeat. The chaos of the rain

marked her forehead of moist clay. For one moment,

she tried to grasp onto the root, but the wind

abraded her off. She tattooed herself

with smoke as part of an orgasmic ritual, to insure her origin is not forgotten.

The primal cry left her with honey amidst the fog.

Fragrances scattered during the rite. The divine serpent

recognized the energy of quartz, and shuffled the syllables of fire.

I kiss the scarab. It diffuses

into something I perceive within me.

Into something without a name. It dispels.

It is intangible, full of mirrors without syllables.

Step by step, I restore the sensations,

Sculpted by touch, a muzzled

moment. The memory of vigil

hovers awakened, alert to the path

treaded at night. I awake in the attic’s hands,

invisible, ready for flight in delirium.

We fly to the signs of the arcs.

And without language, we secure ourselves

in the uncertainty of a scarab stone.

Leaving is the hardest of the alphabet.

It sounds like chirping doves.

It is time to go. This is the blessing that rains down upon

the wanderer, she never wanted to go. Leaving

is digging through dusk, and not knowing how to discern

between one breeze and the another. Its top lies with the masts of time.

To wander means not choosing the suitcase’s final destination.

Her suitcase is never empty, is always filled with amber necklaces, of corals,

and of smooth sea stones. She voyages to the bottom of the satchel

diving among the unknown depths of times past. She yields herself in the fog,

as vapors of the sea. She dissipates in the expanse of the clouds, and loses herself

in the vastness of the water and the fire.

She finds nothing. The bottom has been raided

by pirates who abandoned the caverns and left them

barren of any nocturnal treasures.

The wanderer must go. Forsakes on one side

immediate experiences and on the other, marks her skin

with the ink of an octopus. She breathes, in the mist of nothingness,

a word, any word. A sea word, salty with grains of sand and time.

One word etched in autumn leaves. The wanderer

must go, freeing divine breath. She must take risks with the wind

and risk her destiny with all the letters of the alphabet.



I am a scribe. I haven’t left my cloister

in lo some thirty or forty years,

but this much I know: a book’s dead if no

errata or proviso appears,

for its essence begins where the text ends,

clear in its illumination, obscured in its title.

Time sieves the sand of what’s written

through the wire mesh of a riddle.

I am a scribe. My clothing is simple;

my instruments don’t dazzle with gold

or mother-of-pearl. I’ve a plank-bed to sleep on,

lips for praying; I work while morning unfolds.

In any book you’ll find a battle

waged — from first line to finis — to the death,

without which no quire’s completed.

And prayers? Oh no, save your breath.

I am a scribe. My humble craft

is my short’s life lasting balm.

Books decay slowly. I remember precisely

how many I’ve done: three Psalms,

twenty Apostols, and nine Palaea Historicas,

five Hexamerons, and seven Bees.

I’d pore through all I’ve copied out, imbibe

the wisdom in words, if only I could read.

And that noon, there was a sudden blast

 

The truly sacrosanct

exploded

 

until razed

and burned

 

 

 

It is imperative that it is once again made whole — the grassland

that now flowers

 

reddening red

 

 

 

 

There is no mark

 

on everything that should be erased

 

 

 

 

Emerging

as if gasping for breath

 

from the one who waits

at the frontline

 

 

 

 

there is a need to eradicate

knowledge

 

declare

the knowledge that is waning

 

 

 

 

senility that’s slowly

endured, savored

 

There may be none

but there’s none

 

except for what cannot be found upon arrival

even after waiting

 

 

 

 

 

 

Created

to come into being

 

Stitched together

 

Become longer

like a procession

 

of horses

In the house which was really a shack, in the laundry room,

on my fingertips, the sourish smell of work clothes

as I look in your pockets for sweet dates that have been forgotten.

Brightness, you wanted, and you used to raise the antenna

the highest in the neighborhood so it could catch disappearing

broadcasts from the expanse of the Mediterranean,

as far as Izmir and Istanbul.

What could you hope to see?

Your eyes imprisoned behind glasses with heavy lenses,

you saw no one and no one saw you.

You didn’t consider how they knocked inside me,

the vapors of the wars of the holy trinity,

Jews Christians and Muslims,

and the thudding of wild horses’ hooves on half a far island.

Evening falls, the call of a man commands

his wife in a foreign language: Comer.*

ּAnd my two useless eyes look for

the brightness they seek.

In the beginning there was a window

and mother,

cats scattering and hiding

from the first rain,

and worm-laden guava

that fell beneath the tree,

rotting in the drunkenness of fall.

This was the first place,

the right order,

the law of nature,

from the absolute beginning.

The wadi widened and blackened,

overflowed and retreated,

leaving a bright field.

This was the First Garden

and I was the first human

who gathered to her bosom

the flowering stars of wonder.

After that the honeysuckle wove a nest

in the old lemon tree,

and from two pearls

split chicks

that didn’t manage to live a day.

This was the first place, yes,

but it was not the law of nature

not the absolute beginning.

And the lemon tree dried up

and the snake of the wadi shriveled

and became ruin like father’s eyes

and again this was not the first place

and it was not the law of nature

and it was not the absolute beginning.

And in the end a window —

my daughter:

seven plants

and a dream,

this is the first place

this is the law of nature

this is the absolute beginning.

Mother, 
you were so small

when I looked for you in the hospital.

I thought I had come into an empty room

when I found, between the sheets,

a white head peering

from a metal bed

and I was amazed and didn’t remember

when I grew up

and when you grew small.

Remember how on Fridays we used

to sweep the courtyard for Shabbat?

You taught me to gather

leaves which fell from the path

and how I cried when the bee stung

and when you removed a sword-sharp stinger

from my bare foot?

Now I wander

down hallways

getting caught in looks which say

I cannot take anything out of you,

Mother, I cannot.

Arriving as daybreak mixed gloom with light

before the Eastern Channel, I was thrilled

and entered with the morning and the tide.

With fellow boaters those waters were filled,

both men and women. These latter I eyed,

but none resembled you, whom I once held

and so, undesiring, away I plied.

The current purled and eddied, caught my prow,

and swept me veering for the other side.

If even water in such whorls will flow —

then will Love’s course run straight? Do not think so.

Grab my waist,

man. The ledge is narrow.

And the abyss is a fearsome undertow

that wants to absorb us.

See: the grassy foothills, from which

this ecstatic gush of cliffs leaps,

look like a boundless graveyard

with its white slabs.

I’d like to dive headlong

into the dizzying fluidity;

I want to free-fall on a hard rock

and uproot it and grind it

with my bony hands;

I’d like to extort from it a sole word

that could give me light, as a cross

in a cemetery. And then, I’d drink

my blood with happy throat-swigs.

Grab my waist,

man. Fog comes

brushing and dispersing my insane nightmare.

We shall see it unravel

over the valleys: and we shall be at the top.

Grab my waist. Oh, how sweet

your hesitant eyes,

your eyes of sheer blue glass.

When in darkness you’ll brim

with a crash

in a waterfall

of blood —

I will cruise with a red sail

across hideous silences

till craters

of promised light.

They are too long, the lines of the unemployed.

They are too endless, the hours of the unemployed.

They are too wide, the doubts of the unemployed.

They are too short, the cigarettes of the unemployed.

My grandmother Josefina was a millionaire.

In her house, no one went without food.

Because of an orthopedic handicap,

when I was little

I had flat feet and only one pair of shoes.

A neighbor — old and generous — took me on walks

holding my hand.

He zig-zagged because he was drunk

and I zig-zagged because of my handicap.

You have seen me,

now I run marathons

and if I return drunk some nights

one hand rests on the wall

while the other holds onto something zig-zagging.

The fire never goes out

in the smokestack of the refinery.

Just as the noise of that toxic industry

is never silenced.

It’s a science fiction city of pipelines

and in the night, a spaceport.

I admired it.

I dreamed of working in that refinery

and estimating the quantity of dead

in case of a tragedy.

I grew up in a neighborhood with a refinery.

I don’t miss my neighborhood

but the truth is this fire

never goes out.

children of the fog

dense fog of those eyes     gazes

intersecting

the paths of meteors

sons and daughters of the forbidden blue

years stained

black with forgetfulness

the dearest of my sisters     life

at the entrance to the garden

where grow blooming bodies and beatific moons

the earth begins on the smooth page     taut belly

exposed to the knife

an incision makes the red flow     I touch the words

roll them     hide them in my pockets

I erase their borders

I invent sleepful mornings

toward which dreams set out with slow steps like camels

and disappear

far away in the desert of the hours

just as I fall silent beneath the branches

your voice dresses in gold and green

dances

displaces the air

destroys time

                         what separates us:

the blue within reach of the mouth

I leave my clothes at the feet of this unknown god —

are you familiar with him?


Death will come for me in Paris, in a rainfall,

on an afternoon I can already recall.

In Paris — I won’t run — Death will come,

maybe on a Thursday, like today, in autumn.

   Thursday, yes, because today, a Thursday, as

I was writing down these lines, I blackened my own

arms and began to see, inside my bones,

from birth to death how alone I was.

   César Vallejo has died, they beat him,

all these people he stupidly believed in;

they hit him hard with a stick and hard also

   with a rope; I call now the witnesses:

the Thursdays, the bones and their marrow,

the rain, the streets, the loneliness.

With dignified expression, my father sleeps.

His heart must be so tranquil.

He’s so pure now …

If there’s anything bitter in him, it must be me.

In this house, there’s solitude; and scripture;

And no news of the children today.

My father wakes up with a stethoscope tuned to

the flight into Egypt, a farewell to bleeding.

He’s so close now;

If there’s anything distant in him, it must be me.

Out there, in the orchards, my mother walks

Savoring a flavor already without flavor.

She is so soft now,

So like wing, like love, like leaving.

There’s solitude in this house without noise,

Without news, without freshness, without children.

If there’s something broken in this afternoon, a hook

and a grinding, it’s those two roads,

white, ancient and curving.

My heart goes down them on foot.

Together we go. The dream

laps at our feet so sweetly

before sweetness is displaced

by life’s pale renunciation.

Together we go. Dead

souls, who, like us,

crossed for love,

emerge in rigid mourning,

and with nauseous steps shimmering,

undulate within us.

My Love, we travel to the frail

border of a heap of earth.

The wing flies by, anointed

in oil and purity. Sharpened

by a fist falling I know

not where, each tear

transforms into a vicious tooth

and a soldier, a great soldier,

with wounds for epaulettes,

awakened by the heroic evening,

pulls out the brain of Life

like a dirty rag, and laughing,

drops it at his feet.

Together we go, so close,

the Light undefeated, together we go,

with nauseous steps, past the cemetery’s

mustard lilacs.

I want to write but what comes out is scum,

I want to say so much I get stuck;

there’s no nameable number without a sum,

no centerless pyramid once it’s been bricked up.

I want to write, but I feel like an Injun;

I want to fold a swan but it comes out a duck.

There’s no semen, once expelled, that isn’t come,

no god or son of god, without bad luck.

OK, so what? Let’s go chew yerba mate,

the flesh of sobs, the fruit of moans,

our melancholic heart prepared on a hot plate.

Let’s go! Let’s go! I’m already alone;

Let’s go get what already got me,

Let’s go, my crow, and make more crows.

This is probably my most distant memory. It’s a happy one. We’re going down a road in the night. It’s cold; I’m all bundled up. I am wearing a scarf and a cap. The road is covered in ice, and seems treacherous under my feet. But I feel safe, advancing between my father and my mother. I am very small and need to stretch my arms to reach their hands. I can’t picture their faces, only the presence of their tall bodies by my side. All around us, a profound darkness: a quiet, limitless vertigo. It’s good to go down into this mystery. I seem to intuit, far away, above us, the shadows of mountains. Perhaps there are bright stars in the frozen night. If I insist, if I force myself, I can introduce some sound into the memory. The voices of my parents who spoke to me from above. Surely I’m inventing that. But who could be certain? Who would be able to declare that it’s imagination that brings their voices and not memory struggling to save them? They speak to me. They laugh. Therefore they are as happy as I. Or even better, my happiness is a consequence of theirs. I dig a little further. There’s something curious: in the darkness we move through our figures are enveloped by light. A luminous halo. From where? Is this the light that will later accompany me on other country roads, and then in the cities? That will help to bring relief in the face of all the damage and the dangers? Will this baptism protect against the bite of the years to come? It won’t. It lacks enough eternity for that. But there, surrounded by invisible mountains, we’re inside a moment that is absolute. No needs exist. My father, my mother, and I are the center of the world. We are enough.

Someone is running naked down the frigid hallways

of a derelict hotel with no stars. Beautiful

beside him, a jeweled rattlesnake uncoils,

red saliva glistening as it shows its fangs.

From the transom of the tiny window raised

above Room 301, come knocking sharp knuckles,

a fog of sweet cigarette smoke, and from Babel

the faraway echoes of lost radio waves.

The knocks return. Become restless. A drunken

tapping of high heels reveal an unwelcomed visitor.

Biting her lips is the surprise of a platinum blonde.

Someone signs the guestbook: Sinbad the Assassin.

Someone’s forked tongue licks the stain of desire.

Someone no one expected is in Room 301.

Rescued from a beautiful shipwreck of mermaids

she is now leaning her narcotized breasts against

an edge of clear crystal. Two black dice

tumble and stop to roll seven. And she gazes

at a man she barely remembers, a shadow who shakes

its mane in a desert of wallpaper and dance.

No one knows the names of those who just

arrived. A light swings above their full glasses.

Behind her another shadow approaches and lengthens

the intermittent light of a dim lantern

that has sealed its rendezvous with hidden ships.

The zipper races indigo, willows a heaven,

and she recognizes the face of the man in a fierce galerna

wind who once threw a lifeline toward her frozen lips.

Nobody knew, nobody, of what dream her

eyes were kept, the woman who stopped, elegant

in the rain. And alone. She lingered in front

of a faceless statue in an empty square.

Nobody could possibly know how her heart

beat as the gray satin glove slipped

from her arm. The key shimmered for a moment.

Nobody saw her looking at that picture

in which a tragic man, touched by the moon,

comes back from the hunt and steps from the car.

Nobody saw her throw the hunter into the fire.

Nobody saw her leave. Nobody felt the clock strike one.

Nobody saw her vanish into the dark.

And the dogs of love kept barking from afar.

They call her Scheherazade. She who is forgetful,

who rises from the lake, she, who between

her breasts wears a gold tooth, she who suddenly

watches the clock, and at each strike she feels

in the pink street corner, the turn of a key where sparkles

the iron grillwork of the labyrinth.

She feels a clarity of the sleek serpent’s neon

no longer blinking. And the night’s long, gradual

stride covers her with a shawl of dew on which

a compass rose of winds is sown.

She looks at the clock again. And again the devastation

travels up her naked back like a shiver.

They call her Scheherazade. The stories she has forgotten.

She knows that when she leaves the lake she’ll remember them.

Out of the hairpin turn the rain becomes viscous,

slow, impenetrable like gelatin.

Before the headlights her shadow is feline,

waving a handkerchief. At last she sits

beside his two sad eyes. Along the way, she says

she tricked the lookout of the black bilge’s den.

They arrive, they enter, they witness. Lights of paraffin.

In back, in a mirror, a tempest agitates.

The man with sad eyes places on a platter

three frosty cups of a yellow liquor.

Later, across the silver he lays out three snowy tracks.

And her feline shadow kisses him, and in his ear,

whispers — he’ll not be coming back. And a fang shimmers

as she tells him tell no one with a finger to her lips.

On the vapor of her belly, across her waist,

in pale handwriting — that hand, then the other hand,

the one that wears the ring, stained by American

contraband smokes —, the gorgeous erasure that sharpens

desire has been lit: it is neat penmanship, a secret

snap of the jaws, it is night one summer, it is the sound

of a piano playing from a dark corner, it is the shine

within the shadow of a treasure that awaits.

Erasures rise through the woman’s shoulder

as she sits up straight in the deep divan

beside the aquarium. She smokes. She looks strange in that corner.

The man of midnight draws her attention to a star

that’s bleeding from a gunshot. Later, they will run

away and see the dream of one assassin to another.

Coming from the window of the bar, a tune

speaks of prisons, of a day and someone’s lips.

And he feels upon his lips the night’s chill,

and in his pocket he squeezes a black scorpion.

He’s back from the islands. The light of the narrow lane,

fatal ever since then, has made him smile.

(And in the same alley he sees her pass, an old

spy with burning ember in hand and a swallow of rum,

who steps from the shadows to enter

the phone booth beside the pier.) The fog suggests

a streetlight screaming across the neon sign

where “The Gold Tooth” glows. A signal flare

rises at high sea. As it flashes, he sees

her lips, traitorous and fleeing in confusion.

At last, everyone left. On the table the leftovers

of a poker game of invernal ages,

of nights without piety. Four of a kind still flashes

in the young princess’s fingers

who won the hand, an unexpected arrival carved

upon her belly in beautiful initials.

Everyone except the shadow who touches the window panes

to leap from the banister and puncture

the thick smoke around a waning quarter moon.

The shadow who once nuzzled her breasts

and ventured a burning hand beneath lamé panties.

The shadow who reclaimed his share of the fortune

placed before his eyes the dark loneliness

of a mirror he kept hidden up his sleeve.

Like a liquor stain on the carpet, hair

spilling over of the woman who sees

a white pedestal. How incredible it seems,

their eyes passing through a mirror

quick as a shadow. Tick-tock. And a fear

strikes in the bells of metallic winters,

of secrets crossed-out in tragic diaries

they found when they entered. Nobody ever

knew why she asked them (in vain) to search

the other labyrinth of white pedestals

for the sculptor who — she said — fled with his fate.

Later, upon opening the letter she clutched

in her hand, they found the map without cardinal

points where a laughing mask pointed the way.

Years have gone by. A telephone is ringing

down the frozen hallways. Between mists underwater

her fingers stop searching for that other lather.

She opens her eyes. She wonders. Answering

can’t be worth it. Yet she leaves the bath. Seen slipping

across the surface is her nude body in a mirror

as are her tracks of wet footprints … On the phone receiver

comes a voice like a distant star trembling.

— Thirteen paces I counted, marked leading to the north,

where there was ice on your lips … —From the open balcony,

hardening her nipples is a long-forgotten wind.

— Count them again — she says —; if you push the doorbell, forever

open for you will be my desert and my skin:

and beneath it all, my treasure, and its scorpions …

Their commas exact and sensible,

poems slip into publication —

but my insomniac monologue

doesn’t see itself inside that spine.

It’s not really my book —

it’s floating without oars

into the far rapids, some boat

I’d left untied at the pier.

It rides on the shoulders

of unfamiliar but faithful friends.

Let this boat carry their past

like quenched candles — until we meet again.

While poets still live we trade the stars

for clarinets and flutes of birds;

and flutes, for blue brushes of flowers,

ratchets of dragonflies, whips of shepherds.

How strange to think that we’ve exchanged

for rhyme — in which there’s so much sorrow —

for voice—its sibilation and terror —

our rooted-underground honor.

And you’ve loved us, and us you’ve praised,

so why do you lie there, grave to grave

and float mute in boats, listing —

scyther and psalmist and carpenter prince?

Where black wind, like a robber,

sings a convict’s slang,

a lone trackman walks, his fire

the only light on the plain.

In the zone of estrangement

a lantern swings at his side —

like wings from a dream

on a river in the waning night.

Here in the lullaby light

at the edge of the human,

by this singular feature

I recognize my native earth.

Through these iron rails, one hears

a hazy, prophetic call

of impossibly blessed

and sleepless cities at night.

And close as a painter

a train traveler tracks this light;

the railroad worker,

upon the vast steppe, slips from sight.

If I were the arrogant man I once was

I’d leave you forever, leave

what I should never let go,

and everything not worth the grief —

my kingdom divided in two.

I’d say,

                        go ahead and seize

one hundred promises, one hundred

holidays, one hundred words. Go ahead.

And I’d be left with a cold dawn, one

hundred late-running trolleys, one hundred

drops of rain on the trolley route,

one hundred lanes, one hundred streets, one

hundred drops of rain running after you.

I

I beheaded groves and meadows

to make a tender bed.

Bitter hops and sweet laurel

would cling to your feet.

March did not relieve April

to guard our order, our laws.

So I built you a memorial

on this soil rich in tears.

Under the northern sky I stand

before your white, rebellious

Parnassian height,

and cannot recognize who I am,

alone in the black shirt

in your future, as in paradise.

August, 1968

II

When misery lay covered in flowers

in the Cathedral of St. Nicholas,

a word both humble and stark

gleamed its austere dark

on the wax of sovereign lips.

But its meaning was beyond us,

and if we’d understood, we wouldn’t remember.

It was opaque as fiction —

and if it could be revealed, it could,

but only in the quiver of dripping tapers.

And over the black Neva ice,

over the snowy desert Baltic,

and over the blue Adriatic,

the shadow of your homeless pride

flew before our gaze.

April, 1967

III

Homeward, homeward, homeward,

under the pines of Komarovo.

O, my mortal angel

in lacy three-cornered scarf

with wreaths above your head,

your wings ready to unfurl.

Just as snow in trees

burdens not the branches,

your open ark’s no burden

for earth, hovering above our gaze,

beyond your twenty-first century,

from your age to the ages.

Winter flung one last spire

of light above its head,

like the first wingflutter

of Karelian pine,

and above the snowy blue,

stars prickled the sky.

All night we promised

you immortality, all night

we longed for you

to take us from the house of grief —

all night, all night, all night,

as it was in the beginning.

April, 1967

IV

Over ice and white, over jasmine,

in her palm paler than snow, she took to her coffin

half a soul, half a song

in praise of her.

Not trusting eulogy,

finishing her earthly half-circle,

half-recognized like heresy,

through the icy curtain, through

the vortices of light —

                                  she looks south.

What does the invisible gaze

of her clear, distrustful eyes see?

The parting gates, opening to miles

and winters, or the great fire

come to engulf us?

January 3, 1967

V

I saw this shade off, on her last

trip, to the final threshold,

and two wings behind the shade’s back,

like two rays, slowly faded.

How did the earth orbit, once again?

Winter trumpets from the forest clearing,

and mica ghosts of Karelian pines

reply to its horn by clanging.

What if, outside the earthly, memory

can’t, at night, remake a day?

What if, after leaving earth, the shade

can’t drink immortality in words?

                                                Enough, heart.

Don’t lie. Swallow a little more blood

and bless the dawn’s shards of light.

January 12, 1967

Enduring roots,

effort accumulated drop by drop.

Growth of branches, silent

growing of hidden strength.

Like a rumor of the forest

presence of the forest, voice of the forest,

multiple voices of unsilenceable tongues.

Melville tells how Clarel descends

toward the sacred pool, sacred water.

The water

that can make the blind see

and heal the sick.

The water springs from hidden caves

from underground rivers.

It sounds for a time, then for a time is silent.

A silence, a sound:

a rhythmic mystery.

The pilgrim goes down

very carefully, feeling close

to that incompressible, miraculous …

Suddenly

the noise of a loose stone

breaks the magical silence

and it falls into the water as all stones fall

stones in the water, the water,

they are suddenly like stone and water.

Nothing else, just that.

They shine still alive

half carnate, still magnets

though with diminishing power.

Here it rises again: the upright stem,

timeless, the eternal rose.

Cut it.

(And even cut, it still shines.)

White tented cloth

And plants and a bird and crumbs

We two embrace before the morning

Small seedlings of music everywhere

The eons

And from high up the red boat

Laden like myriad harmonicas

The words of July

We are Greeks of Asia my love

We are alone

                      in the waters, the deep of Louisa and the

Stepless pearl-e-ros

                                   divers of little syllables.

Flames small

And others large

Sleep’s words

Dimly dimly gloams

The sky

And if it doesn’t find you

It’ll fall — or again

Your garden on tip-

Toe crosses

The window to flee

Cat with electrocuted tail

The eon raptor

A slight house standing

In my teeth

Naked I fuck the night

Catch me.

And everywhere axes —

with the pine gashes — your heart

Men bore me in the pain of learning an inner stranger

they cursed fate fishing me out of fire water      before the eyes of

disoriented females they bit through the umbilical cord furious

Men breastfed me with the usual helpings of cold

it entered my tendons and my muscles went still

their long-awaited rejection fed my heart milk

Men were good to me they covered the slick and empty surface

with webs of goals      cartography of triumphs      they summoned each other

in my most important moments revealing the beautiful places of the earth

Men only men were able to wait in earnest      tough Penelopes

they could be wonderful women doing their job even-keeled

not wasting time on sentimental theories they slammed the door shut

Only men and their friendship without illusions      rough epidermis

under my fingertips      where there is nothing to savor one saves on tears and blows

no problem tightening the glass-filled fists

Men taught me how on occasions one sticks to the cause till the end

women are there to be touched zippers to be unzipped

skirts to put one’s hands under      night to be entered deeply

Men a taste of vodka and failure      safe indifference

there is no place which would be far away      they returned my freedom

without asking permission      left me a rib for the road

Consigned to silence Hidden in the death act

Pressed against the chest Dissolved in saliva

Hooked by the teeth Slipped under the tongue Sunk into arteries

Narrated by the skin Tied up in the guts Smashed against the heart

Stretched by the lip corners Grown into the feet Slid under the eyelids

Tangled up in the eyelashes Beaten down by the fingers

Dried up in the earlobes Wedged under the head

Stored inside the muscles Grown over by scars

Ironed out in clothes Combed into the hair

Caught on the pharmaceutical bait Punctured through by words

Dazzled by the white walls

Broken by the conscience

Tricked by the lips closed tight

The scream

Her heart was light like a feather

a gentle breeze even

a single sigh could kill her

she knew how to read mouth corners and shapes of fingernails

she took a long time weighing each word inside her

sometimes even a “yet” was so heavy she would fall into an abyss

actually she was transparent

a see-through object of angst

just like the notes of Mozart’s Lacrimosa

like air that can become stone any moment

sometimes she feared her own shadow and gave way to it

she fed on trinkets:

a lock of hair over the ear of Raphael’s beautiful gardener

a single flaw on David’s finger

the gaze of a young man on Lotto’s painting

the field of sunflowers and lavender meadow

she loved what was behind glass

picture faces in gilded frames

exotic butterflies in clear coffins

and fish in their tanks with whom she spoke French

the world was dearer to her when she looked through a window

not really seeing but feeling it

with every inch of her translucent skin

the ones she loved she watched from a distance

close-up she was distracted by details

when somebody stepped up

she hid behind a thin sheet of ice

worrying that when it melts they will see she is fragile

she pretended to be in a hurry and returned to her glass house

under artificial light and in room temperature she bloomed like an orchid

a small plant doing her penance of keeping watch

the little one with a feminine smile

yesterday she was a castoff today she is a beggar tomorrow she will be queen

I’ve written so many ugly and dirty poems

and not a single person was outraged just the opposite

they called for “more” I felt almost holy

so many risky confessions directed to women and men

ambiguous vulgar savage rapes of the lyrical

and yet I was followed by a disgustingly good reputation

I’ve assembled so many negations and retorts

I lost myself in them but I can still hear the repulsive words of comfort

“you incurable pessimist” as if they counted my “no’s”

I cursed so many times in literary magazines

and never had any “how can you’s” only royalty checks

I confessed my sins publically so many times

I aired my dirty laundry in front of everyone

and yet I was always absolved: “Go and bother no more”

so many times I rushed naked to city centers

and always anonymous packages came out of nowhere — with Dior’s lingerie

and notes on pink paper: “Be careful not to catch cold”

how I wished for a tiny little stake to be lit on my bedside table

no way just publications flowers awards interviews readings banquets and other crap

those boring nineties without lynches only a thin worn-out crowd

with their daily papers obituaries horoscopes and TV listings

their humanitarian “are you ok?” “how is your health?”

the pretentious rhetoric of every day

that trails the shadow of the last verse behind it

could what I’ve written be true

That’s enough. I lean

into your words, light for my thoughts. They’ll open

doors and let truth be heard, the artists, the

intellectuals — they’ve always

dusted off reality, uncovered

ways, emancipations

they themselves couldn’t always see through. They were

premature in some cases, and in others, well

— let’s concede — , those require other terms, drawing

the slide back to cock the hammer, using

the sight to set on something that might move. A shape,

a rustling less than a hundred yards

from your vulnerable heart, also enemy.

✼
Here, chance has ceased to be mistaken:

the light was lit and your chaos could be seen, the

atrocities: that hand

there, this greed. Fear and other malignancies

were evidenced, love

did not appear anywhere. No one — utterly changed

by the surprise, exhausted by what happened — no one

can deny that in this country, in this

continent, we are dying of shame.

✼
Here I am losing friends, looking

for old comrades-in-arms, gaining life too late,

wanting to breathe in

fragments of hope, mouthfuls of breath — to leave,

flying, so I won’t drown, so I

can see the whole earth and fall in its arms.

I heard some boys ask: “who’ll stop the rain”; other

people heard the same question and, in turn, began

to ask it: the store clerk, the dispatcher of imported

drinks; even grocers and Uruguayans and continental

brothers abandoned their old and stupid

rivalries, clearing the clouds of mystery

and confusion over the earth, to ask precisely: who’ll

stop the rain. Guardians of order ventured

in their desperation to ask themselves as well: “who’ll stop

the rain” and the question rolled from hand to hand, until it came

to the cushioned ears of torturers, specialists of all kinds that never

were able to plunge into the sun’s glory: “Who’ll stop the rain,” they said

one and all and the dumb and the petty thieves tried to capture

the clamor, the new airs loosed with the rains, the love

that uproots with the storms: “who’ll stop the rain,” said the infirm,

the defenseless, the defeated, the satisfied who ceased being so

immediately after asking “who’ll stop the rain.” Immediately

victories collapsed like triumphant plagues, the New Deal tangled

in its golden chains, Doctor Frondizi didn’t notice. The dead

yielded to the defiance: the assassinated came

to lift their lacerated heads and gaze straight ahead,

demanding: “who’ll stop the rain.” And the question spread

like the seasonal storms, shoved against

the sky, opened to the lights of the universe.

I’d never been so close to one.

When I found it hidden in the boat,

beside the riverbank,

its eyes still shifted back and forth,

as if sight itself were movement,

flight.

Its wings were broken, and its long, thin neck,

as graceful as the reeds,

could only intimate its feathers, slicked with mud.

The acid ants, bright red, ate from the gaping flesh,

the bird-blood streaming from its side.

I stared, afraid to touch:

I’d never known about the drawing-out of death,

this trembling beyond pain.

The crane was drawing labored breaths

when the handle of the oar I gripped

shattered its skull.

It made no sound, it never squawked,

but with a reflex, the kind that life can’t yield,

it moved that leg of river grasses

once or twice.

I felt a line of cold rise slowly to my neck,

my hands shook, since they couldn’t weep,

and in my soul, compassion

wore shame’s face for the first time.

But in the splendor of the body

that fractures had abased,

and as the spirit of the bird cut free,

something in me vanished, too, something fragile, dying.

That was many years ago, and sometimes, in the afternoons,

I watch the crane return, inside me,

across the broad sky of my youth,

lurching, barely in flight, nearing the ground.

I know it’s very tired,

as all things that repeat themselves are tired:

crickets’ unchanging song,

what’s on the other side of windows,

the constant weight of blame.

But I’m waiting for it to fall

so I can draw close again, the oar clutched in my hands.

And if I should remain inside the belly of the whale,

if, when three days and three nights have passed,

I’m still here,

reciting the words I learned on earth

in the dark

and the fish’s mouth won’t open.

If my arms and legs

should learn the ocean’s forms

and if the ribcage of the whale becomes

an extension of my body

and if I learn to raise my voice

until it mingles with the songs

of all the other whales

as they gather for migration.

And if, after we’ve swum from north to south and south to north,

we’re still as far from Nineveh as when we started,

I’ll learn the language

of the shoals

and tell them, from inside my whale, to go to shore

and swim where people wade, among their legs;

they’ll bear the message,

they’ll be gentle, slow,

so children can touch them.

You stood before me as the fog came down,

responded to my words

as gently as a door without a bolt.

You were your city,

the twilight in the narrow streets,

moss growing on the stones,

the snow’s raw damp.

You were an unfamiliar tongue inside my mouth,

your language made of mountains,

the music of what’s pulled along.

I saw the shadow of your body

repeating you beneath the arches

with a shape that wasn’t yours.

I’ll remember while I make my bed

and the beds of my two kids

and while I wipe one’s vomit off the floor

open a window to the dust in the road

and while I uproot weeds

from a pot that doesn’t grow roses

and read a recipe for the authentic mansaf

while I mend a white gown that little fingers punctured

and prepare winter’s budget

sniff a quilt for ammonia

while I flip through the six TV channels

looking for Tom and Jerry as commanded

while I search in my supermarket of a purse

for a forgotten pad

I’ll remember

While I bathe a body the size of a palm

remove green boogers from soft noses

untangle a hair that chocolate and lollipops

and apricot jam have invaded

while I read stories about dynamic ants and lazy lions

and migrant seals while I degum the sole of my shoe

and search for the best method to remove

oil stains while I bite my twenty nails

after a long hunt for scissors

I’ll remember

When a child touches me by mistake

in body parts that no longer function

when the faucet sprays me and Turkish soap

operas anoint me their loyal fan

when two hands pinch me under the table

in a restaurant and when I excavate

for living desires in children books

I’ll remember them all

mothers with jaundiced eyes

all at once spilling in front of me

Their dazzling thighs that plunder the house

their fleeting anger in certain times of the month

the excessive anxiety over the phone bill

and belly cramps of endless bloating

the absurd interpretation of dreams for little devils

the coffee cups ready for fortune-telling

the song of the blue skirt above the broad knee

the lips that ooze under pressure bites

large bras for bills and coins

forgotten aprons over round guts

and the nonstop stories of the lewd girls next door

Mothers with cut braids

and clay henna streaming over eyebrows

and dead desires

The revolutions I have known

began their first days drafting lists

for walls of shame

Whoever wins by killing fewer children

is a loser

The land that promises me paradise

is an impoverished land

I listen to their jokes and chatter about the devil

the flames that will burn those who lie

and what fluttering beautiful doves are saying

The kids are screaming now

as I write this down with the skill of a plagiarist

who knows exactly what to add and what to delete

for the text to become original

Then I draw a picture of the schoolteacher

who will reprimand me tomorrow

after the kids tell her what I said to a T:

No God will burn us

and no Devil will reside in our hearts

At the corner of my laptop screen

a hole in my heart

the size of an Ozone puncture

opens up for the kids and devils and schoolteachers

and also the one touch from your hand

that can plug it up

You moved gently from sleep to death,

from night to tomb, from dream to silence,

like the sob of a closeness, vanishing

into the air of a collapsing summer night.

In deep Twilight, where colors darken

and the world whitens beneath the ashes of dreams,

you seem to listen to the ebbing sap

and the musical April the flowers sing out to.

The velvet earth embraces you silently,

and over your forehead, violets are weeping.

Your unreal, mild blonde hair

glimmers faintly, clear and cold.

Your stare is the blue of ether and wave.

Your dress, the ripple of wind and forest.

My kisses burn your white fingers.

The night air scatters the dust of worlds.

And yet, in the center of the night,

gazing at you no longer delights me.

The moon’s slanted gleam had grazed you …

it was horrible, that mantic lightning

exposing the ugliness deep in your beauty.

I saw a wilting flower spreading

over the summer dawn of your mouth —

an old courtesan’s decaying smile.

You for whom I wrote, oh beautiful young women!

You alone whom I loved, will you re-read my verses

in the future mornings snowing over the universe

and in the future evenings filled with roses and flames?

Will you dream, in the pretty jumble

of your scattered hair and undone dresses:

“Through thick and thin, this woman

carried her loving eyes and lips.”

Pale and exhaling your perfumed flesh

in night’s magical rekindling, will you say,

“This woman had a passion that fled from me …

If only she were alive! She would have loved me now …”

Technical things

put mechanically one after

another, like a train,

wagons loaded with a package

of precepts and everyday prescripts,

keep and upkeep: main-

tenance of a life

like of a sink which has to

stick in the wall,

my technical I

assembled in a boxy

reality, flat three-dimensionality.

A boy on the bus saying to me:

Look what I’ve got

I sewed it by myself

and used it

right away —

in a patchy little sack,

a sprig of willow catkins

in the middle of November

I like making things

what wasn’t, now is

I’m good at this

Something that wasn’t, now

is — evening,

three words in a row

vanishing into the pit

in the middle of the wall

from where they give off a void

What was, still

is

— as a speech

Sometimes, I’m good at this

WAS-IS and WON’T-WILL,

mortar — glue — a clogging lullaby

of technical things

and a fistfight

between

WON’T-IS and WAS-WILL

Just flashes will remain,

sequences of a filmstrip.

July, Venice: how many canals are there?

How many palaces, and what

do they mean?

One pink, another white,

the other yellow —

like colored fruits.

Once, it was the capital

of the world.

Now, just tourists

and masks:

as many tourists as

masks.

Plus the mask of time:

moment,

mask of continuum.

With a big Venetian nose sniffing out

everything.

The past is parcelled out

like shelves in the supermarket

in the outskirts of the city:

on the right, cheese,

on the left, cakes,

in front, pasta and toilet

paper, behind

bleeding meat. My meat —

and trained puppets with their carts

buy pictures of the past,

paying with the present.

Canals like

TV channels, editing the past,

the future, a poet stands

on the bridge, switching over them,

collector of his I’s

and our SELVES, their

soap operas —

and with the help of tricks

he makes a film from the flashes,

because he can’t do anything more,

just complete

the headless face, the moment, the mask

of Venice ...

There is one who among the living rests,

his death resuscitated by cypresses.

The wheat sprouts in his hand of grasses

because to wheat and hands

he fell.

César of rage and thunder,

town crier

for peace nonpareil.

I relive your bread burnt face,

unscathed fist open to faith.

Over the Eiffel tower

I perceive your chained god bones,

your raucous architecture

of the man of bread, of César y Vallejo.

I will tell you a name as written in lime

by the fiery index finger of a forest archangel.

There are names that are the fire

as if roughly sewn.

This is the name I bear in the lines of my hands,

the name that tells a legend

and writes the story of my twenty five years.

It is beautiful to be born like birds

on a stone nest,

lift the wings like an antenna of light

over the bitter sea,

carry the name of the beloved

on the wings.

But more beautiful still

is to be this rare bird, this sword silent

like a snake tongue,

this blaze of burning lava and rocks,

this name stretched in the brooks,

this body awaited in the midsummer heat,

this voice, these hands, this mouth,

this innermost scratch of fable and glass.

This is why I am the way I am,

why I am named this way and no other,

why the land has made me prisoner.

This is the mystery,

a name, a word, a blaze,

a little geography.

I am crushed by love

between four walls of live lime.

Under the lemon trees,

in the scented shade of pomegranate trees,

where basil and rosemary exude their aromas,

the figure of palm trees as if beautiful women.

Now you know the mystery of my life,

this lacquer name unearthed for you

by the thirst of my salt works.

Now you know this name of torture,

this name of fig tree and quince,

this fragrant branch of orange blossoms,

this frothy shroud of rough sea

where the birds nest,

this lustful woman with red mane

who wrote the legend of my twenty five years.

Now I have no mystery for you.

I am the man from the island of Ibiza.

This evening reminds me of the beginning, when I was closer to the windows’ iron bars than the sun, and when I was watching: how the windows’ iron grows to a plant in the evening.

I was entering the presents, which didn’t notice — a golden ribbon on an empty box\ which is life\ and what it was supposed to be.

In that tour of Al Rasheed street, he stopped before the glass of the shop; he knew it well: ever since it was something forming in the ranged dust of the street\ (the days held the color of permanence … ) … he was growing more barren each year, and becoming new in the opposite yard, where the river shines with its voice’s lights.

The shop is now closed\ and the street is rolling in a motion that extends to the beginning of Abu Nuas, to establish — from there — the voice of childhood in a remote encounter.

Dee dee… dum di dee…

Good morning brothers and sisters

of broken ear drums.

This is the Voice of Solitude

broadcasting live

from America, in the middle of a cornfield

on the channel of exile with no regrets.

Today’s high temp

will be a hot 98 degree hard-on,

no rain and suffocating atmospheric conditions

due to crazy stories coming from the East:

to rescue her daughter,

a mother set herself on fire;

two naked women

clasped a body of land;

trying to save a river,

a crowd waved banners across a bridge,

only to be kicked into the water.

Meanwhile, all is quiet in the West.

Business as usual,

eat less fat, drive in circles.

Red lights slow the disintegration.

Life is an iceberg,

it melts faster on sunny days.

Let’s switch to the Reconciliation Program.

Forget all your suffering, humiliation, sorrow and bitterness.

Please call this number to chat,

1 800 – 382 5968

or

1 800 – F U C K Y O U.

Dee dee… dum di dee…

Now for a commercial break…

I don’t recall the color of March,

only the snow melting that day in Chicago.

I flew south to Atlanta,

walked around a sparkling downtown

circled by dismal districts.

Setting out, I explored the monotony of manhole covers,

observed the immature flies of spring,

nervous vibrations atop pathetic flower pots,

in front of a liquor store dotted with cigarette butts.

I knew an incident just occurred

but didn’t see any blood.

I bought a map to make things clear

you are here, an outsider.

In the Coca-Cola Museum,

I pissed more than I drank

of the different sodas

tricking my thirst.

I heard America burp.

This guitarist stretches his strings

from one time zone to another,

from the silt beds of the Cuu Long River

to the fields of the Midwest.

The sky where he lives is often cloudy,

the cows slaughter-ready.

His songs are about love,

the smell of a road after a tropical storm.

He sings of exile, blizzards,

and empty parking lots.

His past is like a street musician

faking blindness. His present

is like a hot air balloon,

aloft, and waiting to fall at last.

His future is just a TV,

in a nursing home, losing its signal.

He has nothing but music

in this hard-of-hearing world.

And this makes him feel as useless

as those times during Sunday blackouts

he would lie in a tiny room

on Nguyen Tri Phuong Street naked

and fanning himself,

in Saigon during the 1980s.

You are sitting

in the armchair next to mine,

and the silent spittle

hanging from your lips

distinguishes you.

Zombie like the others

with a head like a cow.

You have an oil lamp without any oil

on the side table

and a pile of crime novels.

So much clarity requires a name:

Diógenes Osram.

(You could call me Wrought-Iron Gate Without Hinges …

but you can’t.

You could misunderstand me,

but you can’t.)

Your bald spot, a lustrous bulb that doesn’t shine.

Your belly, a cracked skin that has lost its tenor.

You wear death’s uniform:

an undone sky —

blue pajama.

I see your ruddy profile

your prismatic tears

— your eyes, two worn out marbles

that fell to the floor and stayed there.

The government pays for your imitation leather

easy chair

and the window you don’t look out

that lets freezing cold in.

Are you also

the world’s deep breath?

A lump

in that breath?

Your present has come to the mansion

of Past-Future,

where they will rewrite

the past, the future, and the present

of your breed, your sex, and your age

on your flesh.

It is your contribution

to the health of the tribe.

I see you

and I ask your forgiveness for seeing you.

Or perhaps you wanted to be seen.

Here, for you, there is neither day nor thing.

The satellite no longer sends

calls to your cellphone.

Your misfortune is a bit inhumane:

the absence of philosophy.

It’s impossible to know what you think about

or if you think.

Such is the sublime victory of your grand defeat.

Have you feared the death

of your personal mandrake?

Have you driven

with frozen windshield wipers?

Have you woken

with

your hands cut up?

Your silence

is a bomb of silence.

A hyena’s anus chases you.

Nothing cleanses

your sores.

They practice the sagittal cut on you,

but it reveals nothing.

To name you —

that is poetic fallacy.

What is stored in your dresser:

your ID and six pairs of underwear.

What is put in your mouth:

a spoon

which you do not suck, berries

of different colors.

I have qualms about kissing you,

but I feel like kissing you.

(Forgive me for any irony.)



The air dries his flesh, all of his skin.

Lying on a bed of salt.

He doesn’t shave with the ice razored over the cistern.

He rubs the nettle of his hand across his face. Or he doesn’t.

He stands to be idle.

 

The roses, the primroses,

the hedge.

He sees them.

In the middle of the day,

on the whiskers of a primrose,

he bites the black bread’s

broken dentition.

(He bites the unbiteable meat.)

Silver in his hair and silver in his eyes.

He hangs on to his jacket

as if to life,

even though he looks for bananas,

reasonable people, tropics,

the spermatic poplar tree.

 

His sight line

about to break.

Flesh,

written in a dead language,

says:

“Give me gazpacho.

Give me omelet.

I don’t want dessert.

Or you are dessert.”

He doesn’t mix his blood

with the froth of the ocean.

He doesn’t cry

his tears of tea.

He thinks:

“I have been an honest pillow,

a sturdy headboard, a healthy pine,

a serious dream.”

Thread straw

through a needle.

 

Cutting the hedge

would be like fucking,

being thirty, fifty.

A shirt doesn’t conceal

the silence

of a bonsai forest.

Now he no longer opens or closes

his coin purse

that

for years now

she doesn’t open or close.

He is the owl

that passes in front of the sun

in the white of day

and makes your hair stand on end.

It is still the date and the world.

Sleepless,

I noticed something on the windowsill.

I got up,

pressed my eyes to the glass.

There you were.

Your poor eyes were

shining.

The line of your back turned silver,

mole.

I took a step back.

I undid it.

We stayed like this,

face to face,

lightly scruffy

for a good while.

Later

each one went back to his bed

of black

sheets.

The bread’s poisoned and the air’s drunk up.

How hard it is to treat wounds;

Joseph sold into Egypt

couldn’t have suffered more!

Under a starry sky, Bedouins,

eyes closed and on horseback,

shape private epics

about the day they’ve lived through.

They don’t need inspiration:

one lost a quiver in the sand,

one traded a horse — the fog

of events disperses;

and if sung truly

and with the whole chest —

everything finally disappears,

leaving space, stars, and the singer!


Your thin shoulders are fated to turn red under whips,

turn red under whips, to burn in frost.

Your childlike hands are fated to lift flatirons,

lift flatirons, yes, to tie to a noose.

Your tender feet are fated to go barefoot over glass,

over glass barefoot, yes, in blood-stained sand.

Well, then, I’m fated to burn like a black candle for you,

to burn like a black candle, yes, that doesn’t dare to pray.

Mounds of human heads stretch into the distance;

I grow smaller here — they hardly notice me,

but in gentle books and children’s games

I will rise to say the sun is shining.

They killed one of El Pareja’s neighbors:

gunshot in the back; expanding bullet.

The migra said the victim was smuggling people, drugs;

said it was self-defense,

said he only fired after being attacked with stones.

And we all know what stones can do.

In La Libertad all the houses hold each other up:

doors that lead into the street, into neighboring yards,

long clotheslines in danger of extinction,

electricity and television lines shared through under-the-table agreements.

Joint alleyways, windows looking out on windows,

fiefdoms controlling entire zones.

Here the workshops, the houses,

the little stores and the abandoned movie theatre know their limit:

a wall not to be crossed.

                                                    (unless you talk with Don Pancho or the Huertas)

Doña Sara’s garden was the envy of La Libertad.

A mandatory trip for people who knew about geraniums.

It’s so hard for them to sprout in the desert.

One of the many times life dried up,

— like the dirt hidden under her plants — ,

Don Marcos proposed going to live on the other side;

in any case the compost already came from there.

She simply responded:

And my plants, Marcos? How do we take my plants?

El Juan’s last name is Laguana

his grandfather is a gringo-guameño ex-marine.

His grandmother lived in Tijuana.

They were waiting for the war to end.

(Pacific mestizaje thanks to gringo militarism)

His father never wanted to go to Vietnam.

He thought it'd be better to be a mechanic on the border, where cars are everywhere.

We grew up working in the iron shop;

we crossed the border every day;

we talked about the Mexican national team,

about La Libertad.

He seriously thinks the migras can’t touch him.

I tell him he’s really fat, that he couldn’t get away if he ran.

He tells me that by guameño standards he’s eight pounds below average.

... and what I hear on the radio or read in the paper,

              after I tear my doo-rag off my head and enjoy

my morning coffee like most Americans I know.

I just want to start my day, imagining

              all the people I see outside getting here for the first time,

trying to do their thing while I do mine.

But the news persists ...

Later, after a stranger pulls himself from the Straits of Gibraltar,

              after death in the water and resurrection on the shore,

maybe after he had all but given up until he realized

no one watched his body light the border,

              worrying the citizens and haunting the politicians,

after newspapers turned to his travels

between phrases without translation

              and decided to headline the morning with his movement,

hand over hand and one foot before the other,

as if his hands and his feet belonged to someone

              other than his own free will,

his appendages kept moving toward

his need for generations of family to flee,

              and, after all of that, someone, someone

next door to me or down the street, decided to fear his journey.

Well, I can’t worry about all that. There are too many citizens

              making life difficult for those born here. I just imagine

this daring stranger clinging to a man’s shoulders at sunrise

on the border of a desert, or, let’s say, falling asleep

              with a face buried in a woman’s hair in a bed

next to an ocean as waves rise and fall over them

like small chances at life and small risks of death.

              Then, someone already living down the street,

hears of the stranger’s arrival at the edge

of our neighborhood, even this neighbor who knows

              what it means to hold another close,

will work against desire. They ask me: Did you hear the news?

I just shake my head, ear buds on blast, as I walk away. I’m tired

              of news of what Fearless Leader has to say, so I shut it off,

and let Boris and Natasha take it all in their inner ears.

Not that I’m scared.

              I’m just done being told that what I’m feeling isn’t pain.

I mean, I was born here. I know.

✼
Dear Neighbor,

what is it like to work in a barbed wire factory?

              I’m asking my neighbors in Peoria, IL, or San Antonio, TX,

or Columbia, SC, working in barbed-wire plants,

trying to feed their child’s needy grasp

              and, more likely, to pay their 30-year mortgages,

keeping them free in the land of summers.

I want to know when you rise from bed in the morning

              to feed steel through the teeth of a roller,

steel heated to 2,192 degrees Fahrenheit to make pliable

its desired contours, woven and braided, three billets

              ferried into three spools, two to twist, and a third,

from the side of these two, to jag its woven edges, to jag them sharp

along a shoreline, behind a golf course, beside an otherwise

              free clearing of space, until, finally,

a stranger’s bent frame appears before this chorded wall of razor,

a mirror of his future, a portal through which

              vistas come into view just up ahead, our stranger’s invisible will still

commanding his soul, or her hands, or their feet to climb

and to cross, out of sight, forever. How do you feel at the end of your day?

              Well, I’m done worrying about what you feel. Be quiet

for now. I’m speaking to our strangers when I say, keep coming but stay ready:

there will be more borders to cross

              once we break inside ...

In your pool, I am 19 years old

     plunging in at the edge of Swimming 101.

In your pool, splashing the 8 a.m. morning

     upward with my body,

I strain to float. In your pool, I can

     see, from the bottom, the other students —

all white, all female — sculling the water

            in a world I cannot manage.

In her one-piece, Coach Maurer

            began by telling us she has no breasts,

a double mastectomy the semester

            before, and like an actor cueing her

line, she snaps the straps of her swimsuit

            as she says, “So let’s get that out of the way now.”

At the pool, I do the only thing I know how

            to do, I’m the only one taking notes: I write,

“So let’s get that out of the way now.”

            I’m afraid of what I hear:

The slosh of water, my gasping and choking

            coming from within. In your pool, even the lights

from the ceiling, ribboning into lanes, are part of a world

            I cannot manage.

When I try to drop the class, Coach Maurer tells me,

            “No you’re not. You’re the only one here

who needs this. Go change.” Then she turns away

            and continues with class.

You learn so much about yourself

            when you practice something at which

you’re not a natural. Your head falls

            a little lower while struggling. When

your ambition is to look common enough

            that no one sees you, like you belong here,

facing your limits. Weeks of this pass

            like the endless surprise of a torturer’s hand,

and I see myself, by semester’s end, passing

            the five-laps-in-five-minutes test.

Even as I recall these details of my awkward life,

            telling it to you now feels so unremarkable

in hindsight. I hardly ever think about this any more.

            But now, looking at video news footage of

Dajerria Becton’s young body,

            younger than I was when

I learned to swim, being slammed to the ground

            when a cop tells her to leave a swimming party

and she doesn’t move fast enough, and, allegedly

            not without some back talk. At some point,

she must have been that girl in that middle-class

            Craig Ranch area of McKinney, TX, learning

to swim, never expecting to drown on land.

            Social media opens a debate about

whether the teenagers belonged there

            in the first place. Some say the music

from the party was too loud;

            some say the police were simply doing

their jobs.   Maybe.   Power limits one’s point of view.

            Becton’s mother asks at the press conference:

“How do you tell your child to behave

            when they’re not doing anything wrong?”

The residents just wanted the crowd of black teenagers

            to go away, even though they weren’t all black.

The cop with his club and drawn gun

            says he’s, “Sorry if anyone was offended”

by his club and drawn gun.

            As I watch this girl in a two-piece bikini

on the pavement, with a white cop’s knees

             (both of them) in her back,

what I remember of that class in ‘84

            was the attempt to think not about my body —

not to remember, devoting myself to

            the smell and taste of chlorine,

of 10 laps with flippers, 10 laps

            with a kickboard: The balance of the body,

the rotation, the counting of breaths, and the stretch

            toward a shore beyond my grasp. What I remember

are the eyes of swimmers,

            the performance in my head telling my limbs

to pretend, and the picture of my out-of-place self

            and the concrete and the gunite, the fiberglass

and the water, my being in the locker room alone,

            sheltering me as I left and preparing

me before I entered. And I remember, my first class,

            the cold love in the eyes of my instructor ... how I wish I

could have just walked away, but how thankful I am now

            that I didn’t. Shit, I remember things

that didn’t even happen to me,

            just things I know, passed down in blood.

There’s my father learning to swim in a lake

            in Alabama, nearly drowning but learning.

No Dogs, No Mexicans, No Niggers allowed.

            I wish I remembered how comfortable these teens were

in their bathing suits with their friends and, if that cop

            hadn’t entered the scene, I’d think about how lucky

they are to swim among friends in familiar dark waters

            of laughter. Dajerria Becton. We don’t say her name

because she survived. We don’t say her name because

            she’s a girl. She wasn’t wearing a hoodie or carrying

anything, but, even nearly naked, she posed

            a threat to a man with a gun. What do I think

when I see someone who looks like me taken out back?

            I keep kicking through laps of memory, pulling

myself forward to a world opening and, just as quickly,

            closing before me, even now.

As a child, I prayed for pianos

and the wisdom of Solomon.

I prayed facedown

for the kind of calm that threatens

to halve babies to save them

because I believed

I could contain the world’s demise

with two clasped hands.

When the havoc continued,

I believed it was my fault.

I was an angry child.

A computer program called Miracle

tried to tame the small apocalypse

in my palms. It taught me

to play the keys: the Beatles

in MIDI — synths tinny with hey,

you’ve got to hide your love away.

But when the metronome’s

bomb-tick couldn’t keep

the planet from panic,

I grew to hunt hallelujahs

in the bottoms of bottles

because the music couldn’t

save us.         The last tiny humans

scurried across my lifelines.

I let them dive off my hands.



What I miss most about hell
is prayer.

I’d pack a plastic bottle

with vodka, drive

to the crag of my life —

the parking lot of a pancake house —

and scream. I prayed

like everyone I loved was on fire.

The bright, violet blob

I called God

would forgive the atrocities

roared in ethanol rage

while I’d shake like a dog

demanding answers

from the maker of figs:

why the sycamore fruit

sweetens only when bruised,

the way a fist will

ripen a child.


My sister is sick.

The culprit — shapeless, anonymous.

Medical science works best with a villain:

name the devil

to learn whether to cut loose a tumor, switch out

a liver, break into heart after heart.

Will it help her to know

she dodged a knife

in the womb? Has she already heard?

In the memory of that day,

I ask

whether the hospital feeds our mother Jell-O.

Mom is alive.

I am four. I associate strawberry gelatin with miracles,

and the baby is okay.          My sister’s storm

needs a name, Lord. She points to her temples

where her torrents are born.

Once, in Galilee, spit and a pair of hands

gave sight to a blind man,

but it took two tries.

The first time, the people looked like trees.

So open your mouth

and get her story right.

Give over and over, your hands.


I smoked my first cigarette next to a trashcan

spray-painted W-R-S-H-P —

a call to worship in the bowels

of Will Rogers State Historic Park.

I sucked down my last

the day a Boeing 737 dove into the sea outside Bali,

and all one hundred and eight passengers

survived. Let’s tell more stories

like this one. About how to stay alive.

About the time buildings yielded to the earth

on my right, while the ocean soared

scraper-high on my left.

The planet in seizures,

I begged pardon for the years I’d wished to die,

and gunned it like the Israelites

wild across the split sea.

My husband materialized next to me.

Then twelve of us. Forty more. And in the end,

nine billion, hand in hand,

charged from our erupting world.

I woke next to the yellow note

taped to my wall — a handwritten list

of the people I love

and the mountains they’ve slipped from.

Each morning, I touch their names.

I picture the friend, the sister,

then picture the sun

pulling for us between wreckage and waves —

a hand in a crevice feeling for a lost ring.



Not long after the big bang —

         God’s first holy call and response —

                   the universe went dark.

                   All that hot bliss of brilliance

         shut inside a tomb. God

second-guessing

both Let there be and light.

         We know how the power went out:

                   the cosmos cooled, then birthed

                  hydrogen, which swallowed the glow.

         The name for that switching off of spark:

recombination.	         Depression. Grief.

But we don’t yet know

         how the power returned.

                   One theory imagines the first stars

                   banded together, and their tenacious light

         knifed the dark apart: reionization.

Resurrection.          It’s possible, then,

if we believe our astronomers and angels,

         that our abyss is temporary —

                   that a young soprano of stars

                                   gathers now on the other side

                                   to sing the crucified to life.

It’s morning and there’s a poem in my jacket

             pocket, and I like how that sounds:

jacket pocket,

but I’m thinking about what the stranger penciled

            in my book, how he circled the word

mistakes, then wrote, how damage can lead

to poetry.

            We are quiet birds under the morning

glory — jacket pocket — in the near-heart of the dying

hydrangeas. Damage creates the thought

            of brokenness: my garden never had enough

                           songbirds, my life never had enough

song. It’s morning and there’s a poem in my family

             history — I know the suicides, the stories

                          of strange deaths: brother choking

on a balloon, sister tripping on the church steps

                            and hitting her head so perfectly

her arteries became a celebration, Bastille Day,

             New Year’s Eve. And she was. And he was. Gone.

Even though I wasn’t there, I still see my sisters

              finding our father’s first wife in the greenhouse

where he grew orchids — jacket pocket

— a gunshot to her head.

This is postpartum with suicide corsages,

             psychopsis, dendrobium, a landscape

of the dying, a three-year-old finding

             her mother, blood on the leaves

of the plants near her. My sister would later say,

It’s why I dislike the colors of Christmas,

             and yet, she. And yet, she. Grew up

like so many of us, near-heart, fingers

              in the roots of the dying, and mostly,

              somewhat, okay.


The first person you fall in love with

will be a deer. You will want to cradle him,

but his instinct is to vanish. Scuttle. Scurry.

He may lie down at the end of the forest

in the sorrel, but you won’t ever see him

even with the binoculars you bring into the wild.

Perhaps, he’ll disappear on a trail beside you,

and you may be charmed by his departure.

He is worried about your heart spear, what you keep

hidden, but you are not a hunter, you are just tired

of walking through this forest alone.

My children are beautiful. They grow away

from me like a storm-cleaved tree and I am

dying. That’s the only conclusion I can draw.

It only sounds like a hackneyed melodrama

because it is. I cry openly when my son slips

onto his bicycle and spins into the world. We

used to ride together all these mornings. He

pedaled the trail-a-bike, chattering. My little

outboard motor. Then, his own. He exulted

in balance and the speed. It only accelerates,

just as folks say. The days are far too long

and the years flit quick as a whisper. My wife

just smiles and shakes her head at the softness

of this man who’s never held a separate heart-

beat in his body. She indulges no illusions.

There’s no escaping the echoing hallways in

the temple of cliché. There’s a reason it’s built

from ossified bone. That is what we become.

Leaving teeth, gold bands, and maybe one

incongruous strand of hair. But this is not

a rant about death. It’s too in love with life

leaving us, on a bicycle. Strangely tall now,

suddenly handsome, not once looking back.

Feed me the part of the animal

no one else wants, the wiry bone

cage of its back, its knotted feet

picked clean and fried with greens

ripped from a dusty ditch. Serve it

to me in a tin can with powdered

glass sprinkled on top. Let me

die slowly: let the tiny lacerations

bleed it out of me, the poison

they planted so long ago. Allow

my body to return to its human

shape before they find it: then

no one will be forced to confront

what we have always been, mostly-

wolf, mostly-ape, and so, so clever.

i invent three nightmares for my therapist to decipher.

the first i’m eating a plate of boiled peanuts — inside

each a boy, winged + writhing + red, he writhes red

+ winged between my teeth. in the second my father

digs a hole in our backyard, i lay face down in the rain,

for a moment i’m mud covered, then an island, then a city

swallowed by flood. in the last + this is the most transparent,

i’m a pane of glass all the boys in my class press their lips

against before heading to war. i want my therapist to know,

i’m the glass + the war + the hole + the boiled.

i want him to stab at what’s bleeding just below the surface.

to reach down my throat + release me from inside

the locked safe. i want to look at myself in the mirror

without swallowing all my father’s heart medicine.

we should have you

  committed

                                                     we should have asked

                                                     what’s wrong

  no commandment

  handed down

                                                     makes sense

                                                     from the chaos

  i mistake the satellites

  for comets         pause

                                                     a comma hurtling

                                                     through the black

  my mind a little metal

  satellite hoarding

                                                     boring data, always

                                                     in orbit around

  the flies     pause

  we should have called

  before we came

                                                     mother says nudging

                                                     my bottles back

                                                     below the bed

  me covered in bugs

  in my brain again.

  hear the clear bell

                                                     ringing anyway

                                                     this is where

                                                     the line breaks

                                                     down

  weeping

                                                     for no reason

                                                     other than the beauty

                                                     of the page   pause

  where a staggered

  thought meets

                                                     the profound metered

                                                     evenness of the world

  the world

  at rest. any disease

  of the mind traced

                                                     back to its origin

                                                     is a sickle

  is silk

                                                     it’s sick isn’t it?

Carry me, I said,

clutching at the hemp

too good to throw away — her rough kimono,

my sling my stink my blanket.

My father asks if I remember: The strong back,

my radar bouncing off the mountain of her shoulder,

how absence nursed me,

my mother happy to be rid of tadpoles, the others

flushed in buckets. My sister eating mud,

pulling out her hair, counting backwards.

She carried me all day until it rained so hard

the ghosts showed up. Carry me, they said.

Near the mountains of Altai, beside the Chinese border

they dug her out of ice.

What portent in the tree of knowing that adorned her?

In wild silk dyed with blood of insects?

Her bones were the event, the larches that had been her hut

a frozen chamber, her skin tattooed in signs.

On her shoulder kicking deer, leopards inked and swirling

to her fingers. Six

black horses hurried her to after-life. A warrior. A priest

she darkened in their view. Who

stuffed with fur the sockets of her seeing,

sacrificed the mutton?

O shooter drill, I bow to your chipping

                 linoleum, your three syllables, your rusted

intercom. O shooter drill, for you, only

                 for you, we stuff our offspring into closets.

O shooter drill, I praise too the teachers who

                 call you by name, refusing lockdown,

or shelter-in-place, like the teacher who,

                 crouching in that closet too, surely wanted

my son to stop talking, my son who spoke

                 early and has been speaking up ever since,

my son who was, at first, incredulous: this doesn’t

                 make sense. O shooter drill, you conjure

changelings — this boy looks like mine, but he’s

                 been struck mute. O shooter drill, you maim me

a liar too, murmuring you’re safe, you’re safe

                 while he sobs into his dump-truck quilt.

If tomorrow I wish to clasp his hand and

                 walk him to class, I will be the visitor

with the high-tech sticker on my left lapel —

                 my driver’s license picture color-coded for the

kindergarten wing. O shooter drill, I present to you:

                 my son, curled up tighter than his own cochlea, now

calcified quiet. O shooter drill — what a shit I am,

                 silent in my own closets, downing wine and Advil.

When asked, she says it started with chickens

on a cousin’s farm, mayhem

of movement, reptilian fluttering irruptions.

Such a fine line between phobia and phillia .....

Draped across workshop benches creatures hover

between alive & dead, artificial & real. First lesson:

a study-skin, Sparrow Hawk, (always start with birds .... easy

to procure, small enough to be worked

at a kitchen table). You’ll get used to the smell

of “high” flesh, oozing fluids, the sound

of crunching bone. Work-out out the rigor

mortis, inspect for shattered bones, torn

skin, establish cause of death.

Note: left eye, blood-full. Think flown

into window, not rock thrown by a boy.

Inject eyes with water so they can be

measured, replaced with glass.

If the skin is beginning to rot, treat

with borax to stop further loss.

Accept that you can never really stop

further loss. You’ll mend countless bones, salvage

slipping skin, ruffle innumerable feathers. You will

become intimate with the necro-

geography of Eagle Owl, Hawkfinch, White-Crested

Laughing Thrush. You’ll be privy to secrets

of assembly, but don’t dare believe

you’re breathing songs

back into the dead.

two swans dabbling

a doe dead in the Quaking Grass

where we praised

we praised

the doe lay dead

we saw two swans

unshaken by our looking

morning’s fragile beauty

where we praised

we praised

the doe dead

two swans

we waited

no mother

Un-tasked with breath, but still taking on air

and light, and light on its feet for once—

feeling up for a jaunt to the gift shop

to buy what it thinks is a mirror.

             ~

And yet the spirit has no weight

to move the hull. It spills through the porous bones,

if even a thing at all, boomerang once slid from the jaw.

If it loves you, it’ll come back.

             ~

Lights out. The guards grow beards,

lose them, grey, but every weekday morn comes the same

mellifluous light, the honeyed light that cradles

the same bony mask in its palm.

             ~

When you’re famous, you’re known for one

famous expression, encyclopedia-worthy.

The T-Rex attempts a smile for field trips

but the bones don’t give; jaws remain child-sized.

             ~

Cannot see the plaque facing outward by its feet,

cannot speak to assumptions of temperament,

tyranny. Of all the imaginary, unmusical—

the tin box roars below at the press of a button.

             ~

In which the keys of the great lizard’s spine

sing under the swoop of a sliding Fred Flintstone.

Nat King Cole: But it wouldn’t be make-believe

if you believed in me. In which the dead still speak to us.

             ~

Now the distance from which extinct begins

its bleed into imaginary.

The mountain’s relief worn down, green

fog spreading smooth. We turn away.

             ~

And so the lions, and so the blind insect

that never escaped the jungle’s palate, and so

the mammoth, manatee, and our hearts

that fit snug anywhere but our own chests.

             ~

And so the continents that, over millennia,

draw their breath then exhale. And so each morning

the bathroom light comes on and we excavate

our faces, try to step backward, toward what we remember.

She was a man that loved tea                                   I (was) am an artist

that (liked) likes nudes                                             I drew half a woman (last night) tonight

I drew her soul (that was) a woman

 
I (was) am unusual                                                  I (was) am an artist that loves

volumes                                                                   I like(ed) her (in her Japanese robe))

to drink (drinking) tea

                                                                                (liked) like my (art) teacher

I measure                                                                 postures with a stick

She (teacher) says                                                     there are no errors only changes in thoughts ()

                                                                                         life is movement

                                                                                         put your eraser (pout (Eeyore)) away

Let me show you

[see note]

          first note:               that night I drew

                                        with the incandescent light on her skin

                                        a body of pillows on stage (that she set up)

                                        one arm (over the heart) raised on her hip

                                        other arm (across the leg) in the air

                                        a red Japanese robe draped on the hanger

                                        my hand (flew off) shading on the paper

                                        the shape of a navel (between my hands)

                                        the shape of the letter C is her (one) head

                                        (a heart of heads a heart in my right hand)

                                        my hand (flickering) grinding the pastels

                                        molding you

                                                                           soft skin, molding you,

                                                                           soft skin, molding you,

                                                                           soft skin, molding you,

[continue]

white pastels smoothed out becomes lips and skin

((newsprint) white paper pastel in (chalk and) sienna pastel in (chalk and) sienna)

(teacher) she says             don’t forget the hand is the size of one head

                                             the length of two heads foreshortening

            second note:          her belly (was) swelling

                                         the size of cantaloupes

                                         (tender buttons) two buttons

                                         round and darker than the rest

                                         tilting the hips

                                         pointing the tip of the foot like a ballerina

[continue]

(teacher) she says               step back — step back — straight line — draw with left hand

            third note:

                                          difficult poses are quick

                                          3 minute sketch

                               one leg pressed into chest

                                         other extended

                                         eyes closed

                                         lips soft

                                         mole on breast

                                         chin lifted

                               turned to the side

                                         arms resting like a bird’s wing

                                         bones beside bones



We perch beside the Hudson in July, its muck and legendary light, and you tell me how summer makes you crazy. That if you ever take your life, it will be in this month, before it gets so hot you can’t think straight. It isn’t odd for us to discuss death this way. We’ve both walked with it for years, pushed it off the path when it got too close, grabbed for anything that might buoy or pacify. You once drove onto a golf course at night, hooked hose to exhaust, and slept. Connected to you, I coughed CO2. Now we watch a barge move silently past the tiny spit of land we both love. You may own the river, but Senasqua belongs to me, I tell you. You don’t mind. Your soul’s magnanimous. You can slip into the river anywhere, you remind me, but I know you love it too much to cause it grief. Like a lover, a fisherman, a fish.

With that pink-ass moon in Sagittarius beaming obscenely

on the Flatirons, ruffling up infamy, you’d think citizens

would be howling to get out of their homes or booking

groupons to anywhere or philosophizing along a continuum

that might present itself for a stroll into euphoria. Or luck.

I don’t know. We’re supposed to stay the course, stay

embodied, check out our personal and collective delusions.

I walked my Chihuahua at dawn and a shirtless archer

appeared around a corner with a Great Dane at his side.

We all froze and looked at one another in a kind of rose-

tinted astonishment. Then the Chihuahua growled low,

the archer laughed, and the whole moon vanished in the sun.

It’s worth watching Harold and Maude again for that moment when

Harold looks at the camera and you know he knows you know.

It’s worth watching Harold and Maude again to say Vivian Pickles.

It’s worth watching Harold and Maude again for Maude’s favorite funeral

umbrella, which is yellow.

It’s worth watching Harold and Maude again for cemeteries, their

breathtaking algorithmic scenery and their stalkers.

It’s worth watching Harold and Maude again for: A lot of people enjoy being

dead. But they are not dead, really. Wisdom à la Maude.

Or this: Grab the shovel, Harold.

It’s worth watching Harold and Maude again knowing that Ruth Gordon

didn’t die until she was 88, and on her last morning she was working on a

play.

It’s worth watching Harold and Maude again knowing Bud Cort is still alive

and dimpling in the summer of 2016.

It’s worth watching Harold and Maude again for the Cat Stevens

controversies that have nothing and just about everything to do with music.

Maude tells Harold there are two things no human being should live

without: making music and breaking the law. It’s worth watching Harold

and Maude again to see how they accomplish both.

It’s worth watching Harold and Maude again to understand the difference

between death and death, and to decide which one you prefer.

Death is a metaphor, of course, but for what? It’s worth watching Harold

and Maude again to find out.

It’s worth watching Harold and Maude again to support or reverse the

theory you’ve harbored your entire life about old women and sex.

Harold grows in wisdom over the course of Harold and Maude, but it’s

worth watching it again to see Harold’s face when Maude says she took

the pills two hours before her 80th birthday party.

What!? (Harold)

It’s worth watching Harold and Maude again if you are on the fence about

choosing your own death or about how old is old enough or whether you

should move to Oregon or Vermont before it’s too late.

It’s worth watching Harold and Maude again to see Harold dance on a cliff.

Or Bud Cort dance on a cliff. Either way, any movie with someone

dancing on a cliff is worth watching again.

Maude was my great-grandmother’s name, but without the e. Maud

Emerson. Not necessarily a reason to watch Harold and Maude again,

unless you like the way your mind travels from one Maude to the other,

which I do.

And it’s worth watching Harold and Maude again to recall that smart

people exist. This is particularly comforting when any humanity your

country still has left is up for grabs, not to mention its poetry.

For poetry alone, it is worth watching Harold and Maude again.

My hot minute as a pin-up: the golden hour’s

slick ruse. More likely, Stu drew the thin frame

of a girl downtown, feral dame I feared as a newly

housed wife. Or a wisp of the she before me,

untethered Amazon freewheeling the countryside.

Her body’s open road, long haul, radio static,

bellowing semi horn her call. Maybe she was

a goddess of his dreams: the slope of spine

a dangerous curve at night, dark crease along hip,

one-way bridge, flashing lights. Change gears

too fast, and areolas’ inverted potholes will shred

thread, send a rig skittering sideways across

Highway One, a full cache of beer and glass

crashed. I prayed that he’d come home, wanted

to bang the road from his bones, but I tired of his

crass jokes, how he thought time stopped when he

was gone. I sundialed in sheets, pined for a woman

who went braless at the post office, the peaked

grottos of her tits in the cool dark of an old cotton

shirt. My breasts were a roadside attraction, though

the toots and whistles were for a phantom sexpot

they dreamt of bending over, never kissing.

Whenever I listen to Billie Holiday, I am reminded

of that Levis poem and how we sat in the back room

of the library, just out of reach, box fan blowing the heat

between us. I’d like to believe that I’d know what to save

in a fire, children first, the cat. I might want my mother’s

rings, my good pillow. It’s hard to tell what I keep closest

to my heart and how it gets there. That bright night

I drove to your end of the island, nerves sparking, afraid

my car would die on your block or be broken into. Maybe

it was a way to convince myself it would be only a kiss,

first on the street, and then, on the edge of your bed, where

I held your hand, then ran fingers through your hair

for hours. It’s not appropriate to imagine a house in flames

when others have stood in the street and watched decades

collapse. But I have always imagined the end of days.

If I am honest with myself I love the way a substation

sounds like the ocean. Today the clouds look like x-rays

of a fractured skull and I understand wanting to stand

in the middle of the track, to jump from the trestle.

Like Levis and Holiday, like you, I’d like to make some

dignity out of loneliness, and if I keep using the conditional

there’s a chance it will happen, right? In my throat, barbed

wire coils, and meaning drags itself over, pant leg caught,

blood at its heels. I have not become whoever I will become,

but this is who I am now, and it’s all I can offer. What I’m trying to say

is in July when the irrigation guns grew

hot enough to seal an eye shut, I was most afraid of myself.

Some things grow better in the dark,

but most flowers will arch their spines

to whatever light they find. Off the path,

an hundred-year sycamore squats, trunk

itself, a flash of lightning or a woman

whose hips lie even with knees, torso lifted

toward sky. I’m not a tree. I’ve not covered

the distance to the moon yet and may not

in this one life. It took five years to plant

the seeds they sent to orbit the moon.

Five years, I clocked my body’s tidal forces,

but each month the blood came. I’d spent

my whole life up to that moment not wanting

a child and now this need was all I knew.

Once, in the middle South, I tried to find

the Lost Cove. The pressed clay looked

enough like flesh I understood from where

the old tales came. Every ropy vine in shadow’s

crack, a fool snake. In a second cave, I found

a vortex of stones balanced in what must’ve

been a basin hewn by settlers a century ago,

and beside it, a tub, shaped like an old pram.

If I’d found a child there I’d have taken her

home. In a story I read as a girl, a fishing

woman finds a merchild in a king crab shell

she’s hauled after the storm of all storms.

She’s righteous enough to consult village

elders, to seek out the sea goddess who fills

the night with her sorrow. Who would return

to me what I’d not yet found? Five years

after they left, the seeds that returned from

the moon were scattered across earth, have

grown full-size. They cast the same shade

and their seeds have become half-moon and

quarter-moon trees. Child, I’ve carried you

this whole life, just waiting for you to bloom.

The soup in the pot boils thicker than blood.

In the kitchen the mother melts in her martyrdom.

My father a portal in which I crossed over and now am lost.

Son of a ravenous boar and a volatile mare.

Boy folded into an accordion.

Everyone else is guitar, hollowed, shipwrecked.

Brothers of pigeon feet, sisters with rabbit hands.

A troika can be family; the trinity is blessed family.

Catholicize the mysteries and misdeeds of parents.

How grossness traverses the plain sight of the canopy.

Orchards, littered with carnivorous creatures, fermenting rotting fruits.

I feed on gruel from the cups of my hands, which is never enough.

The occupied space carries the departed spaces.

The range of gradation radiates catastrophically.

Hence, I swing the pendulum.

String words to recreate my long-dead father.

Search for those who flowered from the same womb.

I return to the house of collapsed selves where I unearthed the poem that taught me how to love, 
how to conjure a thing from within the body when the body’s invisible.

I then take the libertine road of the familiar to find the narrow route to a dawning.

In the aversion of blood there prevails the chosen family.

1.

I will publish a book by the time I'm 30.

   2.

April, June, September, November.

   3.

Breasts or chests and an empty stomach lying on their side.

   4.

At age 30 my mother gave birth to me. Of five children, I’m the middle. Her favorite.

The oldest son of my generation. I chose to not have offspring.

   5.

I turned 30 on November 26, 2001. New York City still smelled of ash.

   6.

An omen of blackbirds roosting on electrical wire.

   7.

For the very first time I fell in love with a man.

   8.

Every morning I count the almonds I drop in my oatmeal.

   9.

There are 30 hours in a day, minus six, which I could totally use.

   10.

Taylor Swift sings of young abandon in “22” (ooh-ooh). That I abandoned.

   11.

I detest the rock band Thirty Seconds to Mars despite not having heard their music. Leto is

forever Catalano to me.

   12.

Space Station Expedition 30 Soyuz Capsule landed in Kazakhstan. A friend adopted a

cherubic boy from a Kazakhstan orphanage. Renamed him Julien. He now resembles his

French-Polish father.

   13.

My sole brother’s birthday is May 30. I often fail him.

   14.

Forgiveness has proven to be the hardest lesson.

   15.

Fifteen is halfway there. There is halfway to sixty.

   16.

Adulthood prances nowhere near a New Yorker in his 30s.

   17.

If I run on a treadmill for 30 minutes, I’ll burn a cupcake. Or two.

   18.

I met a lion-maned sorceress, wearing a glittery sweater. We ate dim sum. Went on

adventures.

   19.

The last TV show I regarded as religion was “30 Rock.”

   20.

In many parts of the world 30 chickens constitute wealth.

   21.

Zero Dark Thirty is military slang for the unspecified time in the early morning hours before

dawn.

   22.

“–30–” was the title of the final episode of the final season of “The Wire.”

   23.

In The Seasons of a Man’s Life, psychologist Daniel J. Levinson defines “The Dream”—youth,

illusion, inspiration, omnipotence, heroic drama—and how it needs to be modulated during

the transition period (28-33) of early adulthood. For survival.

   24.

I aged out of “30 Under 30.”

   25.

At the end of a press release, the end of a story.

   26.

In a clearing, a sawed-off tree. I count its rings. History.

   27.

“–30–” was a telegraphic shorthand to “end transmission” in the American Civil War.

   28.

My roommate and I rushed to our Manhattan rooftop and saw a tower downtown crumble

into smoke and nothing.

   29.

When my knee inadvertently touched his at a poetry reading, he moved not a muscle.

   30.

Eyes inward, moan arising from the throat.

What was unforeseen is now a bird orbiting this field.

What wasn’t a possibility is present in our arms.

It shall be and it begins with you.

Our often-misunderstood kind of love deems dangerous.

How it frightens and confounds and enrages.

How strange, unfamiliar.

Our love carries all those and the contrary.

It is most incandescent.

So, I vow to be brave.

Clear a path through jungles of shame and doubt and fear.

I’m done with silence. I proclaim.

It shall be and it sings from within.

Truly we are enraptured

With Whitmanesque urge and urgency.

I vow to love in all seasons.

When you’re summer, I’m watermelon balled up in a sky blue bowl.

When I’m autumn, you’re foliage ablaze in New England.

When in winter, I am the tender scarf of warm mercies.

When in spring, you are the bourgeoning buds.

I vow to love you in all places.

High plains, prairies, hills and lowlands.

In our dream-laden bed,

Cradled in the nest

Of your neck.

Deep in the plum.

It shall be and it flows with you.

We’ll leap over the waters and barbaric rooftops.

You embrace my resilient metropolis.

I adore your nourishing wilderness.

I vow to love you in primal ways.

I vow to love you in infinite forms.

In our separateness and composites.

To dust and stars and the ever after.

Intrepid travelers, lovers, and family

We have arrived.

Look. The bird has come home to roost.

No combination of car door,

rolled up window, tire iron was safety.

South of the mailboxes, the boxelder tree,

the box truck now half empty,

there is no justice but a broken bottle

beneath the slip and slide.

Maybe this is why Momma took us to church,

barretted our hair on the porch Daddy built

using the hand he did not slice open

with the posthole digger,

had us sing Nahum, Habakkuk, Micah, Amos,

until we could find chapter and verse

faster than God.

When summer came, when uncles gathered by the river,

Momma held us to her thigh as warning,

as if to say, touch them

and you will not touch another:

another PBR, another paper plate

full of summer sausage, potato salad,

as if to say, you are not my brothers

but a fire I intend to put out.

Maybe this is why Pentecost

is the cruelest month:

revival songs, one-pieces, an eight-fingered man

who sells fireworks from a tow-trailer.

Maybe this is why Momma

won’t drink from the cup,

crosses her arms over her heart

during the blessing.

Maybe this is why this is my body

is the only prayer Momma ever believed.

1.

The glance was everywhere, humming among the projected desires — houses bulging with goods, Russian sage showering the afternoon with lavender blossoms, moon turning full and beautiful in our desperation.

This idea that the world was birthed from our needs. The IEDs and iPods. The grommets and silks. The Great Philosophers of the Twentieth Century. Potted meat. Post Office. The reconstructed woman sliding upside down, red heels wrapped around a silver pole.

The glance tangled in the trumpet vine. The vine itself. The music it wanted to make. An orange music. Thin as a wire. Where were they taking us? What bother laced our foreheads? What dialect of money would they speak there?

2.

In Hanoi, thousands of wires spanned the emptiness, the panoply, the indeterminate universe, the wicked excess, the unaccountable plenty, as when we traveled from floor to floor gathering crustaceans, noodles, ribs, chicken wings, eel, pho.

As when we flipped through propaganda posters from The American War. As when the rain fell, relentlessly, on the Temple of Literature.

3.

When the man and his three year old daughter sat in meditation in Wat Phnom, the daughter tilted her head back and rolled her eyes to see me and smile.

When the fire swept through the room. When the angers were extruded, the signals disrupted—alternately here is the latest from and cold front and pit bull impounded.

When the lights began going out in the valley, a wave of darkness rolled toward us.

When the computer screen in the empty room flared and dimmed, flared and dimmed.

When the gong.

When the colonial hotel. Vase. Single yellow flower. Mahogany paneling. A water glass, sweating. White petals floating in it.

4.

In Cambodia, all the poets were princes, composing new lyrics to the old songs, all the elections rigged.

The monetary policy presided over the charred bones of the poor. Lined the coffins of the wealthy.

A new word to avoid the inconvenience. A new crawl of language. An angle from which to see into the incontrovertible. A scope. A bead. A glance. A certain inevitability in the book depository.

Nobody ever said what they did up there. Book depository. Grassy knoll. A thousand wires. How could anyone know where the error was, especially now that the fines had exceeded the value of the items themselves.

It’s time, the man said, to just get some weapons and take some shit.

5.

At Angkor Wat you could trace the history from ornate Hindu to austere Buddhism and back. Back and forth they went. Answering not to truth but to power.

At dusk, we scrabbled among the rubble, the huge stone Buddhas, smiling then glowering then perfectly impassive in the blossoming dark.

We take refuge in lightweight bodies

that, wrapped in the mist of this valley

continue (like the grass) to keep

their balance.

The bare fields have nothing

to say to us

and the regions of ice teach us

only cold.

From now on we have to learn

how to live

like the sky, like the sky.

Here in rain’s homeland

a thin thread separates us.

The ones still here

wear the faces

of those who are leaving.

It is evening.

Seated on the stone steps of my house

with my dog

I’m waiting.

Sparrows chirping in the poplar

joined by the far-off flute

of a shepherd,

the shadow of the forest, the voices

of children.

The neighbors curse God.

It is night.

Seated on the stone steps of my house

with my dog

I’m waiting for my father

to come home drunk.

Albania,

bitter

destiny,

we lose each other every day.

What a cruel trick to be your inhabitant

and you my mud,

we’re dying every day in one another.


When Icarus

fell

into the sea

the mermaid who

first

found him

loved in him

the bird

in her he loved

the fish

The remains of his unraveled

wings

washed ashore

among the plastic

packages condoms

empty bottles and cans

of beer

We did not sleep;

we thought the night

could be substituted by coffee

and it was

our heads under the moon

round

the small cafe open so late saved us

keeping in its heart a soup red

and living

you carried coins in your pockets

from three countries

later the sun rose like on the cover

of a notebook

we spoke as if providing captions

for photographs

we wanted so much

so little

we took the bus

at the last minute

we traveled

side by side

like a bilingual

edition

What do you call both the knife

stuck in fruit

and the one

stuck in your chest?

What do you call both fruit

with the pulpy sun of an orange

and the moon-sweet lychee?

What do you call both chest

with the hollow weight of my heart

and one with the hollow weight of your heart?

There’s no sea anymore

there are bullets

you come back from the wave and move forward

the bullet hisses it hisses

on the golden foam

foam blood sea

today an absurd man is growing

in your eyes

he has neither sea nor house

he’s the everyday world

violent to the point of delirium

that grabs you by the feet, snatches you

climbs up your feet

and devours you

lays you out naked and alone

over death

over a landscape of lies

there’s no sea anymore

there are bullets

there’s this world awarded blood

parades assaults

later

they put on statisticians’ voices

and speak of a democratic system.

Like the impossible farewells

Without meeting each other’s gaze

Without saying a word

Like devastating hurricanes

Each one grabs onto a shaky branch

Where are you

Where is your green and gold chrysalis

Where is the hour of the infinite dream

Maybe this whole task is in vain

I want to embrace you who are reading this

And maybe

You’ll furiously bang on my door

Only to say later

It was the wind.

Everything casts shadow

even a shirt even a bag

between the trees there is always

air from which

I want to hang

something

so the wind

will move

more than just the leaves

and the soft sand

within the earth there is power

that draws

the people to her

Cut up — naked

like trees — like blood

wind-beaten

shacks

stars crushed to dust —

to coal

With his hesitating

tentative stroke

he resists

the offer of the balconies

and turns

from the perspective-lines

back

into these egoless rooms

whose emptiness he blankets

with flowers

fruit and women

No one can say

it’s cold

Remember there’s a fondness of pain

and ennui that they call love.

And one of tulips and mirrors

licentious, unworthy, that they call desire.

To not walk the walkway of wrongdoing, groveling

toward the winds, the lashes

and a single extraordinary maelstrom.

Why do you always want me in the mirrors

in that walk of wrongdoing, in the dust of what’s impossible

if I only want myself alive in your veins?

You pulsate as if butterflies were made of flesh.

And what does that mean? you ask.

I say that’s how my poem will start.

So you complain that I’m never with you

that I suddenly hurl lines into the air

that I speak of Scottish pine trees, those

that Talleyrand felt like taking care of.

Or even when I scream or lose heart

you guess smiles, codes, plots

you say I must have them in my insides.

Well, maybe.

To think of the Other, I hallucinate or versify.

Thinking HIM is joy. So you don’t know? DESIRE IS INCORPOREAL.

It’s better to hang up the keys, your house stays open. The railings

encrusted with salt and your glasses animated by the movements

of the sun. There is a peace that travels from your chair to my book and rests in

the valley that you dissembled with the written word. The night isn’t more

than any other of those that you invented, like the ovular shape of

silence or the marine spelling of death.

Here’s the severance for this atrocious profession. Nobody realized it;

your office, a notebook, the love of wires and doors.

Into the bow of your ear, I whispered the secret story. Now you can’t sleep either. Consider it

part of your own memory, it connects our childhoods that would have otherwise never crossed —

I fell down your knee was scraped; I stuffed the yellow cake into my mouth and your stomach

cramped; when you were abandoned grief filled my well — the private ravages

of our spent youth, and adulthood now implicitly intimate. You want to pull me to you

because I have already softened your sharp elbows. I might have sucked the lobe of your ear

though so many have you wouldn’t recognize me there. The pressure of your fingers in my

shoulder leaves a firm impression, as if in need I had touched myself.

We are insomniacs. The grip of the night freeing us from the slept-through day and its demands.

Once you know, you can’t unknow, so we ruminate on literature and the Gods and continually

seek the ousia of the emptied jug (or the ever-luminous cherry at the bottom of a looking glass).

We are not pretentious in the slightest, we need no wine but are eager to get on with it, and will

take in or do whatever forwards the living, this conversation (this trip-wire) keeping us tied kite

to string, present to past, arrow to quiver.

A call to arms
came as the lanterns floated upward

on a night of celebration, and as flares spun upward out of the fear

of those who set them; as shawled women smiled in the night,

prayed into the night, and just as many ran through the swallowing

night; as a bed was shared between two committed to shepherding each other,

and as others committed themselves to harm;

as doctors took their hypocritical oaths, as dentists clenched their own teeth;

as a young woman was killed by an angry man, a stranger, because he was

and remains angry at his mother, his life, and the opportunities he let go

and blamed others for the loss.

I am telling you the call to arms came as we slept

and as we marched, and as we questioned and as we hid

our heads in the dust of nostalgia or our spent dreams

of a future, and as bills were repealed, and as debt grew and values diminished,

as women decided other women mattered less; and the doors began to close

and close and close and close and close and those who had opened them

were marked for what we refuse to imagine or acknowledge (though this is not the first time).

And I heard the call to arms like a moan from a drain, desperately

clogged, like the lowing of cows in drought, like the impotent drone of governors

and the great blather of Senates questioning the hours without answer, and

no one satisfied by the moment. This moment. I hear the call and realize

I am not the rider but the fox,

that I must resort to my feet and my wits amid a storm of hooves

on a day that began as any other day, and I can’t tell you why

I hear what you refuse to hear or won't admit

like the pounding of your own heart upon hearing this.


Mother threw a platter

of blind spots on her son,

without knowing that bees

ached in her feet.

The beads of her breath

sank into his chest —

          he kept them five long years.

A tassel of singed hair cinched

around his wrists,

key latches soothing songbirds

in his pockets of fire —

he stains the night’s rim

with sprigs of dry air

exiting fevering bodies

       cupped briefly by their itching.

 

 

 

 

✼
 

 

 

 

She daubs clear his brow,

remembers: syringes filled with lake mist,

wonders if it was him

who strung teeth marks

                     across her wrist the night before.

Together, they pace

the ravine’s gauge nearing empty,

step upon a pale horse

lying on the earth's heat,

legs upright in the cattle guard,

          butcher paper stretched taut over wiry ribs.

Its gasping sent them barreling

          back toward the awakened cornfield.

Somewhere, between,

          they leapt back into their bodies,

                                they didn’t recognize their own voices.

 

 

 

 

✼
 

 

 

 

Her apparition ferries the flowers of their bruises

          back to the severing.

The bullwhip’s knotted eye turns toward her and only her.

When fences come to suckle,

            where will her mind’s legs carry her?

 

 

 

 

✼
 

 

 

 

Her departure alights them with memory.

Moths mill about her feet’s sleeping fountains.

Her throat’s cave claims each son’s song,

wears them like tiger’s legs

          across nights striped and fanged.

How they stretch between moon and helium,

how they weave tuned and plucked

          out of the sea’s gassed maw.

How they uncover, with clear hands,

a handful of hushed hours

held like silver coins,

           where their eyes fail to shut     for the third time.

The water brought me

          such suffering, beauty

                      sprung from it —

a child. And I loved him

          as I eventually came to

                       love all artifacts

of violence done to me.

          His hair, gold as light

                       broken across

the river’s surface. His

          eyes twin stones

                       glinting

at the bottom

          of an unstirred pool.

                       The simplest things

undo us, the simplest

          of which is ourselves,

                       desire as weapon,

mouth as ingress.

          Sweet boy,

                       steeped

in my deepest

          waters, what of me

                       looked back

in your need?

          When thirst

                       rises,

the body cries drink!

          When love,

                       more, more.

You are gone, so it is

as if you are dead. No one

comprehends. They arrange for me the sundered

tops of blossoms in a jam jar by my bedside, yellow

as the crowns of blonde boys.

They bring lemon tarts and want to dance.

They are convinced, like a long illness or tyrant,

you have been vanquished.

My friends drink to my new freedom and good health.

But you are gone and I am not fine, having grown in grief

so thin I disappear

like a moon mid-summer, what’s left of me

a glossal hook, latched on air.

A website posts the photos, ages, names

of bodies dropped along the gunman’s way.

That one girl seems baptized in her own blood.

Still charlatans elicit prophecy

from stars or palms, from guts or flights of birds,

and say they see in chaos a design.

Do you believe that there are signs that pointed

to her or point to others yet to be

who’ll dangle their angelic vertebrae

from rafters, bridges, closet hooks, doorframes?

The stars are balls of gas, you know. The line

that splits your palm cannot translate to words

of warning, hope, or dread. What’s understood?

Tonight, another head will be anointed.



The wide-eyed, voiceless boy watches a squirrel

ardently pressing thin paws to the wet earth.

The squirrel looks back at the boy, but doesn’t stop

its work until it’s finished burying the acorn.

Then the squirrel runs up the base of the oak,

stops, turns, and twitches its tail high behind its head,

as if transmitting a message in cryptic semaphore,

all the while with the boy fixed in its sight,

two black pupils like the points of polished spikes.

The boy is happy to be held there, buried

like an acorn. He feels loved like an oak now

under the awful blue weight of the sky.

How many millions of faces are aflame, lit

by sickly blue flickers in prefab living rooms tonight

as canned laugh-tracks and empty sighs blend

with hoarse, insistent cicada drone? The laughter

is a moth flitting around a flame. The monologue

sounds like a catechism designed to save no one.

In other rooms they’re talking strategic targeting,

collateral damage, what no one will talk about tomorrow.

A washed-smooth stone lies on a riverbed

like a tumor lodged behind the left eye,

motionless, embedded, elemental.

Shouldn’t there be something we could do?

Listen to me when I speak to you, my sudden slice of person.

Your skin is only a stretch of land sanctioned by the first light

your eyes blink away from. My common miracled thing,

let the village women burn sage over you rocketing limbs —

tremble to a pink meat, scrape your fingers on their wooden

teeth. Their love songs aren’t for you love. Be a sk8er boi

rock chick, gal-dude — my sweet gendered nuisance. Be an empty

parking lot at night. Whole into dumb a nothing, my blue-glass

smithereen. Be the spooky-eyed cousin to the dangers you

were born with. My totally normal angel, be cool like your mother.

Wreck havoc my slinky boomerang — learn to juggle, learn to hustle

learn to wipe your own ass by age five. Find a galaxy to shoot tennis

balls at. I hope they float back to you, a mouthful of lightbugs.

Come here my moonbodied half-body, beautiful is nothing important.

I hope you see a volcano one day, my honey glazed torpedo, I hope

lava flames from its hot bloated gut before setting the sky completely

on fire and it reminds you of me.

one breach — roll along shore hem

harpoon-sea ebbed and resolved from puncture dews our

calves blunt cold, gaze fat with sex and cool america —

gravity imbibed heaps meat after loam, salt from our napes

lulled to a gaping mouth pulls mucus to spit

kids, pick ligaments in the shape of broken cliffs

dignified, dig your foot here to mark the shooting rib

speary in earnest — catch blubber on tongue

body of water, water my whole unbirths pique clean

these knees heft from carrying bone tapers a swallowed vista

my soul, I repeat my soul, your arms are flimsy from too much dynamite

We coupled like rabbits, me with hundreds,

hundreds with me, hundreds with hundreds

in those orgies on narrow beds at the baths.

Some nights their faces from the ‘80s rise —

                    Ken Ketwig

                    Stephen Simmons

                    Ramon Castaneda

                    Doyle Hardin

                    Michael Donatelli

                    Robbie Mittle

                    Peter Vom Lehn

                    Christopher Morrissey

                    Terry Cook …

Did you know there’s a rabbit, not a man,

in the moon? Battering with his pestle,

pounding the new rice in his mortar,

crushing, releasing the elixir of life.

Linda said, “You live ten minutes away,

why wouldn’t you want

to visit Jack Gilbert, get to know him?

Take him some unhealthy food,

whatever he likes. That’s how

I came to know Brodsky, Milosz, Stern.”

I wasn’t born to fuck the stars, I didn’t say,

or eat nothing but lentils for years in a Greek hut —

(also, I thought, I doubt

if he is interested in visits from men.)

“Or, call and ask if he’d like to go

to the Miss Florence Diner for New England boiled dinner.”

So, a mistake, I did call, said I was

a poet friend of Linda’s.

There arose a long silence, followed by

“I don’t. Know what. To say.”

But Linda’s next visit we tried again, met at Jack’s

over Henry and Noele’s garage.

Old-man room, yellow underwear

washed in the sink and drying and his mind

unsteady, but full of letters

I would have paid to read.

She and I smoked too much, is what I remember,

and he questioned me as to whether I loved

differently because I loved men, which I don’t know

how he knew. I said I thought not,

and thought a little less of him, which is a thing

I’d been afraid of. A copy of my first book

given him minutes ago he then signed

with his own name, precarious,

and handed back to me.

This awkwardness, which I had tried so hard to avoid,

how to finesse it now? By drawing an arrow

from my signed name to his, adding the formula

“an honor to spend a morning with,” and the date,

then sliding the book back to him.

After that I visited

only his books. But knowing always he was

just across the river.

                                  And offered

to Linda as the reason the story Kevin had told

about Jack’s rebuke, ending their long friendship,

“This relationship is over,” his brutal side.

Then she had to move him to California,

and from a bad place there

to a better where he was visited at least weekly.

My copies of his books now

between Frost and Ginsberg.

The great fires.

But where, after all that,

is his copy of my book, my first,

which I signed and he signed?

We know nothing about your bodies, but we want to
teach you ours. We aren’t weak. Our skeletons

are built to stand even when certain parts break

or go missing. And while most of us are born

with collarbones, there are some who aren’t —

in the ’80s they made a living rescuing children

from wells. We’ve since stitched up every hole,

but the squeezers still exist — on this planet,

you don’t have to be useful to be kept around.

Our interests include improving the aesthetic

appeal of practical tools — cat eared umbrellas,

musical toilets, red bridges. Our main turn off

is nature, though we find ways around it. For

instance, with the right mix of chemicals

and a lot of patience, we can change a chicken

egg into a single-use camera. How advanced

are you? We’re not looking to move backwards —

even our primal yelps crawl up the throat and out

the mouth — but we’re known to be flexible in tight

situations, we’re known to be honest when desperate

and honestly, we’re right here if you like what you see.


Where I'm from, every house is a house with an obstructed view
 of the ocean. Oh, we are boring and superstitious

in my city. We believe tides are caused by millions of oysters

               gasping in unison. Our rooms are eggshell white,

and our eggshells are poked through with silver spoons to let

               the demons out. Yes, we fall in love, but our love

isn’t golden so much as it is Midas-lite — hard and cheap —

               everything it touches turns green. We run out

of swoon quickly and respect the loveless, who are paid

               to stand naked in department-store windows, eating

homemade granola and sketching caricatures of anyone

               who stops to stare. Yesterday, I gawked at a man

who wore a yellow knitted cap on his penis. I was impressed

               by how acutely aware he made me of my forehead,

which took up more than half of the portrait. I tipped him

               generously with one hand and gave myself bangs

with the other. As a child, I was just as impatient and always

               justly punished. When I tore the buds open in my

garden, I lost my garden. When I threw rocks into tree branches

               to shake fruits loose, gravity was ruthless. I still miss

the flowers, but these new bangs do a marvelous job hiding my

               scars. Where I’m from, we are practical and ready

to grow our mistakes. We whisper our heaviest secrets into seed

               packets and launch them toward the nearest planet

where they’ll take root in neat rows — flower, fruit, flower, fruit.

               This is how we build our new home. This is how

we make ourselves light enough for spaceflight. We haven’t set

               an exact date and I’m not sure how long the trip will

take, but when we arrive I’ll be able to tell which orchard is mine.

The media loves pitting women against women: how do you feed your baby, why don’t

you fit in that dress, disposable diapers last 8 billion years even in the guts of sharks, gold

digger, cougar, jailbait, cat fight. On Coney Island, Miki Sudo downed 38 hot dogs in 10

minutes for the national crown. After every hot dog, Miki brushed her hands together in

the universal gesture for take that, her eyes on Sonya “the Black Widow” Thomas, four-

time champion, who for every one of Miki’s hot dogs was falling a nibble behind. How

might one discover she’s good at eating hot dogs? Was it a meal brought to her that she

tossed down like luggage into the belly of a plane? Predators may eat up to 10 percent of

their body weight at a time; scavengers, up to 20 percent. I’m picking at my breakfast in

bed, wondering if champions chew before swallowing. The Heimlich: you know

someone must be standing by, reviewing the steps. It’s one of the only positive gestures

that begins with a fist. If a woman has died eating hot dogs in a contest, Google doesn’t

know about it. My kids ask: you gonna eat all those raspberries? In the comments below

the article, people have a lot to say about the bodies of women daring to eat hot dogs

in public. I know what Miki and Sonya know: the food’s brought to you. Then the vultures

descend.

When we hit the playback button

for the catapult

                       and call it history class,

will it show us every heave

of its life in a single second,

                       like the wing of a half-buried hummingbird?

Why can’t we learn from vivisecting weapons

the way we learn from the frozen horse

sliced into Bible pages

of viscera

        and scanned? An NRA mouthpiece

                       came to me in a dream and said

“Guns don’t kill children, other children do.”

Except when a hundred cops arrive,

and they spill out of their cars,

Glocks grafted onto their wrist-bones,

each of them giving different orders all at once:

don’t move, hands in the air,              get on the ground,

          don’t move,      show me some ID,        you have five seconds,

show me your hands,      slowly, turn around, now,

hold your fire, did

                                    you say fire?

          get on the ground, don’t move, get on the ground,

touch the sky.

And the two brown boys holding hands

are mistaken

                  for two black men gripping pistols,

as if black love is a hungry gun,

and the boys multiply themselves

a thousand times

so that their various versions

        can follow all the directives,

        because their father told them to comply, comply.

But the cops still shoot them all, except one.

He dies,     but it is because they told him don’t move

and he followed the command

        absolutely,

stopping his own heart, fixing his lungs into petrified wood,

        halting even the unbent light

that usually rushes into his eyes

                         like tornadoed branches of oak.

Handsome man who rides in to save me, I’m ready

                    for all manner of rewarding. I have kept

this pressed handkerchief scented with the most precious

                    of exotic oils in the fold of my sleeve. I’m going

to drop it. I’m going to thank you so hard — oh, oh,

no, I did not mean – of course, of course, certain standards,

                    protocols, I only meant — Absolutely.

Let’s start again. Handsome man

                    who rides in to save me, I’m ready

to step down from this post to which a dragon

has tied me, despite a total lack of opposable thumbs,

                    and swoon into your arms like this,

see how limp? I’ve been working on my lax

                    muscle tone, I’ve been flexing my can’ts

and helpless cries, just last month I

couldn’t escape from a blanket I awakened under,

                    it took hours, that’s how good

I damsel. Handsome man who rides in to save me,

                    I have been watching you from atop this hill

as you fought your way past that wild boar

which may have been a hog and that wall of thorns

                    which may have been a hedge, and that witch

who wanted you to be kind to old women but you showed her

                    what was what. You have conquered young and old,

and my heart, handsome man who rides in to save me,

you’ve truly — oh, I see, this is more of a platonic

                    sort of rescue, you’re more in it for the prestige.

You and The Black Knight have a competition — uh huh.

                    Right. Ok. No, it’s fine. It’s fine.

Handsome man who rides in to save me — look, I get it,

there’s no need to be a dick about it, Handsome man who rides

                    in to save me, not all of us were born pretty. Some of us

have had to cultivate a personality. Uh huh. Uh huh. Sure.

                    I bet she said that. I bet you’ve got a lot of high ratings

from other princesses. You know what? You know what,

handsome man who rides into save me? I think I’m just going

                    to stay here. Yeah. With the dragon.

I’m just going to swoon by myself. Look at me

          swooooooooning. Yeah. Like that. Like that? That’s right.

That’s right. Ride away. That’s what you’re good at. Ride away!

As is the custom of this country, men and women

hold certain poses in the bible-tinted light

of a passing storm in late afternoon.

Though some are irregular in speech or gait,

the majority are clean and well-formed, smooth

limbed, and clear skinned. Many are excellent

on the horse, and there is a long history

of mathematics and philosophy, as well as

trade with other continents. Most interesting

is their language. They have many words

for the blue of a sky contrasting with peach tinged clouds:

airbrushed, Florida, parfait. They have numerous

idioms for apology, and for love, many of which

are interchangeable. When a man says to another —

you are the last grains of salt in the bottom of the cellar —

it is the highest of compliments. Salt gives life savor,

and is an element of preservation. It was once rare,

but no more so. It is incumbent on the one receiving

these words to refrain from pointing to the ocean, or

from producing tears from the inner corners

of his eyes, where recriminations are stored.

You skimmed in on a pearl pink shell, left us bobbing

in the wake of your breasts. There was no party

until there was you. In the wings we all

snapped to — readying your next costume change,

topping off your drink, even pulling a disapproving face

when you needed that, too. One guy just blew

the wind so your hair was always off your shoulders.

Love means never having to say you’re sorry

love means saying sorry so often. I’m sorry

I can’t say aloud your real name, curled in my mouth

like a mint leaf, crushed between my gentle teeth.

Your false name, the one you gave to me, to anyone

who had hands open to receive, pushes out

from my mouth like a swollen tongue.

I’m looking at a picture of a bearded man

superimposed against a mountain. He is not

on the mountain, but it’s the idea of him

in the snow that I like, wearing a mock turtleneck

and freezing to death. I’ll find him preserved

with a bag of trail mix and a well-seasoned pan

and will thaw him out like you would

were you the caretaker of a vault of kept heads.

A renegade cryonicist has no concern

for the way a revived brain is never the same

as it was, the way a person can change.

I can feed him a new name. I can put him

in the cavity of a warm animal for safekeeping.

When he wakes, he can wax his beard

like a gleaming board upon an uncertain sea,

a void appreciated for beauty and fascination.

At a party I am staring

at a gigantic cardboard cutout

of Beyoncé that’s across the room,

realizing I will never be what I want

to be. I get drunk enough to forget

my aspirations and go home

unfucked and hungry, smear

my makeup and pass out to a movie

about the end of the world.

If I could bathe I totally would,

but the future is here and everything

must be destroyed. My problem

is that the only thing I’m good

at destroying is my body, a vessel

I wreck again and again like a car

in a video game programmed

to ignore the physics of death.

They say the asteroid will be here

in two weeks, so I’m making

a moonlight raid on the boy’s village.

At night they know all hips

are great — they can

take shelter under mine.

You can pick up any fashion

mag at the grocery store and know

you’re not in New York

because you’ve never lifted

a green juice to anything. You can rub

those beef ribs yourself, or let

Guy Fieri do it for you, your choice.

Gwyneth Paltrow spends $21,000 a month

applying the stem cells of apples

to her face and can’t fathom how

the poor live on $29 a week. It’s easy

enough once you’re an abstraction:

just feast upon the groundless assumptions

made about your life. Today I bought

a can of beans and planted it

in my yard. When the stalk grows large

enough I will climb it and yank the stars

from heaven. We put them there,

and it’s fun to watch them fall.

After we stop

touching, I count

your slowing breaths, listening

for your descending sleep

before I reach

for myself in longing —

quietly, so

you do not wake.

This kindness

is the sort

that cannot thaw.

I am ice all over,

the dead tree frozen

and reaching up

to our bedroom window,

and I am also the axe.

The first man peeled an orange every night

over the sink, and I studied him alone,

my hip riding the doorframe. At seventeen, I

thought a man’s tastes were what you married.

His searching fingers stung inside my mouth.

The citrus oil always stained the bed.

At twenty, each night I slept in a different bed.

Understand: my throat opened around the night

and the men called my hunger reflexive.

They touched me, but I felt my pleasure alone.

Finished, I’d look to my audience, ready to marry

the nearest outstretched hand or searching eye.

Who can I blame for this failure? At first, I

asked my body, who wouldn’t leave the bed.

I knew the old-wives’ trope: no sex after marriage,

listened for my parents, quiet together at night —

only I in the world couldn’t stop. Alone,

I married myself. I stopped my counting,

for the problem with blame lies in the accounting:

a fist cannot then love a swelling eye.

I imagine that first man — alone

in his kitchen, hands sticky and feeding. In bed

with each next woman, he tastes the nights

with me. This is a deception I will marry.

My love, perhaps someday you too will marry.

She’ll take apart your bookshelf while she cleans,

then sleep while you reorder it each night.

We call these lies fidelity. Instead, I

bend over before you, my elbows on the bed —

your face pressed to my back. Alone,

this is how I will lose you. I walk alone

down Harvard Street at dawn, already married

to another man. It smells like oranges in our bed.

What should I have learned? — I know new love

tastes different from its penances. I

suck it from my fingers every night.

Tonight, I palm the rounded flesh alone.

I marry every segment of my blame.

I put my love to bed inside my mouth.

I don’t know how

I’ll ever tell you —

the heroine’s

just walked into the sea.

 

By lamplight, you read

your textbooks, your body

soft inches from mine:

our books we read

 

in silence, discuss

only in morning,

water boiling for tea

in the kitchen full of light.

 

The sheets re-bleached

to white each week, never

bought again new.

I must examine

 

each of our mistakes

before I erase them.

Two armoires,

for we require partition

 

to function, the gathering

and dressing

of our separateness.

Those good books

 

by my bedside, the ones

where the women turn

into birds,

into pillars of salt.

 

The heroine’s head

in the waves,

her arms empty

of offerings.

 

The Gulf opening

to her, warmed

and patient.

At first, pain arrives wearing my own face, and I welcome her because I am lonely. I walk with her along the wooded path in the park behind the empty house, the dog snout-deep in the wet-matted leaves, and I tell her over there he kissed me, hard and she inhales. I’ve been here with you before, she says. She gets me drunk in Boston, runs her hands over the bar: you looked past me here, too, she says. You only wanted to see his face.

The confessional poet risks only what she’s willing to admit. I use the personal, wrote Sexton, when I am applying a mask to my face.

Because you will no longer touch me, I let pain instruct me. I bind my fingers together in the shape of an oath before I place them between my legs. In my imagination a single mouth lowers itself down my breasts and stomach in a perfectly straight line. I pretend I cannot recognize the mouth, the face, but I weaken and soon I am finished, bound prone into myself. I wake hours later and my fingers are white and cold and numb. When I return them to their starting place, they feel almost like someone else’s hands.

The confessional poet never discloses which of her stories are true. Some of her stories are entirely true, but all of her stories could be untrue. This self-protection sometimes looks like fraud. I use the personal, wrote Sexton, when I am applying a mask to my face. Like a rubber mask that the robber wears.

Pain hears me call her name, for I have named her, and she turns around. She resembles me less the closer I allow her. Some nights I awaken to her hands moving inside of me, her mouth pressed against my neck. You’d always ask me how does this make you feel? how does this make you feel? each time we fucked. How do I make you feel, Rachel. How do I make you feel. Pain doesn’t ask, for she already knows the answer.

The confessional poet risks more if she is a woman. Of Sexton, the critic John Simon wrote one of her symptoms was a preternatural need to be loved by everyone all the time. He wrote Sexton managed to function in some ways and keep teaching, writing, falling in love, having affairs — anything to keep her poetic juices flowing. He imagined her suicide as a kind of poem. In the end, Simon wrote of Sexton, it is the poetry that matters.

Pain leaves, and in her absence I dig my hands into my skin and nobody responds. I chase the escaped dog through the park as the sun sets because I forgot to close the door. I forget my gloves and hat and scarf and jacket and shoes and socks and run exposed through the snow because I have forgotten I possess a body. When I realize I am cold, a stranger has bent over me, blocking the waning light, the dog a shivering comma beside us. Who are you she asks me. Is this your dog? Who are you. Where do you belong.

In the joke with the bowl of water

you sprinkle salt and pepper

to represent children.

In the bowl, the children swim

together, mixing like spices

in a nourishing soup

which is the only thing

that belongs in the bowl

and we feel hungry, don’t we?

So far this seems silly or surreal —

a fable, a metaphor, something made

up, dinner with children,

their skin figured like seasoning,

how to make something delicious.

In a story from childhood,

someone performs it for me step by step:

First you fill a bowl. And now you

dump the salt, and now the pepper,

and look, they’re swimming together!

Such fun! But here comes

the Mexican or the Pollack

or the Jew, which is dish soap

on the tip of a finger, touching

the surface tension of the pool

water, so careful and clean.

Ha ha. We watch the children flee

each other, scatter to the sides

and out of the pool as if sizzled

by lightning or drowning

with cramps from swimming

too soon after lunch. Cool!

I’ve got the bowl out now —

teaching this joke

to my own children,

a demonstration of how clever

and hilarious disgust can be.

Ha ha.

Yesterday a black man died

slowly from a white cop’s gun

while his girlfriend filmed

his story, her proof while

her small child watched

and surely learned. All of this,

expository and literal. Thirty

years have passed and

I make them touch the surface, and

I touch the surface and

I watch their faces and

this is no joke and

I’m not laughing

anymore.

My father loved petunias,

my mother tells me.

I don’t recall him enjoying

them but I’m not saying

I doubt her, either.

There are so many things

I will never know.

My father loved peonies,

my mother doesn’t need

to remind me. I remember

the black ants pouring

thick off sweet pink petals,

how I called what happened

to his brain a tumor

because it was easier

than explaining how

the mind can swirl

and swell.

My father’s petunias,

purple this year, spill

over their own green bodies.

My mother taught me

to dead-head, pinch

and pluck just below

the bud so they grow

stronger, reserve

their strength

and stay contained.

But one day I stopped

tending the spent bits.

I got busy and let them

go. Exactly the way

twenty-four years

of gone has seeded

itself into my dailiness,

until suddenly I’m shocked

by dry soil and woody stems,

blossoms barely hanging on.

And by then, it’s too late

to do much except

lament. I called what grew

inside my father’s skull

a peony, pink and bursting,

early up and quick to succumb

to heat and hardier blooms

like petunias, yes, but irises,

too. Those have always been

my favorite. Indigo spike

straight up and piercing

through. I like the sword

metaphor. I plant them

when I remember next

to the crumbling steps.

They spread rhizomatically,

reaching outward, always,

beneath everything else

this garden may give.



What broken California am I from      what x-ray lacks bone and lays

underexposed             What splints for borders make a wrestling match for citizenship

Whose war on drug lords      of what government     What mouths like trap doors spin a labyrinth

          What revolution becomes a street sign     Isn’t a line a series of dots

What people power      What crown of thorns we are      This thorax poetry

makes foreign headlines makes the street a wake makes a sinking cruise liner of a

country Yeah   What country       just this mass of followers        born from the sword they brought to iron a

sobering laughter     Pretend I’m a package Pretend I’m coming undone

A typhoon of knives  a failed strangle  Pretend the outsourced women as weapons      What

weapons What sharp shouting in English this grip panel of teleseryes & dancers

You hit & run    unsolved crime   collection of belly buttons you mayonnaise inside

you mayonnaise outside         You minute hand jacking         you a old teddy bear

Pretend fire   Pretend I open from flame       Pretend this open flame breaks poorly

into orange     Pretend these embers catch roots     a rhizome     a rope      a fist        a crack

A semi-automatic kundiman    We camouflage American   We varicose ink  We a

dinosaur ghost        What good is your compass      If you got scissors for eyelids yo

if you pretend Magellan     if you Columbus      What time period did you sleep on

Pretend you erase when you don’t remember   if you pretend you don’t see us now what?

This a shredded blindfold   Not your nanay’s house no more    Your paradise come from

explosive smoke Your slippers ain’t armored cars Your pretending costs lives

Flocked on the cold, slick street,

birds partake of an unexpected feast,

what we might consider a pittance

of crumbs. Birds sip the same rain

from stone basins & bathe as small siblings

huddle inside a tub nightly, wings touching,

sharing twigs & twine & anything raw

with possibility, enough to build every nest!

Do they ever pray for safety from the beaks

of others? Lose everything over worms?

I think of them singing to each other in the dark

for seasons on end, calling when no one else will.

How they make my heart flutter

this damp winter morning, delighted

by their easy fellowship until a sudden,

deep yearning breaks open in my chest —

a screeching climbs up my throat. A friend

prefers me grounded & hungry. I try & try

but can’t unknow this. Circled around broken

bread, these winged sisters gladly share

the sky, tree branches, rooftops & ledges,

sometimes peering into windows at our lives

or dying when fooled by clean glass.



A rattle inside a new fist,

Irma shakes us with the glee

of men without morals

shaking kingdoms senseless.

They tried, twice, because

fools often will, the rest

of us be damned.

Some prefer to atone after

rather than restrain

that first wicked urge. Irma’s

wet, high-strung hands

grab the plane’s steel

wrists, twisting them hard & away

from her swirling core.

This ecstasy is mine —

you can’t land

in the middle of my dervish

twirl, pentecostal bliss. I’ll make

quick work of you.

I’m 44 & not as afraid

as I should be. I stare

at the hills & faintly hear

my name; knees threaten

surrender come shine & rain.

Men embrace me, weeping

from my words. Women clutch

the nape of my neck in joy,

then let go. Timelines wail

of those wedged between wavering

parents & distressed babies — nights

crush us random as pines uprooted

by giant ghouls oblivious to cities

swarming their heels. I’ve weathered

Earth long enough to start craving

what’s beyond it. How would Saturn’s salt

stun my tongue? Is Neptune’s water

unleaded? Would my country

or my friend who has forsaken me

love me spinning large elsewhere?

The jilted plane shudders,

straining to climb above

the ruckus it thought

it could handle

& we hush. I text my family

calm as her eye, almost ready

to find out.

into violence

 

 

 

                                                            our cowardly cub

 

 

 

                                        wulf tō wuda

 

 

 

                                                              is born

  if he

 

 

                                if he

 

 

                                                                      cruelty comes

 

 

                                wandering

 

 

                                                                      far

         a fearful

         heart

 

 

þætte nǣfre gesomnad wæs

 

                                lacks not for food

We are

 

                      the army

 

 

 

                                the

                                injury

 

 

                                of

 

 

need

those who wish

 

                                                                      to lament

 

                                the battle-song

  courage has

 

                                                                      no woods.

 

as if one

they / him

                    if he

         this violence

we two,

the other —

                    island,

                    this island

bloodthirsty.

If he toward

                    we

                    when I

I of far

wanderings

                    when his battle-bold

                    also misfortune.

Wulf, my Wulf! Your

expectation of mourning


My heart was quietly singing.

It did not need to raise

its voice.

When I saw you scamper,

I gained a second of life.

An orphan wind in the empty square

tugs at my coat, as if

asking: Be my guide?

I will. Look at the fountain.

Its arcs flee themselves

tenderly, like lovers,

and fall back, singing —

let's do the same, little wind.

Patiently, as one pounds stone,

Patiently, as one waits to die,

Patiently, as one absorbs news,

Patiently, as one nurses revenge —

 

I wait for you (fingers laced—

As a consort waits on a sovereign)

Patiently, as one waits on rhyme,

Patiently, as one worries a cuticle.

 

I wait for you (eyes — downcast,

Teeth in my lips. Stunned. A paving brick).

Patiently, as one holds off coming,

Patiently, as one strings beads.

 

Creak of a sledge, answering creak

Of a door: roar of taiga winds.

An imperial decree has issued:

— Regime change, entry of a new grandee.

 

Welcome:

Unearthly home that it is —

It is my own.

Spring brings on sleep. So, let’s sleep.

Even apart, it seems we yield: every piece

Of our broken set unites in sleep.

Maybe we see each other in dreams.

 

The one who sees it all knows whose

Palm — slips into whose, who — is with whom,

To whom I bring my sorrow,

To whom I confide my everlasting

 

Sorrow (a child, whose father

Goes unnamed and whose end

Comes unexpectedly!) О, sorrow of those

Who cry with no shoulder to cry on!

 

Crying over what slips from my fingers

As memory, like a pebble off a bridge . . .

Over all the places already taken,

Over all the hearts already engaged

 

To servitude — with no break — forever.

Bound to live — a lifetime — without joy!

O, buried — barely able to rise! at dawn! —

Consigned to a shelf, that Elysium of the stunted.

 

Over how you and I are quieter

Than grass, stone, terror, water . . .

Over the seamstress taking up a hem, left to:

Slave — slave — slave — slave.


I may sleep with others — in rosy tangles

Of tangles . . . For problematical fractions

Of weeks . . .

                     But I will be in you

As a treasure-house of similes

At second-hand — in the sands, gleaned

From detritus, — overheard in the winds,

On the tracks . . . Beyond all the hungry

Outposts, where youth wasted itself.

My shawl –- remember it? Drawn tight

In the cold, and hotter than hell

Thrown open . . .

                              Know, that a miracle

Of the heart — lies beneath my skirt, a living creature:

Song! With this firstborn, finer

Than all earlier-born and all Rachels . . .

— My truest heart, caught up in thickets

I clear with our imagined connections!

All doors are man-made

Even those in hell and heaven

Behind every door

Is either a home

Or a prison cell

More often both

Than neither

The only living space without a door

Is a nest or the sky

Both for birds

Neither for man


Every bee dies

While charging towards light

All flies survive

Even thrive

By fleeing into darkness

What

What if the empty bottle rotates

1

I was your slave

between thirty pasts and ten futures,

one half of me became a shadow,

a shadow spread by laurels

at the bottom of the valley.

Where the shameless light is wounded by your sanctum,

seven quiet balsams, seven balsams of shadow

And the prayer beneath the lip that

was I and — alas — myself.

I, your servant,

saw only your belly button and not even your belly button.

I lie, facing your threshold,

between ten pasts and thirty futures.

The moon beside my face

is the light’s dying gasp.

I’m not cold anymore.

A blanket is enough for me.


Baghdad’s arches and the arches of the Tigris —

The story left unfinished

may turn into a poem and a poem

finished                       can make a story. That’s why poets

always break the lines of their poems. And I want

from among those pointless walks around Baghdad

to break the line on a house in the bazaar

carpeted with many marbled stones in The Thousand and One Nights, where the ceilings

are painted turquoise and gold.

“Ten dinars a month for rent!”

“Are you kidding?”

“I’m not kidding,” the doorkeeper said, “but whoever enters the house

gets sick and within two weeks dies.”

For two weeks

I’ve been in this palace and nothing has happened.

I’ve only seen sunsets of gold:

you can hear them!

“Hey, boy, you haven’t seen the palace belvedere?” the doorkeeper’s wife said.

But what is on the roof

other than Baghdad’s arches and the arches of the Tigris —

draped in a white shroud

your feet a mirage

here you are, man of clay, on the side

of the mountain of light

specks of dust rise in your wake

the blessed grotto right at the end of the climb

will shelter your tired shepherd’s bones

this is it

you smile at the angels with two, three or four wings

for a moment

one brief moment

the angels’ face and yours are identical

twin brothers—two sides of a paper dream

my revolt was in vain

silence gives me its breast

its music

simple, sincere

flows like ablution water

that preludes the call to prayer

the words born on the lips of the guide

transport knowledge’s wine

by the barrel

I pursued this elixir as soon as the sun

lovingly drank up the mist before my eyes

from temple to temple

and soon the moon out of pity’s sake gave me a pebble

orphaned from quarterly vigil

a shaft of light precedes me

and my back

in turn

clumsily reflects

the slender harp-shaped form of the being

who kindly walked

in my faltering steps

my revolt was in vain

no regrets

the journey is long

tomorrow I’ll set off again

with dawn slung over my shoulder

By day. By night. In handcuffs. Through mind-scramble. Brain-

          surged. Shock of force, body taut. Alerted. Taken.

Outside. Inside. Anytime. Any place. No words to explain. My

          infant mother, 1942. My young son now. The rug,

his twisted body, his head inside. And what it does. Red flare

          or white lightning. Fried impulse or smoldering

heat. A searing of gray or glitter of stars veiled by fog. Her

          fragments. Yellow orb, the porch light. Shimmer

against her face. The cradle, her mother’s arms. A blanket's false

          cover. Itch of wool, hives on skin. Things

just happen. By bus. By train. In war. Electric storms. A horse

          stable. Desert. Sand swirl and mind gust. A thought

spark. Word cloudings. Mountains spike against white. A guard’s

          boot. Trodden syllable. A thorned cage. Wing

pierced. Baby hawk in wire. My barbed string of words. To capture

          him. Capture her. If he never speaks? I carry him. If

she cries for her father? My grandmother carries her. Some place. She won’t

          speak of it. I don't speak. Of things I don’t know. Of

despair. About him. We never know. Where we are going. Where

          love will end us.

I am the baby

          erased

from every war

          story. The wish

empty in Father’s

          hands. Our cord torn

by razor

          wire, skies of violet

plasma. I sense

          boredom

in mosquitoes, the itch

          beneath skin. Fall asleep

to the rake

          of Topaz

wind, desert willows

          bending over

the stone tablet

          of earth. Nighttime

my body curled —

          slashed by

the quarter

          moon. Waves of heat

and waiting. My lips

          on a bottle’s nib,

sand in

          the face, Mother

stooped over

          stairs, always

rocking me.

The rustle

          in a thicket

of gingko,

          shadows

waiting between

          trees. Teeth

of the gibbon

          glinting

above, my arm

          around the throat

of a stranger,

          choking words

I don’t

          understand.

Rough sand

          of his skin, beads

of rain spilling

          into his black

hair. All

          that follows

us. The warmth

          against me, his struggle,

his body

          foreign, I drag him

to the river.

          In the blood-orange

wash

          of the moon,

I lean over

          the current,

let go.

 
As a child a macho told me to close

                                           my legs or he’d take me to a dark room

                                           & make me cry. I closed

                                           my legs. He asked me

                                           to give him a kiss. I gave him

                                           a kiss. I could not stop crying,

                                           & he could not understand why.

::
 

                                           My father was a ghost

                                           in our house. He would not speak

                                           for days, then drop a glass of water

                                           on the kitchen floor. My mother

                                           always swept up his shatters

                                           & buried them in the yard.

::
 

                                           At thirteen a macho put his hands

                                           on my knees, then became tarantula,

                                           travelled up my skirt. I didn’t scream

                                           because I felt chosen. I felt lucky

                                           he had chosen me to be hunted.

::
 

                                           Machos hunt to watch women

                                           in orgasm. Not because they like

                                           to see women in pleasure,

                                           but because they like to watch

                                           women close to death.

::
 

                                           Machos don’t know what it is

                                           to give birth

                                           to the dead. Machos know

                                           pleasure through release. Machos

                                           hunt to give pain & to witness

                                           pleasure. To testify:

                                           the resurrection of the body.

::
 

                                           I will not apologize

                                           for my desire to love a macho

                                           who could crush my skull

                                           with his bare fists.

::
 

                                           I apologize to a daughter

                                           for telling her to close her legs.

                                           Machos are hunting, always hunting

                                           to see women close to death.

::
 

                                           I work two jobs & still come home

                                           to an empty pantry. I am a bad woman

                                           when I can’t feed hunger. My labor:

                                           the taste of bleach after an alacrán stings my feet.

::
 

                                           I write to machos & never

                                           send my letters. In the age

                                           of los Zetas, I am a lucky

                                           hembra: I have a language

                                           to write of the violence of machos.

::
 

                                           I watch the azahars grow into lemons

                                           machos pull too early from their branches.

                                           I slice each lemon’s rind into translucent

                                           sheets & place each little sun under

                                           the tongue of my macho who eats & eats.

+

A shell of teeth,

mother of pearl brilliant.

I wash each tooth by hand.

They are the bones

of my daughter still

to fall. A foam collects

in the vitals of the earth

full of teeth. Bones,

from my womb

washed clean with hot

water in a brass tub

& poured beneath

the ocotillo to be burnt.

++++

Que te salves,

María, llena eres

de rajas, estas

sola en este mundo.

Bendito es El entre

todas las mujeres

y bendito es el trabajo

de tu vientre, Jesús.

María, ama de casas,

ruega por nosotros

pecadores ahora y

en la hora de

nuestro nacimiento.

+++++++

Who is the father,

María? Does it matter

who it was if he

isn’t here now?

Does it matter who

it was if he wasn’t

here when from

between your legs

you bled into bedding

onto the floor. You made

this baby, it was your

baby. You made it,

it was yours.

++

Dios te salve, María,

llena eres de gracia,

el Señor es contigo.

Bendita tu eres

entre todas las mujeres

y bendito es el fruto

de tu vientre, Jesús.

Santa María,

Madre de Dios,

ruega por nosotros

pecadores ahora

y en la hora

de nuestra muerte.

+++++

María, when your macho

comes knocking at the back

gate, turn each light

off. Pretend no one

is home, María. Pretend

you are not home, in your

body. Pretend your body

did not lose pressed

skin & blood. Pretend

you did not rid yourself

of your child, of your

baby, by your body,

your cuerpo. Your body?

++++++++

There is no damp earth

here, only powder

I grind from teeth

to use as dye for thread.

This is my solitary

burial. No macho cares

for the child born, but not

breathing. My baby, I tried

to roll myself into a ball

as he kicked to break

teeth, but you would not

stop bleeding, you kept

flooding between my knees.

+++

No llores, María,

tell no one

of the child. Tell

no one, María,

even when machos

laugh as you hum

to yourself over

the pot of laundry.

Beat each sheet

against stone.

The washing

machine, gone

to rust in the yard.

++++++

The desert is always

hungry. I break

rock to dirt

with a pick. Sky

breaks in shards.

I wash the child, hope

to hear a scream.

She is dead, but I

carry her, eyes closed

through the yard &

breathe into her

mouth, which looks

like my mouth.


You come home with a bottle

of sotol, an apple floating

in its pit. You say the apple grew

inside this bottle & you snapped

it off a branch to bring home

to me. I pour each of us a glass

& smash the bottle to rescue

its tiny fruit. You drink liquor

from the ground until flakes

of glass cut your tongue. In my jaw

I carry the apple — little fruit,

little child — to the yard to hush

its sticky crying. The apple stains

my hands yellow as I slide

its soft flesh down my throat.

When I return to the house

you sniff the corners of my mouth

hungry for any evidence of what

I have done. You say: You are

the bad mother. I say: You are

the bad father to have brought

this fruit home at all. I drink

& drink, until I root into a tree.

You sell the fruit I bear in bottles.

Y o u   a r e   n o t   y o u r   d e a t h.

 

Y          ¿How long has she been dead?          Y

o              ¿Donde están sus dientes?              o

u           ¿Do you recognize her shoes?           u

          ¿Tienes la misma camisa?          

a               ¿Missing, for how long?                a

r                         ¿Tiene hijos?                        r

e                 ¿Was she a prostitute?                 e

          ¿Vive en Anapra?          

n          ¿Why cut under each breast?           n

o                ¿Esta ropa no le vale?                 o

t            ¿Will you get the rape kit?             t

          ¿De donde vienen tantas moscas?           

t          ¿Rocks in the vaginal cavity?           h

h              ¿Mordidas por los oidos?             e

i              ¿More hair 300 ft. away?              r

s                 ¿Una barra en la boca?                

              ¿Puta written in blood?           

d                    ¿Por sus piernas?                     d

e                   ¿Whose daughter?                    e

a                 ¿De quien es mujer?                  a

t           ¿De donde son estas esposas?            t

h           ¿How should I bag her body?           h

 

Y o u   a r e   n o t   d e a d.

Driving to the airfield that would launch me to Texas,

from Texas to Bagram,

I dropped my cell phone beneath the driver seat. Just one of a thousand

small things

that grew then absurd in their insignificance. And my fingers —

just comprehending

a corner edge of the phone, drew all of my awareness there.

Beneath the seat

of my car I was approaching Zen — quiet and still. A stop light swung

like an empty bell

and I was filled by a sun-struck, dry-rot barn in the spreading high plains

wheat and wandering

herds of Anatolian Red, where a vet, myself, a pregnant heifer were baking

clay in a summer kiln.

Birthing chains chattered like wind chimes as we dragged them

from the truck bed.

Then in up to my shoulder, her warmth claustrophobic as the Oklahoma sky

flattening fields,

I felt two hooves pressed together — praying, unprepared,

and stupidly eager.

One day a cat spied a family of mice trying to hide in a milk can.

These will be a fine supper, he thought, and thrust

his face into the pail. Lifting it he soon

had a mouthful of mice. But to his dismay he found

his bulging cheeks kept him stuck fast, and he could

not swallow the mice, even one at a time, because the narrowing

neck of the pail narrowed also around his own.

He stumbled about in frustration tipping the pail back and forth

as the mice tumbled into and out of his mouth. At length

some soldiers approached behind grumbled humvee engines. The cat

froze in terror, unaware he had wandered so close to a patrolled road,

unwilling to remove his head lest any of the mice escape.

How did a cat even get stuck in a pail is not a question

anyone stops to ask in a warzone. And why should they?

One soldier drew a pistol and fired. The cat ran back and forth

in frantic, erratic patterns. The soldier fired a second time —

no one knows what became of the mice.

How will I leave this life, like I left my job, drifting off without

comment, like mother took off to get schooled, shut the door

hard on my crying, she had books to read, or father in an ambulance,

rotating light swept red over oak trees, then the hospital bed,

hallucinating war ship and sea, or the way my ex left us, dragging

his clothes in a garbage bag through snow like fresh kill, or like I left

K, I had twenty minutes before he’d get home to try to change my mind

or kill me, out the red door with my dad’s briefcase full of all my poems

and the typewriter and seal skin coat, and then the airplane home,

so freaked by the years with him in New York I broke when I stirred

up a grouse in the woods, will I leave like a grouse leaves, drumming

the air with its wings, or like Freddie left the stage when Queen played

Live Aid, glossed like a racehorse, top of his game, or like I leave parties,

no valedictions, out the door like smoke from extinguished candelabras

On what day do you think Jesus was actually born he asks,

and do you think Billy Idol is talented but dumb or smart

but talentless, I love the cold, he says, I love it to be as cold

as it can possibly be, I want snow as high as the rooftops,

which is why he swears he’ll never come home from the north,

never back over the bridge, not for holidays like the false birthday

of the so-called Lord, throw out my stuff, all of it he says, so

cold I can spit and it freezes, makes a chhh sound like Billy Idol

pronounces s when he’s really rocking, did you see him live he

asks, did you see the Clash, yes to the Clash, no to Billy, I spat

and it froze in November, he says, rare these days, never home, not

for funerals or to sleep in his old room where I used to find empty

quarts of vodka, needles, pipes, but he’s clean now, clean, gorgeous

word like snow like cold, if I were Jesus, he says, I’d make it colder

I courted her, that musky tart, dusk personified, she of the purple prose and yellow

journalism, her claws the color of Gaugin’s Christ, pee-pee yellow with a dash of green,

like that algae called Xantho-something-or-other, missing its Fucoxanthin, thus yellow-green,

like poor-people teeth, like the finger and toenails of boozehounds, come to me, I said,

her mouth like Day 2 of a bad period, can hardly get up from her stool without that wooden

cane with a stiletto in the tip of the shaft in case somebody gets local, but to quote my cousin-

who-looks-like-Moses speaking of Etta James, she’s old, she’s fat, she’s sick, she’s mean,

she’s the sexiest thing I’ve ever seen, like this girl who showed up at my door, she knocked

and I answered and she just stood there in her tatters staring at me and picking her nose,

sized me up like I should be the one ashamed of myself, she had a point to make, I guess,

something about the grotesque, and Caren whose head was too small for her body who later

became a cop and then a minister, said that I embodied that song “Femme Fatale” by the Velvet

Underground, “false-colored eyes” and all, well now I’m barely femme and fatal only to some,

my kidney hurts, I debrided my own burn, that loneliness I once lusted for I have become

I floated I flew I fell to earth to learn the pleasures of the lowdown

which meant sometimes going downtown to the Ready theater

to get my ticket punched by ole hook-for-a-hand I feared ambulances

janitors knives dogwood blossoms my sister’s boyfriends one of whom

threw a knife at my head one of whom pressed his whiskers into my face

and whispered things my girlfriends’ boyfriends one of whom shot me

in the bone behind my ear at a shooting gallery my unspayed dog’s periods

we put her in my sister’s bikini underpants stuffed with a Kotex pad the girl

whose eyes were crossed cowboy boots on the wrong feet the birthmark

girl Dwight who saw through me Little S hit and killed by a jeep on 13th

St. the guy who hit him sticking his tongue in my mouth at an adult party

Jesus the eschaton which I learned from a well-read Jehovah’s Witness

was a synonym for the end of the world my father resurrecting my

father not resurrecting I feared floating flying falling the lowdown

Keep your panties on. Fill the room with sand and blood. Play the role of a mountain range: distant and cold. Play the role of a desert: dry. Make your holes so impenetrable God must make new holes. This is the greatest tease: promising a new opening, new entrances to the sad soul. Hold out your arms like you are guilty, even if you are not guilty. Lie on the divan like a dissected frog. Spread, splayed, pinned. Label your parts as you wish: Latinate, Romance, Slavic. God is fluent in language and ruin. The smell of desire is rank, with blooming. A spiritual mustard. Make your body into the letter t: terrified, temporary. You will die the same way your pleasure dies: violently, weeping.

Burn the memory of your mother, her mother, her mother, her mother. Burn the idea of being a mother, to her, to her, to her. Trace your ancestry back to the violin to validate your hollows. Begin your body from no one and nothing. Watch God’s excitement as he sees your meaningless figure. You could be a salesman, a bed wetter, a botanist, a slave. He will get off on naming you. This is the closest he will come to being a woman, your mother.

Take into your mouth everything but the beef of the other. Curtains, bird nests, bridges, smoke, etc. Kneel at the altar of your own godly breasts. Hold out your hands to egrets. Pleasure will travel through sawmills and swamps to nest at your hind. In the meantime, your mouth. Let it speak in tongues. Let it maraud the man. As a woman, you’ve swallowed enough of God’s currency to have an ocean behind the teeth, salty enough for any wrongful bones to float. Watch God bob up and down in the cold current, his shrinking cock the first promise of all the things he was never willing to give you.

When you want less, raise your hand. When you want more, raise your hand. Be God’s ceiling mirror. Be his twin. When god says jump, say into which discourse. God is a labyrinth, enter without leaving. The ass is another mouth. Let him choose which he wants to kiss you with and praise that teaching. Be God’s co-ed, his girl on girl. Make yourself into mythology — half cow, half cunt or half serpent, half nun. Read the anthology of God’s pleasure and recite it back to him as a eulogy. There is no littler death than God’s semen on the carpet, his children swimming to drown. Regardless, you get a gold star. Be a man and name it. With your hands on fire stroke everything you see and say mine mine mine.

Name all the ways to be punished for what you haven’t done. Murder, and repent. Vandalize, and repent. Fuck the good out of God until he is only a man. Write a requiem and perform it with your own dead hands, your instruments made of fruit peels and the blow fly’s fresh eggs. When God is panting on his knees like a dog he hasn’t created yet, wrap your legs around his neck and let him smell your death. Shroud yourself in ordinary linen. Make a cave out of your unsatisfied pleasure and crawl into it (you already have). Look at your body and make a list of what you can stand to keep. Look at God’s body and let him keep it all, every sinking inch. Passion is where the cells go to die. Step out of your death like a pair of panties and watch God watch you. Call it tantric, telepathic, this untouching of each other. At this point God is so hard he nearly crucifies himself. Let him. Let him come again. Unlike a man, feast on the presence of his blood.

I would like for him to really taste the dick

Savor it like a last meal

Note the way it has or hasn’t been recently washed

The residue of baby powder and sweat

Sheathed at the base like a foamy negligee

I’d like for him to choke on the dick

If that’s what he’s into and it’s been talked about beforehand

I’d like for him to really get to know

The dick, how it curves to the left and bends towards justice

How it is sweet and bitter under the foreskin

How it is unashamed

Of its history

And knows where it’s going

And while we’re on the subject

I would like for Paul Ryan and Mitch McConnell to eat a bunch of dicks too

Casual, Lunchables-style dicks, a confetti

Of frosting-covered dicks exploding

In their taste buds like a Saturday morning balloon-drop

I would like to ask the president to eat so many dicks

That he vows to eat more pussy

Which have vitamins and minerals

And the secrets to success

Until he feels clean

Until he feels as close to the face of god as a man can get

Until he loves dick and pussy so much he shakes

Like a man redeemed in a church revival tent

Understanding that first there was the word and the word was

Let them eat dicks

And the word was good

Lord, let him eat a dick

That knows it will one day die

A dick that expects nothing in return

Humble dick

Tired dick

The dick he must eat

The one he has feared his whole life

The dick that might fill the endless void inside

Sometimes I sing New England furniture commercial jingles

to my husband so that he might understand me better,

the ones where Boston accents reverberate

like moans in an empty church,

amniotic and relentless, sedating the ear

with elongated vowels like “COME ON

DOWN” and “I DOUBT IT,” blunt

anthems we’d recite as kids

until some adult would scoff, “They can’t learn

math but they can remember this” and today

while singing one of those songs

to my daughter before bed I felt so American

it hurt, like wandering pickle-deep

in the condiment aisles at Costco, half distracted

by someone asking what kind of meatball

I’d like while YouTube footage

of a Nazi getting punched in the face unfurls

across my phone’s screen, his smirk

a sick apology, and I watch it again

beside the mayonnaise jars that are waiting to be snapped up

by doomsday preppers where they will glow

like engorged lanterns

in the basements of musty imaginations —

enough mayonnaise to last through the apocalypse,

not real nourishment but a temporary fix —

not real justice but close enough to feel

like I’m flashing my heart to everyone

in the superstore, asking them to hold it

for just a moment, place the fat joy

of it into their mouths,

the way I ask my husband to hold

this gilded bluster and sprawl

of a busted dialect, a language jagged

as rocks like odes to all of the things

I never learned, which might be the most American

thing about me,

loving what should make me feel ashamed,

filled with unimpeachable pride.

I am thinking about the movie Con Air and my love

for Nicholas Cage, which is profound and focused

on the abundance of his hair, the way it trickles and recedes

to the middle of his scalp, chorusing down his back

with an unevenness that mirrors the body’s swollen

inadequacies, one of my breasts

whistling with milk while the other sleeps

flat against my chest, the asymmetrical

splendor a speaker swelling with fuzz and odd

time signatures, like half of my body

restored to its original form. I never met Nicholas Cage

but watched Con Air so many times I can conjure

the chiaroscuro dribble of his voice, blue smoke

lapping the edge of an extinguished star,

and imagine he, too, knows how to disguise

the body into something less fragile,

the tired meat of his heart striated

into a thousand directions like a smoldering compass

as when I gave birth the midwives praised my composure,

said their last patient clawed the bed like a raccoon,

and I wished instead to have given birth like a squid

shooting an ombre cage of ink and ovum

out of her orifice, ragged and deranged

with hormones, because didn’t I hold my daughter

and wish to be as feral as a raccoon

who knows love is the blunt metronome

of rummaging through trash, who doesn’t

think but throws her body into the labor of it?

In the last scene Nicholas Cage grips the pink bunny

he bought from commissary,

ripped-up and dripping with fuel,

and hands it to his daughter anyway

and I will watch it over again

to see him stand there bruised and lit

with the one good thing he has;

my left breast emptied while the other

floods with music,

soothing the vowel-starred tongue.

i watch from the fence’s perimeter,

          two coyotes circling

as they make of their hungers

          a wicked game, a slow dance

of devouring. between them a bantam hen,

          soft blurt of fear, copper coin

slurring into a planet between four open palms.

          the bird litters a panic

of its blood, ruby crumbs darkening the ground.

          i stand there quiet & do not stop their game.

i am nine & do not yet know this feeling.

          to become a thing of play

& then a meal. but i will learn. a woman

          will howl into me

like the deafness of a bell. i will mistake her

          for a teacher. will awaken

to my skin now currency, sex

          like the barter of a body.

my lips, the tender veins of my neck,

          the delicacy of my tongue,

passed between teeth, from mouth

          to mouth, how i am taught

to find value in the making of my body

          a meal, in my devouring,

boy broken as bread, or a wishbone’s sharp division.

          then, i was innocent as an animal,

unmarked as fresh lain egg. come morning,

          i hose the red away, pluck

feathers like small blooms from the frost

          -choked dirt. think of the hen,

how it could not have foreseen its own opening,

          its becoming a stain, washed away.

how it first entered into the world, drenched,

          body sticky & golden with light.


the forest curves around me tightly as a scalded palm, skin peeling

into clouds slumped low enough among the trees to be mistaken

for mist, or a gasp of steam from the valley floor — spread wide

as a newly vultured corpse — its edges clung with the last wet suds

of yearling snow, like curdled milkfat or maggots dreaming gut-heavy

against a deer’s caved-in breast. there is a wind chime dangling

in the mist. closer, no. not a wind chime. though its limbs percussion

into a fevered tune. the sides of its throat applauding into the absence of air

between them. the wire circles its vein-thick neck like a maypole. the goat

hanging, ornamental, limp as a storm’s decline. its eyes fat, pink, & pitted

as late-season plums. each pupil a single gouge, a thumb nail splitting

peel. even now, how pulseless the knowing: that i will leave its body

strung into the air. imagine the flesh sloughing away, bones suspended

as salt in brine, or constellation — pinholes in the blue-bleak fabric of night

— & how i long for such animal knowledge: to invent of the sky an exit,

a doorway in the wind, breath swung open on the hinge of the jaw;

to see in the body a room & know how to leave it behind.

Somewhere in America, a gun
-shot rings out, baritone from beveled throat & i am in the woods & when the birds first break from the treeline i wonder if you can count the seconds between the shot & the moment they startle their bodies skyward, become a configuration of dark lightning rising up from the earth into a cloud; wonder if because i cannot see the gun this has become again a natural thing, the slow cleave of a deer’s distant pant already resolving itself to memory, the sound babbling off of trees like heavy lodestones thrown into a stream — & still some part of me is already devoting itself to silent prayer, that all that rises from the earth around me was not made by men’s hands, does not hold within its perimeter the heave of human breath, or the many fragiled borders of a child’s body, their tin plate eyes, reflecting, remembering — & somewhere in america a gun is used for anything but moving food closer to a child’s mouth, & the silent praying part of me, knelt in the atrium of my heart, is wondering, if i do not turn on the news, if i hide from my phone’s bright & expectant face, [if i do not see the gun] then perhaps this too can be made a natural thing, an undeserving body gifted first thunder, then absence, then the slow configuration of their heart’s dark lightning arranging itself in the dirt?

please write a statement identifying         the safest way to walk beneath a tree containing a monkey. please note

distinctive qualities and                                identifying signs that said monkey will exhibit

characteristics of                     aggression towards you, the applicant, and mention

life experiences that might contribute to             his ragged nails.              the monkey is

your graduate program                     admissions committee. he is tied to a tree and each step you take

is an education	                     in geometry, in arc length and radius,   how close is too close.    the monkey is

your fellow student                     in learning how long his leash.

you may wish          absently for his freedom, but will you dare

to include          a pair of scissors in the next application packet you toss into his tree?           will you include

examples that address          your apathy?           or even

your contribution          to his captivity?         what about your input

to the diversity   of the                        poisoned fruits you and your fellow

students           shoved into his

body          and called it kindness.                       will you

illustrate your          hesitation, your lack of

motivation to succeed                     in cutting his rope and truly

setting                            him free?                                                            you were afraid weren’t you?

high standards                            of geometric excellence    be damned

for accomplishing                                          accurate calculations of a monkey’s free trajectory.         just like all that

intellectual and                                       quantitative methodology won’t get you         to those

other goals          like no longer needing to count your steps while you walk,

like overcoming                     your fear of the monkey.                      the monkey’s leash is

an obstacle to your education.	          it wraps around his waist and around yours too, though you may not feel it yet.

every achievement                of yours can only reach as far as the end of a red rope, but the monkey isn’t interested in

helping others           (you) understand this about themselves (yourself).           he knows you will only

gain access to                          this truth after fumbling in the dark, your only

resources                   your hands and a length of cord that you follow                       blind, hunting

for success   until your hands close around fur over bones over the slow, slow heartbeat of the monkey   who has been

                                                                                                                                                              waiting for you.

There is a mountain over our heads,

Sun Wukong. You can call it Buddha’s

hand, his five fingers, moss-covered fist.

You can call it nature’s five elements

          earth, air, fire, water, metal

Or, what they have taught us of our nature —

the five temperaments

          quiet, submissive,

                     sexy — but passive! — tame.

I am quietly building a hammer,

Sun Wukong. I’ll weight the head

with the faces of cashiers in Chinatown

when I can’t answer in the correct

language, set the counter-balance

with the expressions of tourists

two blocks from Chinatown when I can.

Will you lend me your staff, Sun Wukong?

I want my hammer’s shaft to weigh

13,500 pounds. I want my hammer

to remember the centuries it spent

as a celestial nail, holding down

the bed of Milky Way, and the look

in the eyes of the Dragon King

of the Eastern Sea as you ripped it

from the ground and his palace

crumbled about his ears.

We are asked if we’re willing to risk danger in the form of Skittles, one poisoned, as the child remains always facedown in a pool of shallow water washed up from the broken boat, I say child as though there’s one but there are thousands without photograph, here’s a handful of Skittles, you might get a bad one, would you risk it? Some call it fake news, not a real child, who knows if that child was gonna grow up to be one of them, a comment says, one of them and not a real child, what if that child held hate in his heart like a gun, he’d only have to reach in and retrieve, would you risk it? Meanwhile my child propulses down the slide, he is here and I touch his small body, a miracle, a mundanity, my real son, I see him moments before the boat explodes apart on a jut of rock, before the hospital wing disintegrates, the housing unit’s blown open, the wedding party scattered, a real child thrown from my arms, a real child who might have hate growing in his heart, a child who might someday reach and find a gun, a real child wheeling his arms away from me, it’s only been a moment but he’s gone and I cannot touch him again, a Skittle in the dark, a bad one, would you risk it? For a child, not a real child, for my son, for the dead child who has nothing, not even hate in his heart.

Others are grateful for two, but you took

one then another, smoked it black and set it

on fire. Heart marshmallows and hot dogs,

heart hobo pies filled with jelly and cream.

Your fifth heart you wore like a shoelace,

always untied and tripping over your own two

hearts. Some hearts get stuck to you like gum

in your hair, others leave little pieces flaking

white snow. Hearts in your breakfast cereal. Hearts

on your wool suit. Some hearts you can’t live

without. Others you misplace like your keys.

Come downstairs in the morning ready to leave,

“Honey, have you seen my heart?” What am I

to say? “Have you tried checking your pocket?

Beneath the couch cushions? Between my teeth?”

We walk to the park, one heart shy, past the heart

tree where you brave the bees and ask for a boost.

The best hearts fruit high branches. The worst,

browning, soft and spoiled. I scoop what’s left,

panning for hearts as if they are worth something.

You are already climbing. You are not afraid

of mistakes. You are not afraid of being

alone. Once I confessed I was afraid of my

own heart. You told me to find another

as if hearts are like whale bones and regret,

inviolate and absolute. It is only a heart,

you said. Your heart will grow back, stronger

and thicker and more heart than before.

The night the Duggar scandal

breaks, my daughter spikes    a fever.

I strip her down to      run her small

                      body under cool water.

While they were sleeping,     Josh Duggar touched

his sisters      over and under

            their clothes,             weaving

fingers through armored denim,

            thumbing          a hole in the seam

of a shirt. Our daughter’s body            hurts

                          like an oven I’m too afraid

to touch.           American Girl Doll

            Girl of the Year,           Grace

loves to bake. She pipes           French

                          macaroons for sale,

a field of pastel coins. I dated

            Josh Duggar   once. Not him,

but a man who lured his little

            brother to          the bottom bunk,

closed his eyes and pretended that skinny,

                                             bow-legged boy

was the girl who turned him down

                     at the dance. I wait             all night,

curled on the lip of the tub        for the fever        to break.

                     He put his mouth on my pecker

                                           that was his word for it.

Wedging himself wet. The fever thirsts                fizzles.

          The baby          sleeps

                     toweled in terrycloth.   Grace hungers

                                   for a girl in velveteen clothes.

How can you take from a small thing

          nested against you       like a cloud

          stitched over earth? In the bathroom

          I discover I am pregnant    again.

                                            My body fills

                        with other bodies that buck

and twist inside me               like the fingers of men.

My English teacher put his fist to my chin as if to punch

me in the face. He gave my jaw a nudge and said “you’re a doll,

kid.” His name sounded like pervert but he taught me to love

Hemingway, ran to keep his buttons closed, but still couldn’t know

what it’s like to spin into a waterspout spitting psalms. Getting raped

is a storm like this, like getting in a car accident on the way to school.

Getting raped, pulled over in a parking lot on the way to school

sprays a shrapnel injury, body splintered while eating cheese. No punch

or scar, just a pathetic blur pooled across his backseat. Rape

made me a Dalí clock telling all the wrong times. Raggedy Ann doll,

Peter Pan collar wilted like lily petals pried open. The nuns didn’t know,

didn’t excuse my tardies. I closed my eyes while ladies shouted LOVE,

rich ladies in tennis skirts, lipstick blazing O mouths, O, LOVE

O, while mine melted, a defeated sunset I had to reapply before school.

Getting raped is a determined bird flopping half-winged in high grass, a know-

it-all too afraid to raise her hand to ask, a gnawing appetite, a sucker punch

spooling through your bones, a basement flood that claims your favorite doll.

Waking up to a rape is uncovering a mutation in your DNA. No rape

kit to understand how everything untwists, recoils, reshapes. Rape

comes back to get you. Big Bad knocking the doors of everyone you love,

my husband’s ex-girlfriend. My husband. My every sister. Rape is dol-

phin slaughter you lament before all-you-can-eat sushi. High school

drop-out returned to drop a second time. Rape is a punch

card Hallmark doesn’t make. There are no congratulations, no

get-well balloons, not for you whose name we aren’t supposed to know

but goes viral all the same. I sat with my legs open while unraped

ladies wiped sweat from pastel visors and went home to rum punch,

and daytime TV. Getting raped is a blinding eclipse, it’s latex gloves,

paperclips rubberbanded to a spitball slingshot in the school

bully’s hand. Rape is a red mouth turning blue. They got all dolled

up to sweat. He kept doing it until I was dead weight he needed a dolly

to lift and gave up. That didn’t stop the spectators. Don’t you know

rape is a relationship and a sport? After rape, I came home to my Playskool

dollhouse. Can you win rape? I was fourteen and a half, but after the rape

I said fourteen. Rape is an apocalyptic antiwrinkle cream. After rape, love

grows sticky. My skin spilled clear across the kitchen, tacky punch

I still can’t stop touching as if by stepping and restepping I can punch

the spot away. Our whistles fail us. Where are you when we need you, love,

because right now your friend or mine, me or you, is somewhere getting raped?

We look up and no longer recognize our kin. Bloodlines severed by a single vote. How easily stories get fastened onto bodies. How black they bleed against—

I place banana leaves onto my grandmother's lids. My piety thin as pressed flowers. The sun is pushing us all outside our encasings. Closer to sky.

When is a daughter no longer a daughter? 
Penumbra, a finger touched eye. We live entire worlds beyond a mother's periphery. Without diagnosis, hers is a path of totality. We just want to be seen.

My rooms are filled with your darkness, empty and unkempt. The umbra's edge. Anywhere I look is light reflected. A knife that never touches you.

Odd number. Odd girl. One is an observation. The other, a polite indictment. She preferred to arrange her studio against the laws of symmetry, her way of saying up yours to Confucius and his man-pandering precepts. No matching pillows, tilted walls, her father's books all perfect bound yet bent like a wormwood granny's feet. 

Imagine a woman's calculations opening up the sky, the sun's orbit but a mole on the lip of solar clustered nipple. How she spilled the milk from the glass of her astronomer eye knowing it would feed another hunger in another womb of time.

Mathematics were just foreplay. There is nothing wrong with being easy. Any man can scribble odes to flatter a goddess of the moon. She turned her garden into laboratory to decipher the secret turning of the stars. Behind the ecliptic strung up crystal, she glimpsed her face in the lunar mirror's gleam.

Infinite planets. Her endless ether. There are those whose greatness grows in shadow, whose outer limits the spotting of blood cannot contain.

Primal fire burns on feathered bone. Ink blot patterns hand over a milk-strewn sky, streaked with vanished stars. Crickets sing you deep into the purpled dark, the vaulted doors of open eyes crack wide. Come. Nestle in the kinship of our gorgeous insignificance. Take comfort in knowing that this year is but a blink in the breadth of trees and cosmic moss, that the nebulae with all its dust hardly noticed how the phone slowly died, how you burned the faulty maps to your forefathers' graves, turning your gaze toward unborn cities.

These wounds won't outlive Jupiter's red eye, its stare fixed on a three hundred year storm. To look is to choose. To see, to sea the primordial stew of trial and error and error and error. Cosmonauts wear loneliness like a bear's back against the night, softly. The exoplanets have no sympathy; they've been at it for years.

You float yourself over this tiny dot, aglow in its mobile blueing. Glimmer in the sweet dusk of amber with its powdered resin in your nose. Maybe we can speak again.

It's true I see them kissing
on the porch, what with how

my kitchen window faces Ella’s door.

Ella and Michael, kissing —

that I’m sure of. Those little wrists

ringed with a dozen bracelets

and there I am rinsing dishes, staring,

and the staring made the lovers change

like one of those ink blots

or like when a toppled rocking chair

is a bent-back creature skulking

in the den at five a.m. until the light

makes it a buffalo, a mountain,

then finally a chair again. Is it the staring

that makes a man into a bear,

a woman into a deer, white tail fanned,

a long kiss into a python

forever swallowing its meal?

I admit to refreshing my lowball glass

more than once, I admit to pressing

myself to the warm oven after he lumbered

away, to letting a pot boil over and not wiping up

the milky water, I admit

to letting dinner burn.

She was dancing like something that twists
when it burns. Iron, titanium.

She turned colors. She oxidized a pole

when she wrapped herself around it.

I was three shots in and just getting started.

The bouncer was heading for her

but I stopped him, said she was my neighbor

and I’d get her home safe.

We went behind the club and played

with matches, lit some steel wool a cook

had thrown out with the garbage, melted the mouth

of a juice jug until we smelled almonds,

hallucinated a dry lake bed

studded with burning horses.

On television, I sing the national anthem

                   & all the rabbits I was too afraid to love

burst into a flock of fireworks. I reach

                 stardom. I become the face on billboards

& highway murals. Here I am, holding

                 the gun. Here I am, hefting the falcon

by the talons & into the well. I want fame

                 like I want clean clothes & milk tea.

I want a matchstick I could use to light

                 small fires in forgotten street corners.

Something the neighbors would stare at

                 & pretend not to see. In a film, I play

my mother’s ghost & turn blue-lipped

                 at the sight of chocolate. I play a deer

shaving lavender from its antlers, nosing

                 for warmth in the dead of a forest. I play

for a house on Beverly Hills, a life

                 & I could spend soaking my feet in ice water

& scattering peaches in droves. In the film,

                 I do not look for the camera because I know

there isn’t one. I do not wish for the type

                 of fame that sings my name as victory

march. Instead, I play the heroine,

                 trace my way home by lamplight.



My name li a creature Nüwa

would swath in the dead of night,

when a man could shoot six birds

with one bullet & still find his way

home by blood. I know so much

about creation, how a language

can become both homeland

& artifact.

                    Myth #1: girl climbs

to the highest mountain, turns

sparrow & flies to the moon.

The moon becomes her lover

& she does not speak enough

Mandarin to say that she loves it.

I am speaking, of course,

of my mother, nursing bird-bodies

back to life.

                    Myth #2: girl turns

ghost & stone-heavy, lives

in an empty field where the kids

play pirate with tree branches

& the talons of some unlucky bird.

Nüwa grows a finch, a daughter

from prairie grass, crafts bones

she could hide in my mouth.

                                               Myth #3:

girl escapes winter for a house

with a glass boat inside it. A language

that takes my hands & replaces them

with perfect wooden replicas. & I

am sorry that I have not grown

to love this body. & I confess

to all the histories I’ve stolen

from Nüwa. But still, I will sing

her name as creation.

Thirteen-year-old boy now only a body
because the dark

          and terrible night because

the vehicle’s inevitable turning because

          the hard earth

                     wanted him cold

                                because the steel

                     frame rained down

on his head in the blackness

          because his body

was rended just so

                                because of how sweetly

                                           the young grass

                                held him

because he flew

          and he flew

and he fell

                                and the man on the news

                     said killed on impact

the man on the news

          said no seatbelt no helmet nothing

to be done because

                                the cattails parted for him

                                          because the stillness of the air

                    before he was thrown through it

          because his hands grew stiff

                    in the grass

                               in the dirt because

                                          he saw a door open before him because

          he stepped through it

When Bambi’s mother died, I cried for hours,

          terrified my father, who told me over and over again

                     that none of it was real — the rabbit, the deer, the man

          in the woods with the gun or the blood that came after,

but twenty years later I meet a man old enough

          to have a daughter like me. He sways on his barstool

                     as he whispers, those hips will get you killed,

           sweetheart, draws an imaginary woman in the air

with one hand, scotch slipping from his glass, cigarette

          rising and falling in his lips like a gull

                     in high tide. A girl like you should be careful

          after sunset, he says, a girl like you, all curve. He empties

his glass, grazes my waist with one finger as I walk away,

          like he thinks my body is a trigger

                     he can pull. But I’ll keep you safe, darlin’, he drawls,

          I won’t let anything come for you in the dark.

Alongside the twisting road to Erice, the cane fields

moved like water, the leaves and stalks bending

and rippling like water under the hand of the wind.

We had never seen sugarcane growing this way

except in the Caribbean; it had to be a mirage, a trick

of the imagination. But it was no trick, the cane

brought to Sicily by the Arabs in the Tenth Century.

Because Europe was sour, because it was addicted

to honey colonized by bacteria and its resulting toxins,

because in the many tributaries and streams of Sicily

the Arabs saw something akin to the world of sugarcane

they already understood, they planted the cane carefully.

But as each turn in the road revealed a new vista, not once

did we sight a mill, evidence sugar was in production.

Apparently, the Arabs brought sugar to Sicily,

but the Normans followed with fire and steel, the cane

growing rampant there now more a weed than a source

of golden sugar, the sweetness of predictable wealth.

By the end of the Fifteenth Century, sugar was worthless

in Sicily. Zucchero, said the Sicilians, the word a nod

to the Arabic sukkar. The Normans softened it, made it

more palatable before taking it back to France as sukere,

the word then stolen by the English to become “sugar.”

God only knows how many centuries would have passed

without sugar in Europe, had it not been for the Arabs.

That evening, as we ate a pastry filled with ricotta,

the server, in the slowest of Italian, proudly explained

the filling had been made in that area for centuries,

the earliest recipe dating back to the late Tenth Century.

He pointed out there was nothing more Sicilian

than this ricotta, nothing more Sicilian at all.

We smiled at this with the knowledge gleaned earlier

that day. Sheep’s milk is blended with powdered sugar

to make ricotta, sugar that arrived in Sicily mere years

before ricotta was established: still unseen, the Arabs, the men

and women who made so much of the European experiment

possible. A mere 5% of my DNA comes from the Arabian

peninsula, but sitting there eating that sweet dessert

I lifted wine to my lips and quietly toasted: Sukkar!



Perhaps to escape violence or war, to escape

living in one tiny room … On a ship from Spain,

on a ship from Hong Kong, on a ship from India,

my great grandparents left the countries of their birth

to travel for opportunity, for safety, for love.

Yes, for love, because members of my family have

a penchant for marrying people their parents deem

“inappropriate”: a Chinese cook marrying an Indian

maidservant, an indentured Spaniard marrying

a Puerto Rican Taino woman, and so on. Even the two

of us, two men marrying each other. Sitting on a terrace

overlooking Lake Como, we were nothing more

than minor nobility, something only my English

great grandparents understood. On my father’s side,

regardless of origin, poverty. You sipped grappa,

and I chose to sip amaretto, the warm orange liquid

made from the almond but better for the digestive tract

than the other potion brewed from almonds. I called it

my poison, despite the fact I knew full well it was not

cyanide. All of my paternal ancestors would have worked

on this estate as servants, as gardeners, as handymen.

Love makes people mad, my love. It asks of a man

or woman to leave one’s family, one’s country,

all for the sake of the beloved. For centuries, immigrant

has been a dirty word, but I am an immigrant, the result of

four generations of immigrants. I watch the horizon, the sun

setting, in much the way my ancestors did, with a foolish sense

of hope and an irreconcilable sadness, with the knowledge

a sunset is a sunset in any land, regardless of where you call home.

Exquisite plumed birds

led our grandfathers to this land

and taught us to love

every place our feet touched earth

some in the mountains

some by the river

others near the sea.

Our elders blessed the land

taught their sons

to plant their seeds in the earth

asked their daughters

to offer the fruit of their bellies.

The earth opens her moist

                mouth

receives each Zapotec’s original home

the earth protects your lifeline

in her powerful belly

and wherever your footsteps lead you

your heart will stay here in the south.

The curlew sings

rain approaches

a woman makes hot chocolate

so those coming from the fields might drink.

Children play in the mud

and a girl cuts a flower

while a dog barks at the hogs.

The day’s light leaves

night falls in this flower-village

elders catch breezes in their doorways

others go off to fish

happy children leap

though soon the rain will soak them.

With which word, which silence to say: No. Pain is nailed.

Flowing outside of time. Gathering all the no mores—

No more inhaling dandelions, no more plums

blushing at lunch, no more melting taste

of a winter nut, and chestnuts bitten into morning and evening.

We bit into them at night, we bit and bit each time

the bats flew south

reverberating

With a scarf, because it grows cold at dusk, especially on the beach,

dress unbuttoned, held together by a moon-shaped pin precisely in the middle of the chest

raising arms, exposing them to seagulls,

slipping away between the piers running along stone platforms chasing you

 

The water resting when the morning star and a girl

fall, scattering

through the air

‘Swine’ or ‘pork’ I am branded.

Men mistreat me with words

like nature with qualities.

Listen: ‘swine’ is my epithet.

As you mutter it

you disgustedly slide

through vocalic manure

thickly muddling your tongue

in a tangle of sounds

choking you as you swallow them.

‘Pork’ expresses quite well

my crude heavy countenance

with a strident, raw, pungent

cacophony of consonants.

Such irredeemable label

is my passport to abjection.

What I pour in your ears

is disgraceful and awkward

as ‘oink’ ‘grunt’ ‘snort’ explain.

I have no talent but pigging.

I am fat, soiled, ravenous.

My hair is rough, my teeth rotten

I am ugly and dull-witted.

I stink. Yet no other animal

was, like me, gifted or punished

with foresight of its own destiny.

When they come by to butcher me

— even my death is gross —

with their knives, before dawn

my loud shrill fills the sky

echoing through the courtyards.

It floods out of the gates.

The air swells with suspension

with a fear of endless night

with the stupor which rises

from the pain of earthy creatures.

Then, abruptly, my scream

absolutely human

reaches the sky and infinity

proud like a bird of prey

it flies free, higher

and higher, towards death.

Nothing but a soul, finally.

Remember too, María,

four in the afternoon

at our port in ashes.

Our port

which was more like a fire run aground,

or a barren land,

or a flash of lightning.

 

Remember the ground set to flames,

how we scratched the earth’s back

as if to dig up a green meadow.

 

The patio where snacks were handed out,

our plates brimming with onions

that my mother salted for us,

that my father fished for us.

 

But in spite of it all,

you know this,

we would’ve wanted to invite God

to sit at the head of our table,

God but with no words

no miracles

and just so you’d know,

María,

that God is everywhere

and on your plate of onions, too,

even if it makes you cry.

 

But most of all

remember me and the wound,

from before they grazed on my hands

in the onion field

to change our bread to

our daily hunger.

And so that now,

since you can’t remember anymore

and bad seeds nourish the field of what has disappeared

I can show you, María,

that it’s not your fault,

it’s not about you forgetting,

that this is the time

and this is its task.

Back from a long trip, I drop by

as if my memories were buried here.

Even in summer there’s that ditch.

The mud, the dirt road, clumps of grass

and nettles — they never change. Someday,

maybe sooner than we remember,

the stones and weeds will disappear too,

strangled by a stronger cement vise.

But for now they’re here, and this bleak landscape

is the one I chose for you. The last house

exposed to the wind and light, a valley

nearly always deserted, un-amenable,

sluggishly traversed

by an irrigation ditch. I stand on the bridge and smoke

and fling my cigarette into the dark water

for you too. It’s a ritual

signifying nothing, less than a ritual —

a habit. I used to do the same under the flowers with my father

and wonder what my mother must have thought

about that tomb of tobacco — ghosts? Vandals?

Or maybe she guessed and says nothing

out of modesty. In any case, full-flavor blend, a coarse,

mediocre cut from Maryland, a brand of reds

bricklayers smoked, or so they say. Even the name,

Parisienne, calls to mind cheap, outmoded dreams:

girls kicking up their legs at the Moulin Rouge,

the lights of Pigalle, century-old mothballs, B.B.

Or the soulful, open face

of Jeanne Moreau. She’d have liked

this brand. But today out of nowhere

five ducks emerged on the embankment.

They almost scared me, regally diving into the water,

swimming against the weak current, and one of them

turned for a moment to face me.

Twilight. A woman in furs

calls across the street, as if calling

across a shore, to another woman

walking a child slowly by the hand,

skirting the neighborhood lights,

traffic, the opaque river of a Tuesday.

“No,” she says, “no thanks.

I just ate at the kindergarten Christmas party.

I feel stuffed like a goose.”

Then she moves on, laughing

to herself at her own inadvertent joke.

The child follows in his innocent, easygoing way,

maybe hoping for cartoons

or simply in a daze, digesting his cake.

 

On the street, from a tossed paper,

the face of the latest politician

shouting: “I’m proud

of myself for representing

what’s great about our country. Mine

has been a good run, in any case.

Our people know it,

never mind the thrashing in the polls I took.

As for the others? Raus.”

“He’s just like Mussolini,”

my mother said one day.

She wasn’t talking about him

but about someone like him.

Maybe even worse.

Or more powerful. Or more sinister.

 

They say that in German the word angst

covers the spectrum of anger—

from anxiety to fear, with every nuance

in between—blind terror, anguish,

a sense of impending doom,

broken glass, book burnings,

etc. It’s semantic

economy, summing up

in five letters all the lessening of light,

how everything between us

breaks down.

Here we are again on your rocky grid

of haze and cruelty, our non-place,

unnamed, memory-less: we cover

your every disgrace, and everything is as it was,

glass instead of stone, new emblems

and privations, yet the same

shadow assailing it. “Hello, Alessandro,”

I say to someone I know passing by.

But I’m mistaken; his name is Maurizio.

Someone else stops me, shouts,

Get out of here, this town is dead.

 

But this was the world, in a backroom

or down the backstreets, the reek

of piss and money, lumber. On the railroad tracks

they used to set their dreams

and copper coins for the train to flatten.

Pedro’s body is an anthropometric story. His beauty does not reside in his body’s individual parts, but in the harmonious proportion of one finger with another finger with another finger with another finger with another finger as they form a hand and another hand and another hand. Everything: his forearms, muscles, buttocks. The rhythm with which his musculature moves, a fleshliness called life.

I thought it was a muscle. I thought a muscle could develop on its own without implying a health problem. Couldn’t this one just be badly made? No, the doctor says, while he signs an illegible note that sends me to the oncologist. Oncologist? Oncology: read problems. I have lipomas on my arms, the webs between my fingers are particularly large, my earlobes aren’t fully developed, my bones break easily, and I’ve had cavities since I was ten or eleven years old. Now I have to worry, too? Are they symptoms of maladies that creep up and will suddenly reveal themselves as incurable? Doesn’t everything have a cure? Shouldn’t everyone be heathy? Of course, a doctor doesn’t understand diseases: he eliminates them. I don’t know what’s wrong with people who forget to take their meds every eight or twelve hours — it’s not like martyrdom, but it’s not exciting either. And one hopes that this cough, this patch of dry skin, this phlegm, this itch — that they will go away by themselves, like a rainy day or a sunny morning. Or come together like baldness or poverty. No, the doctor says, and hands me a form that sends me on for testing.

The story of Pedro is the story of the people versus Pedro’s body. An array of pinpricks that pierce Pedro’s body at countless angles: pincushion or martyr. Culture: an amorphous theory meticulously implanted in him since boyhood or girlhood, in every pore of his brown skin, black eyes, stubble; through acupuncture that has become orthopedics that has become fascism: the rigid legislation of what they have defined as natural. Natural: what is and is not normal. You set perimeters around his flesh, dissecting and reassembling it again and again in accordance with one of his pieces or from the division of all: aesthetic theories, gender theories, political theories, evolutionary theories forced upon his organs, fluids, muscles and teeth. They molded him into right angles. They configured and reconfigured his nervous system according to international politics. But the elasticity of his bones can’t take any more. But his capacity for mental recovery will not withstand another investigation. I therefore brought it with me. I therefore had to extract it from his body and bring it here, to my body.

He only told me, No one will ever

forget you — and I had answered him

with silence, distracted by seasons,

the birds in the bleached fields, picking

at ash. There is a possibility that extends

between people, a kind of thin rope,

a chance that, tossing it up, the end

will reach the other person — or will snag

on a tree, or passing spaceship, or star;

will tether a balloon in the night (in those

clouds, there could be anything), keep it

from blasting, keep it from getting lost.

Find the spark in the darkness, the gas burner

roaring, the canvas swelling with breath …

He told me, No one will ever forget you, the man

who was young, the man who was lost, the man

I did not and can never answer. Where’s

Kansas, the straw man said to the girl,

as if they could go there together,

a place he would be indispensable,

a place he could scare away birds.

My mailman
walks around the neighborhood

with his ray gun ready.

I should probably call him

a mail carrier, given that there is nothing

inherently male about his job

and, if anything, hauling around bags

filled with other people’s bullshit

is a feminine activity.

Heck, sometimes my mailman

is a woman. And she does a better job

than any man. She never listens to Metallica

or texts her ailing mother on the job.

She stares, head forward, focused

on her mission, focused on the mail.

My mail! Which she will never

know anything about other than

its weight and how tired it makes her.

I think truly loving someone

is being just as happy for them

when they get mail

as when you get mail yourself.

And the mark of a good mailman

is that happiness, some of that Christian shit,

for everyone. A good mailman is grateful

for the opportunity to bring you joy —

say, an excellent credit card offer

or a Christmas card

from your former neighbor

who is senile now

but you’re glad is alive,

and it’s a little mean, but

his note is pretty funny. A good

mailman knows the good and the bad

arrive together, like, for example,

when you receive an obituary cutout

in a wedding card or a bill so discreet

you think it might be a love letter

from a particularly attractive ex-lover

and are tricked into opening it.

A good mailman laughs and cries with you.

Even in the winter

when she is wearing her ski pants

and runs the risk of the tears

freezing to her face.

There has never been a black man

on the moon.

There has never been a white woman

on the moon.

When Kubrick faked the landing

he was apologizing

for the genocides. He said

of the astronauts,

They must be white;

they must be men;

they must be educated

at the Harvards of the Midwest;

they must have blue eyes;

they must be hairless

all over their bodies;

they must be sad but look very happy.

They must do it for me.

They must do it for America.

America is very sorry.

America believes in god

and believes he lives on the moon.

The moon is heaven.

Heaven is ours; we have been there.

We have spray painted it with a star

patterned red, white, and blue.

We earned it with all our hard work,

all those push-ups, all those

jumping jacks, our bodies

so strong we can support

our own body weights. We can

make love like victors. If we make

our women come they won’t

want to go to the moon, they won’t need to.

They will eat fruit.

They will feed it to their children.

They will feed their children

to America: it will eat them

and then feel sorry

but never apologize. Not even

by faking the moon landing,

which we all know is fake, because

man’s first words in the face of god

are always forgive me.

On the Route 7 strip

next to the office supply store

next to the pool supply store

next to the Tower Records

next to the TJ Maxx

was the Ranger Surplus,

where I shopped only

at the edges: iron-on patches,

all-weather lighters,

vintage tin pin-ups,

never venturing into the groin

of camouflage and camping gear,

until I began buying

weapons: a mace, a chained flail,

several throwing stars, and the book

Contemporary Surveillance Techniques

with its cover showing a man

crouched in an upright stereo,

all gifts for my father,

because what do you get the man

who has everything — and by everything

I mean a large-caliber shell casing

upright and decorative

in the living room, where you might

expect a potted ficus to be —

and these, too,

were the years he gave me

t-shirt after t-shirt, souvenirs

of every posting and deployment,

including the one that said

Hard Rock Cafè Baghdad —

Closed — Kuwait, Now Reopening —

t-shirts that fit poorly

over my new breasts, boxy,

unflattering, and so I shut them

away in drawers again

and again, each of us

trying to say to the other

I see you,

the way a man with closed eyes

takes the tail into his hands

to see the elephant.

To save the cherry trees, O Cissy O Eliza O Clara O Catherine, you buckled your shoes and descended. Fifty of you marched your petition to the President’s house; a flimflam, he called it, cooked up by the newspapers. The next day, a hundred and fifty of you marched to the Tidal Basin. You grabbed the shovels from the Civilian Conservation Corps, refilling holes. You hitched your skirts and chained yourselves to the trunks. The Secretary of Interior sent lunch over, and coffee, cup after cup, coaxing your bladders toward betrayal. O Cissy O Eliza O Clara O Catherine, O Valkyries in muslin, I imagine you staying deep into the night of November 1938. For the first two hours, you talk. In the third hour, you sing. In the fifth hour, your stoles come alive: fresh dew on the eyes of each fox, fur damp, an exhalation that fogs as if breath. But instead, you’d already gone home to your warm beds. Dig fast, Roosevelt told the graveyard crew, and the men did.

As origin stories go, this is a good one — a dollar toward the cause from Col. John Jacob Astor’s own pocketbook, paid to Mrs. Archibald Forbes, settling up after their bridge game on the night of April 14. His body would be inventoried, as they all were: No. 124, male, about age 50, light hair and moustache. He wore a blue serge suit and a flannel shirt, “J.J.A.” on the collar. He wore brown boots, a belt with gold buckle, diamonds in his cuff links and ring. That’s not Astor depicted, arms thrown wide. Gertrude Vanderbilt Whitney is said to have based the face on her brother, who went down with the Lusitania. The figure designed by Whitney is only vaguely sexed, not clothed so much as draped. Erected by the Women of America, says the inscription, twenty-five thousand women who mailed in their dollar bills. The memorial disappeared after thirty years, reappearing down by Fort McNair. Officials explained this was to make way for the Kennedy Center, glad for the excuse. There had been miscalculations and, in 1936, an unusual snowmelt. No one could quite shake the memory of the Great Potomac Flood: waters lapping the feet, then the knees, waist, the lithe pectorals, before finally crowning his brow.

I wake to Split lint coffin from which the body comes. Who are you now? I wake to jackhammers and the beep-beep of a heavy vehicle in reverse. I wake to the slow swing of a crane, its pudendum chain dangling. Cranes flock by the dozen. One company hangs a crescent moon, lit at night sometimes white and sometimes pink or blue. They strip “SEU” from the Metro exit and note that only an idiot would locate Southeastern University in the Southwest quadrant. They rename us “Waterfront-The Wharf.” The first thing Wharf developers do is brick a plaza and buy chaise lounges. The second thing they do is annex the fish market. No more stink of cod, they promise. The fish market sues. Fountains are in our future. Three concert venues are in our future. Twenty restaurants are in our future. The bicycle repair shop will serve pour-over coffee. Boats huddle to their docks. The demolition signs at Fourth and M promised a church. That church is now rectangular and eleven stories tall, but they’ll put a house of worship by the exercise room. I’m learning to lower a shade — not enough to keep workmen from seeing me naked, but enough to keep me from seeing them as they see me naked. The Wharf promises fireworks, and people bring blankets to the slope along Maine Avenue. They hear fizz and bang, and see nothing. A new building blocks the sky.

In the diagram, Bob

is a striped blue triangle.

Some people do not like Bob.

Down with stripes.

Down with triangles.

Bob is at the intersection of

stripey-ness and blue-ness,

of triangle-ness and Bob-ness.

Luckily there are liberation groups.

Here is where the model

starts to fail me: maybe liberation

has come in the form of four taxis,

each waiting to carry Bob away

from this intersection.

Bob should not have to choose

any one taxi.

Or maybe Bob does not

want to go? Bob has noticed

the quality of the bodega’s coffee.

Bob likes this intersection.

Bob can get a pretty good deal

on a one-bedroom.

Bob is a striped blue triangle.

Bob is a damn gentrifier

In 1995, I flunked a Driver’s Ed quiz

on intersections

because I could not model

how traffic proceeds at a four-way stop.

In my head, each car

arrived at the same time.

What happens when you yield

to the car on your right,

who yields to the car on his right,

who yields to the car on her right,

who yields to you?

No one goes anywhere.

The reality,

my teacher explained,

is someone always claims

the right of way.

Four allies in four cars

meet at a four-way stop,

you know the one,

it’s over by Bob’s bodega.

The car on my right yields,

the car on her right yields.

Do you mind?

We’re in a hurry.

You’re running late

for her doctor’s appointment.

What I call my disability

you call her disease:

treatable, Thank God.

So that’s your

daughter in the backseat?

She looks just like you.

I see their final days

in empty rooms

in that city

I left. See

their days as empty rooms

I left — empty

because I left.

Though, surely

their lives were filled

with things

I can’t see, filled,

as mine was elsewhere,

with time

that gathered to become

whatever their lives

meant to them.

Of course

more filled them

than heroin.

Days gathered

into a heavy lens

through which

I see my friends,

blurred, in those

abstract rooms

that suddenly emptied.

The war stopped precisely

where it was. Soldiers

mortared foundations

inside their fighting positions —

then they erected walls,

then windows and roofs. At night

they gazed from their bedrooms

down into the valley

with its dim town

they’d failed to enter. Trenches

swelled with rainwater;

soon punts and tour boats

slipped over the dugouts.

So many of the structures

we lived among — that shaped

our days — belonged to the war.

Tanks packed with silence

rested in the square. Bombers

hovered — frozen —

above their targets,

and the children wondered

at what was up there.

They began climbing the ladders

of bombs hanging from the sky —

and when the most daring

reached the bays to clamber

finally into the cockpits, the war

snapped back into motion.

The world hadn’t yet gone up

in cartoonish hellfire, which

was what I imagined

back then. The end was never far.

Right now, I could find

the street down which

my father drove the day after

Chernobyl. I could recite

in the green shade the swiftness

of everything ending. Of

dominion. I have a mind

for whatever is eternal. I am

whistling in the darkness.

I’m weeping. Am transported.

Look at how the earth has changed.

Look at the fallout of winter.

Look at the dead that

are beside the road like litter.

All too closely, this fact:

summer, and its golden heat,

and my young body,

never hurt before that day,

just bruised and scraped

and dappled by the pox of childhood —

then in a ditch, unbloodied,

but nearer to death than

I am comfortable admitting. Tonight.

Tomorrow. Next year.

Imagining brokenness: imagining

the radicalization of the flesh.

Made dumb. Also: numb

and burning in the flames

of misapprehension. I thought,

then, everything now is over.

Like a movie. A song.

Not sadness. Not the weight of things.

I was still. Green branches

fell over me and the sun

was only burning up. A star

that was not a metaphor

for anything. When I say to you,

I have seen the black floor of the ocean,

you should know better

than to believe me in that moment.

My heart was broken, then,

and my arms were no good

at all. These words are what was left

of my breath. I am

so very tired of time and of waiting

for nothing to change.

The president is thick as the moon

is white and the river is wet

and the summer air is furious

and inside me are the germs

of beauty. Of violence. Or truth.

Let me tell you a story

is how all stories begin

in the darkness of the mouth.

Upon the tongue, which

in some locales is a delicacy.

What are you eating, brother?

What have you been reading?

What brought you to this pass?

This incredible time filled

with shadows that are not birds.

They are not birds, remember,

the clouds that go by,

and the sky which is stunning

and cruel and perfect

is not blue. Not tonight.

I will talk about love

until everything burns down

to absolutely nothing, to ashes

and embers and the dry noise

of destruction. I will talk

about the news and politics

and this horrible weather

called pain if first sleep doesn’t come

looking for my eyes. What

will I dream of? Horses

and the whispering rain

and a song just beyond hearing.

Before we learned this position

for its relevance when faced with a gun

you could find my people

packed in a sweaty sanctuary —

arms raised, wailing,

asking God to speak and He spoke,

as much as any word is an approximation,

a translation, a mother’s ecstatic dance

until she falls limp to the floor, slain

in the spirit, as we called it, and the ushers

cover her with a sheet to protect her

modesty, not unlike a sheet used to cover

the bodies of sons, before sent

to coroner, after a Sunday morning

singing whose report will you believe?

I raised my hands and felt

a spirit open, tremor like my bones

were sliding past each other,

causing a shaking rift

like the lonely chasm between

Heaven and a cursed Earth.

I was young. This was before

the videos: man shot

while lying on the ground, man shot

calmly in his car, man shot

and/or tackled and/or pinned and/or thrown

and/or choked — meanwhile a mother gasping

between cries out to her Lord

to save us all.

Young, I tried not to resist God’s

overwhelming presence, but this was before

the video of the dead man

being dragged by police,

his literal dead weight not enough

to not be told stop resisting.

This was before I walked into a service

in a church basement and a pastor

took me by the shoulders, shook me

and shouted how I needed to be radical for God.

I need no more convincing that death

in itself is a resistant, radical act.

Surely, Jesus taught us that.

Surely, surrender is not defeat,

but acceptance, is saying

take what you will take

of my body, O you whose smiting

I have been witness to —

I have seen what your hands

can do and so I offer you my own.

Perhaps it is not pronounced enough to easily notice,

at least from a distance, but praise be to the hairs

populating the Bering Straight, or more accurately

crossing the Mediterranean — bridge like cedar planks

with black nails, bridge like the boat

my jido came here in, bridge to Dearborn,

Michigan. The hairs stand up like spines, like each

is a monument over the bridge

of my nose. Since high school I used to keep the middle

trimmed, used clippers to separate such striving

for togetherness, in the name of neatness, I told myself,

though how so many of us have tried to pass, and true —

that is a form of survival but this now also

a form of thriving, of what refuses to be cut down

any longer, so praise be to the hairiness my Lebanese

family shares, praise be to owning what may keep

the TSA’s eyes on us, though god-willing not their hands

(and fuck the TSA, while we’re at it), and praise be

to pride and to the Muslim man at the gas station

who asks if I am Muslim, too, and though I am not, praise

to being seen as a brother (and to the beard

and back and knuckle hair, while we’re at it) —

an oak with so many of its leaves

refusing to enter another shaven autumn,

a cedar holding tight to all its needles.

i.

Tongue unfurls in ruins, low

& guarded as if each syllable unsheathes

a fresh wound. Severed: foreign bodies

clutch foreign limbs. No place

for proper burials, only

tacit uprisings.

 

 

ii.

Wander through deluge / shield / from

gusts of windsong / shingled eaves

rise / dreams are

not yours to be / shared

legacy of no/bodies

 

 

iii.

Heft hems craving, atrophies

into opal bone fields where

spring’s bounty bursts unshut

to expose new realms.

There’s no place like home

There’s no place like home

There’s no place like home

There’s no one place

Unmoored: tears glint

like oceans among the weeds.

In winter, sleet melds into

mammoth banks sighing loss.

 

 

iv.

Accused of siphoning honey from the hive, blood thickens then winds along ravines where tubers are exposed to a certain density. Woe spills into ceramic pots already splintered & mended, balanced gingerly on the heads of ancient women climbing steps carved along the lip of steely mountains.

 

 

v.

            Family trees reduced

                                                                                          to oral

                         traditions, cauterized   dead

                                                                             ends of dendrite filigree:

                                                                                                                 personalities

                                                   of myth, disintegrating

                                                                                                       like vapor, apparitions

                                      that whisper: Don’t you dare

                                                                                          forget

                                                                                                       me.  Don’t forget.

 

 

vi.

Wilderness: oh how

it bewilders! Head west

toward the wilting

sun –– cardinal

vanishing point.

In darkness,

children morph

into beasts rabid

from diets of artificial

commodities. Trade origin

for sugar: they forget

their given names.

 

 

vii.

Ballet of looped

                          (y)earnings: mirrored

                                                            Wall: begin

                                                                               & end: end

                                                                                                  & begin: begin & end:

             &&&

i.

First memory: looking out the window.

Earphones stuttering a litany of vowels

and consonants: a, aaaaah, an apple.

Don’t think I understood what was really

happening, our maiden flight from Seoul,

to an unknown destination: Maryland

then New York City. We went from living

in a brick house with a yard to a storage

room in the back of a dry cleaners. No

proper shower, just a rusted sink and toilet.

I was barely eight when I kept a photo

of a boy under my pillow –– an artifact

of a fading past. Mom found it, ripped

it up, told me to keep my head straight.

 

 

 

ii.

Leaned across the counter, called us stupid

chinks. Go back to where you came from: as

as if it were that easy. My parents stood like

totems, stone-faced. In defiance, they said

hugj-in, a word for darkness –– a distancing.

Fear wedged in everyone’s eyes. Listener

and speaker in both directions –– names

volleyed like capsules of venom. Ache

and anguish hanging like lethal tendrils

in a jungle where the ants don’t carry

their dead. I wanted to shout: Stop it!

But all I could muster was a fever sigh,

holding my brother tight as he cried.

Silence: a fissure. Stalemate: a failure.

 

 

 

 
iii.

On special occasions, we’d head to Red

Lobster or Sizzler, sit in a vinyl booth,

feel luxurious –– pretend we were royalty

for an evening. I loved the shrimp scampi,

my brother always opted for the buffet &

if they could, my parents would’ve put

kimchi on everything. Whenever they

asked waitresses questions in their broken

English, I’d sulk into my sticky seat –– my

cheeks boiling, my claws grappling the air.

Our outings became few and far between.

I’d prove terrible in math. No hope of

getting into Harvard, Princeton, or Yale,

of becoming a doctor or engineer.

 

 

 

 
iv.

Bulletproof glass is not skin: not porous

Nor forgiving. It keeps everything in

And people out like a pallet of hard ice.

Cache is locked away; a hegemonic set.

He held her at gunpoint, barrel aimed

For the temple. She kept her arms raised

Until he, a kid, turned the corner, sprinting

Away with a baseball cap, pager, things

Made in China, and what was in the register:

A few measly dollars. But this was the price

Of doing business in the projects where we

were trapped inside human cages –– binding us

In a strange circus where atoms of haves

And have-nots always forcefully collide.

 

 

 

 
v.

Summers they’d send us to Korean school,

Two brats whining nobody else had to study

At overnight camp or family trips to Mexico.

My brother proved an ace at taking tests

So I conspired ways to break a rule or two,

Nothing unruly, just idled behind dumpsters

Learning best modes to fit in –– be non-other.

Wishing I looked like Barbie or Nancy Drew,

My slanted eyes always sleuthed for costumes

To obscure my jaundiced skin. A lizard

Without proper camouflage is killed in the

Wild. I wanted to sever my mother tongue,

Regenerate anew, but how could I’ve known

Language is lost when left to rot like a pest.

We travel his crumbling colonnades

by canoe, me and St. Marie de la Mer,

a scarlet macaw and polar bear

rescued into imaginary light.

We row to rewrite the continent’s

eroding edge of unattainable sound —

autumn’s chrysalis, the monarch’s remains,

and in the enemy’s gulf, dig for words —

hay meadow, flower-rich, oilseed rape.

This landscape’s quixotic orthography

spells Scipio’s spheres, his starbelt of milk,

moon’s eagle effigy, winged snake.

It is a question of legibility,

how we appear before we disappear —

with baskets of larkspur, lilies, violets

gathered for an infinite descent.

✼
 

 

 

 
The turning point came early, bleary-eyed.

Turtle was already ahead of time,

collecting prickly trinkets of beauty,

the night’s beaded intertidal chitons.

With first light came first waves of departures —

they folded their fishnets, flutes and arrows,

eclipsed the sun’s primordial escape.

We knew no one was coming to help us.

I was shielding my daughter from the rain.

All our old objects chained in their places:

the cracked face of a traded timepiece —

how we appear before we disappear,

an image captured for the quickening.

I would become my own coffin, for her

a raft. This was how they found us, after.

✼
 

 

 

 
Add a new blanket of earth to the mound.

Sunflowers blooming from a trashy wash.

Sumpweed, knotweed, pigweed, ragweed, summer’s

signature: cenotaph, empty tomb.

The evening veil, a partial reveal —

moon’s eagle effigy, winged snake,

eclipse of sun’s primordial escape.

I echo the aspen’s crack and moan

as winter curls about its throat

to find precision’s fitful guise and pine

for lines where swerve the cold, gray streams of lead.

All lines that end undead, not callous, male

or stacked, are cliffs where crashed the cyclop’s head.

Were sleep to moor like once my mastless boat

in night’s dense harbor, diamond cradled, rocked.

✼

Because the time will come when the sky turns

         to umber. If we’re lucky, there will be poems

and good wine, and someone, looking on,

         will see us seated two rows from the front,

you in a summer dress, me in my somber poet

         attire, hair gone to silver — or going that way.

They’ll think, there they are, our bodies together making

         something lovely and altogether necessary:

mother, daughter, like nesting dolls — you, resting

         in my lap, the illusion of a self, split

and refracted in time’s mirror, a trick of generations.

Even in July, the hours are too short to contain

         all the day’s longing. If only we could stay

like this, faces lifted toward the valley’s rough horizon,

         burnt by sunset going too quickly to dusk.

If only I could hold you in the shadow of these

         trees, branches bowed in a cathedral hush,

aisles flickering with tea lights, tapers. I already

         see the girl you’re growing to be, which is why

I’ve imagined you thus, light fading in snatches,

         lamp dimmed until it’s just the face,

glowing faintly, closed in evening’s palm.



Let’s waste another summer.

Let’s lick the walls til sugar, sugar.

lung    twitch

Let’s be clean, insects in silk robes.

Let’s drink honey and never bloat.

sleeves    death-white

Delight, delight. Everyone wants it.

Our cheeks flush; our mouths, fruit-wide.

open    to hollow

O lashful, o lash bat, flutter.

Store up for a sparkling summer.

to butcher    to gone

Here beyond the wall are women smiling, hips

floating to picture. Confetti, blush, perfect finger.

low    buk         slow stutter

Beyond the wall here are women who dance and

smile with teeth. Skirts petaling in practice, in sync.

sink    shudder    here hollow    come

Happy birthday to the DMZ! Let’s celebrate our good

life in the benevolent country. Let’s clap with our hands.

despair	     &nsp;o      clean us

We love to eat the gourds of the country. We love

to sing the silk of the country the grain of the country.

scrape the    rot    clip    the strings

We can laugh out loud. We can keep away

the sweat —

drench

We can polish our teeth and beat

the rugs by lunch —

dust

We can tongue the walls

and dance    slower

until sugar eats our eyes. See

slower than

There. We’ll never starve

a nation

again.


precious gut         dear dough         i have eggs it’s true

         i can make a daughter                   can proffer and bloom

                   if i choose         i could make me         whatever-fold i guess

i can catch my gut in a cup & tip         it into the trash

                   rashly         i discard with my own hands

lots of not-babies         none of my offal’s named         i don’t say

         this to be crass         i have eggs & limbs         & a tongue that crawls

to the side when i’m out                   cold, cut up         or rising

                   from plastic         wrapped         in fragiletape

                             or imagined broken                   when i imagine

         death it’s face         down in the mud                   i came from

not rubber         not plated                   not drawn or drawn upon

         not stitched         by a clean savior         not charcoal         not sketched

not a screen                        to write

         dear unmoving

         dear prey thing

         dear film still

         dear ally

         dear password

          

          

dear ruined ankle

dear tragic practice

dear broke-into

dear glass eye

dear proof

dear me

 

dear cut gut

dear body-ish

dear egg tendon

dear forced ending

dear meat

dear me

dear made-to-be

it’s true i have eggs         & i am afraid

it’s true i am afraid of being cut

         it’s true this makes me precious & maybe flushed

 

so i reach between my legs

i pull the string         the deer fall out

i listen as they hit the water in the bowl & the sound

doesn’t make me feel delicate at all

         i pull the lever

 

         i hope i wreck the plumbing

What a cyborg wants is to work perfectly.

To simulate pleasure perfectly. To not cry at dinner,

forget to call back. To keep her skin clear.

To keep the sheets clean. To reply-all when asked.

To get up at a reasonable hour. To stop smoking,

or at least get it down to something reasonable.

To not worry her friends by worrying about her weight.

To not be so afraid.

To not pick at her face.

To have a face you can really trust.

To have the face of a pretty American,

who makes you smile back when she says,

Right this way, sir. Or who makes you drool

when she says, yes sir

I like it sir.

What a cyborg wants is to be clean.

Reasonable. To wash her hair a few times a week.

To not kill the plants. To stop trying to leave her friends

before they can leave her. To smile and mean it.

To believe in heaven. To believe the humans

when they say they love her. To not want sometimes

to watch them cry. To not want so badly

to be touched, badly enough to slice herself open,

to trap a man in a corner,

to peel the skin from her face

and not let him go until he looks.

He squats in the rain-drowned weeds staring

back along the leash that bonds us

I try to focus on the broken chain link vaulted

by a grey fox back to the stream’s cut

back beyond limits of my sight

I watch the ripples in the dark

as his tail becomes a ghost’s beard then just a tense

shadow what did he see in me what threat

did he misread in a language only instinct knows

now there is just a man and a dog traced across

acrylic snow both of us curious about this wilderness

which has kept to its boundary but for these pellets

what can I teach you when I have no instinct

just psalms and blessings bless the careless

art all animals leave all blood and dung

bless where decay does not live long

we share so little just this need carried out

in solemn ritual we turn

different senses on the doughy pines

marking off our territories

Darling, you're a stain,
tobacco brown, round splashes on my hands,

my arms. The smell of Skoal — wintergreen —

lingers my neck when you kiss on me, every crevice

an open spit cup, every dark flake a hickey.

Your fat plug tucked between teeth and lip.

My mouth a pouch where you spread white patches,

sores; I’m losing my voice. I’ve tried

to wear you close as overalls,

arms locked heavy over shoulders.

I want to quit you cold-turkey,

but you stalk in spitting distance

and these yellowed stains on my fingers,

your fire-cured taint on my teeth,

I can’t strip them,

can’t scour your hills away.

Your silks, those thin, sweet strings

stick to me, get caught in my hair. Days later, I find them

clutched to the canning stove, stuck to my bare legs, bare back,

the back porch where we fucked, unhusked

our skins where no one would see, tried to keep

from trailing them through the house. You take what you want

from me, say you’re full as a tick burrowed in a hound.

Your grease coats everything you touch,

smudge-black on my skin, my clothes, the door.

Later you round on me, scream I’ll beat your ass. You grab

and don’t let go, leave your prints even when you’re clean.

You’re sorry. Again. I let you

peck me like a crow plucks corn, newly planted, fertilized,

straight from the ground. You work hard, want reward —

you till me in early morning, forget to use your finger

to see if I’m warm. Your ear rot molds me in place.

I can’t leave by my own front door.

I see you, sitting there in your letterman jacket, a Pepsi bottle

of tobacco juice wedged between your backpack and feet. I see it,

too, that chew tucked between front teeth and lip.

No, I don’t want a nip. Yes, I know how to spit. I believe you

parked in the woods all weekend, slept in the back of your truck.

I know you still had time for homework. Speed bumps:

your steel-toe boots in the aisles. You carry Axe body spray in your bag,

come to class sweating out both woodsmoke and semen. I have no desire

to see how big the barrel of your shotgun is. You sure as hell

aren’t limber enough to have sex in a tree stand. I would not offer

extra credit, not even for a pity fuck. You talk of big bucks, of points,

of what you want to mount and whose skin you’d like to bury

yourself inside. If you’ve learned, it’s on the power

of connotation, innuendo, your own. My silence did not save me.

Nor you. Come November, you beg me to pass you,

your daddy parking his souped-up F-250 double cab

outside the classroom to make sure you show up,

like your presence is the only thing that counts.

I palpate his chest, a tome, with skin like milk bear-hued. Fingers hum across my forehead into a number. His eyes bloodshot and flaxen from the lamplight. My tongue runs across his shoulders, stone bells affixed to bone. Cathedral noise in the socket, a rotten lisp. Pipelines entrench behind his teeth. I hear a crack in his lung like you would in burning coal. I hear his lips kissing mine as a sermon. My pelvis daises as he chants my body back to the weeds. One day he’ll forget about wounds and lower himself too into bellflower.

You stand by your car, man in meadow

                   now deep white — slow teeth, slow ice.

                                                                              Fallow-night footprints

                                                                    follow through stiff with each crunch in the snow.

                                       Frost crystals on my tongue.

Your cheek bone cold against my face,

         a whirring rock bone deep.

−

I open the word and crawl inside its spine, barbed wire, turbine

                   with dark belly, coil hierarchy.

What word, you ask. Your body a cloud flattened in my hand.

                                      Your body coiled with mine. Air moves as snake

         over ribcage, cracks into powder.

I say thorn. I say mouth.

−

Desire is criminal. You being here is criminal.

         You sip from the delta near my tongue. Bone river

deepens at the clavicle.

Eyes stutter open. Limbs crepuscular over the bedframe.

I watch you shower after.

                                      Tributaries, confluence, mineral stains.

                   You rub the holy off your skin. Your fingers

in after-soap jaw white.

−

Bent wasp hums behind your throat. In the iris,

orange whispers into deep yellow slather.

                                                          Uranium corrodes to spalling black,

speckles on hyoid horn. Your shoulder blades gawk open, wings sylphlike.

                   Torso woven with sweat chalks down to bone.

                                                                    Skin can be too loud sometimes.

−

You have the night’s bristle — yolk noose from penumbra

I lick the railroad down your back —

                                                admire black water in your hair.

                                                Before you go,

                           I swallow frozen sand.

I say you can go now, you can go now.

Painting the faces on baby dolls may sound like a dream job but consider the dream. One twitch and an eye becomes an untoward lane. Show up mad and you’ll have the imprint of doll nostrils on your fingertips all night. Imagine the horror of your spouse, the delight of your lover, your own uncertainty pulling a contact lens out at a stoplight and detecting faint powder on the breeze.

True story: eels and humans used to be friends. So when they had to carry me out of the Belle Isle aquarium I was not causing a disturbance but rather exercising compassion for an ancient compatriot. I wanted to be so long and so thin and just as furiously countenanced. Was already living in a murky box with limited light, hideous fake plants, constant taps of fingers.

I signed up for a class on surrogacy but it was not about migrating butterflies so I quit. The guidance counselor identified quitting as my main strength and weakness. Crack cocaine, AP physics, checking and rechecking gas stove knobs before leaving the house, sex with strangers, nail biting, drunk appearances at the animal shelter resulting in near-adoptions, transcendental meditation.

Most of the guys who got the Varsity tattoo on their birthday now spend evenings drinking Miller Lite next to a bathtub full of the week’s dirty dishes. I would remember how they posed on social media except it wasn’t invented and we just had to gossip and draw crude renderings of how things went down. Sometimes we sketched them with sticks in the dirt at a bonfire.

When did desire become just another dangler on a charm bracelet, next to the flamingo or the handcuffs? My friends crushing so hard on Anna Karenina. All I wanted was to play with her hair. And then the decade turned and we started getting off imagining stacks of cash, extra thick credit cards. Fine, I’ll never say anything funny again, I said, and everyone laughed.

I was feeling really good. I had a friend in town. My hair was soft with grief. Hourly the clock tower made me cry but it was an excellent cry, like drinking from a spring. It was cool enough to wear a scarf which is ideal for absorbing tears unless it’s real silk. The thought of all those silk worms, oblivious to their ultimate role, was a reason to weep. I was not thinking about the rabbit we saw returning to dirt beneath a mulberry bush. Sometimes I seemed like a character created by a man. Just because you can do something doesn’t mean you should. Such as listening to rain on loop. Eventually it will have an effect. My roommate nearly died from standing in rain, and then she actually died. I had to throw away every plate in the apartment but didn’t have the heart. Instead, a note and a stack. Everything was incomplete. A few grains of salt but not a block.

I had the dream again, the one with all the outdated clip art. We didn’t know any better than to present our milky slates bedazzled with Z-marks to colleagues wearing the harshest shoulder pads in American history. It was hard to imagine them fitting through the doors of their dwellings, which looked like a series of glue traps for mice or roaches, set out by an inhumane god. I was too busy searching for my own likeness among the thumbnails. I would know me by my hair and my ass, both of which were abundant. I would know me by the way my two-dimensional likeness would want to be animated, but that was not available yet, kind of like how I listened to Pretty Hate Machine for years before any of my friends took notice. When seeking a bottle of instant courage, the following items were available for insertion: ink + quill pen, poison bottle with ill opossum, empty fish bowl, a Pacific ocean (not to scale), one capsized thimble in a mending box. It goes without saying that none of this was in color. Not the blood on my knee when I tripped on the hastily-sketched mall Santa, or the eyes of my nemesis when we exchanged the only physical congress available: an aggressive handshake in front of two fictional flags.

First the teenagers rebelled against history, and then they internalized it. Modern sex, modern sex, historical sex and decades thereof. So what if nobody bathed. Who cared if a little lace got snagged in the charger cable. The teenagers sought the most cutting-edge snacks fathomable: those cakes made with dry ice, sandwiches that illuminated the customer’s stomach hours later. Then, the reverse, and the homecoming queen was fighting the French club president over an exhumed cast iron skillet and some eggs that may have fallen from a hen or something more primitive.

So how to rationalize what we called “the reenactments,” which were either a barn-raising or building a phone that fit in one nostril and played music with subtle vibrations. Half the senior class wanted throbbing EDM, the remainder voting for a sole, blindfolded fiddle player in the corner. When the bell rang everyone ran out the door to their respective butter churns and lasers and to catch crawdads with either some old pantyhose or a replica of the Edmund Fitzgerald or bare hands, which readily walked in both worlds at once, though more historically acceptable if gloved.

When your town’s main industry is the history, it’s easy to regress, though nobody was pleased when dresses had to be imported from the neighboring town’s dead lady closets, old-timey post cards forged, all cameo brooches snatched up from the case as soon as a store owner pricked them into velvet. Never ask, “How long can antiquing be considered a sustainable practice?” After all, they recycled. Buried coffee grounds and hoped an old-fashioned bicycle would grow amidst the heirloom squash, ready to net a handsome price from some suburban fudge-seekers.

And what about when those teenagers went to university, beyond the vocational offerings of History Town Community College, where Joshua kept asking why you could not breed a peacock with goat, and the mayor’s daughter dressed in full robot before stiff-legging into Communications 101 with zero books in her backpack. And what about early-onset puberty? Middle-schoolers already in full historic dress, wondering what year pendulums had been invented, and whether theirs would swing back like that famous futuristic movie where the hero melts into a thread of steel.

Remember the night you tried to kill

us: The moon takes a bite

of itself. My mouth, the same, you write

there a story about hunger: your mother, wax

& surrogate. Knuckles crackling, star-like.

For each emptiness, you put a dent in me.

For each emptiness, you put a dent in me.

It’s worth repeating this line to kill

the meaning. Doesn’t work, like

bite your tongue, bark is worse than bite, bite

the bullet, I won’t bite. The wax

baptism of the moon, I write

moon too much, my teacher said. Write

anything else. These dents in me

couldn’t be moon or stars. What about a wax

museum? A President tipping his hat? Kill

the magical realism, although as I bite

through blood, that’s all I see. You like

too much — they have to be earned, like

these. See these here? When she writes,

we believe it. See how she uses bite?

For each emptiness, you put a dent in me —

perhaps too figurative. At the end of kill,

a telephone pole’s resolve. Fog’s wax

& wane, the only slowness, clings in wax

mosquitoes. Texas fields unspool like

grass ribbons in flames. This will kill

me first, & last. The hardest to write:

For each emptiness, you put a dent in me,

a planet gaping volcanic. I take a bite

of splinters. I take a bite

of metal. Bites of glass. My heart, a wax

apple stuck with teeth. Please tell me,

has this one been earned? If like

is a hinge, what I am connecting? I write

his name down, then erase it. Kill

& live?

When I turned my life over to the Lord Jesus in January 1959, I threw out all my netstockings, bikinis — some from Frederick’s of Hollywood, many I designed myself: you’ve certainly seen how my one-piece cheetah print greeted the Florida coast, then waved it goodbye for good, when I followed the chapel glow after I left a man in the middle of our two-step to Guy Lombardo’s “Auld Lang Syne.” The Lord was never mad. Not even when my nipple exclaimed its tender joy for Christmas, my black hair so shiny it was mistaken for tinsel. You’d never know I hated cigarettes by the way one would hang from my mouth, talisman to badass & red lip. Such divinity in Max Factor. Can we not talk about my bangs? My forehead never really disappeared just like I didn’t. When people ask me, Bettie, what’d ya think of wearing that leather horse costume, being spanked on the behind, I chuckle because one thing I never was was serious. Yeah, maybe it wasn’t the best idea to strap the brunette to a cross made with old broomsticks, but it was funny, & fun was the fetish I resurrected.

Her lungs, the green tarps covering

                        abandoned buildings swallowed

& then spit out by the flood, Houston’s

                        unsympathetic hurricane. I didn’t toss

a dollar into a guitar case for the man

                        serenading the chapel’s ghosts because

what have I ever given except love’s

                        less than? His Beatles cover whirled

in me like a chihuahua thrown against

                        a wall that can run only in circles.

My body, a guitar ripped of its frame

                        & filled with dough, Vanilla’s the only

one to see me naked in over a year,

                        thighs that can’t get enough of each

other that they burn through denim

                        in order to touch. Michael Vick paid

someone $100 to dig two graves for dogs,

                        but that person refused to bury them, & I

hope for half that much mercy. I picture

                        my head in a bucket of water. My neck

in between nylon cord attached to a 2x4

                        because we’ve used up what’s left of our good.

This was supposed to be a love poem,

                        but what I’ve learned is that in the backside

of love’s hands are violences, just open up

                        Nilla’s mouth & count them. When he goes

to rest his hand on my shoulder, she

                        charges & barks & screams until she knows

I’m safe. No one else has done this

                        unless I’ve asked, not even my own body.



What’s the alternative for starting with I remember . . .? It’s right now, right now. I worry I write the same thing over & over, trying to solve a riddle about the body, generating nothing but a poor approximation. Darlings, I want to find you in Oklahoma’s rubble, but time has outsmarted us again, as I write the shadows & monochrome back into Welch, told no over & over again in my own handwriting. Language should be better than this, & I say language because I’ve given up on us. There’s got to be a better way of moving from one idea to another other than I remember. Memory is the opposite route homeward — memory, home’s autopsy report. The skeletal remains were the moment after the shotgun, the moment before too. Girls nowhere to be found but in memory, so I suppose I remember is good for something, for when we stretch absence to its margins. When we try fooling our inner saboteurs by building our faults away from history. Earthquakes in Oklahoma have increased from 41 in 2010 to 888 in 2015, but otherwise, the ground’s swollen lips keep silent. I tell the earth, Kiss them for me.

What was Paris like on New Year’s? I have a tin figurine of the Eiffel Tower, about two inches tall, & it’s the sorta thing I always want to keep in my pocket, along with a JFK photo in swan origami. Oh, & the fireworks! I bet the fireworks were something else. Like this vicious streak I have in me, were they like that? Diagrams hot with pride? The moment after they pop, that irreverent hiss, the kind hugging together two radio stations, a whippit in exclamation point. I love how a river tries to wind the colors together, but the sky is all gray skeleton, my body inside out & Velcro. Once I was told to chase my fear, but my fear is so close to my obsession, I can’t tell the difference, & that’s what led me to you, Scott. Do you believe in random acts of kindness? Gosh, you look so much like a brother I’ve always failed at rescuing. I’m afraid of growing old without someone there to take care of me, but I’m more terrified of being a mother. I get why you’d do it, if you did. Motherhood is just sucking desperately at an oxygen tank’s exposed, detachable breast. Would you ever consider getting married again? Wouldn’t it be funny for our wedding cake to be a chocolate bar, the vending machine our priest? I too am hated by the world — I’m a cat on fire in a metal drum. No one’s looking for who put me there.

Winter’s appearance

ushers in the season

of abandonments.

As if some internal

organism, refused to resort

to the gratuitous resources

of human survival.

All the lights

in the buildings are out

along with your cigarette.

I turn off the TV,

wonder how you could possibly hear

the things I told you

from where you were.

I light one so that something,

in the space of the city

that grows between us,

remains lit.

There is a yellow light that enters

and I confuse it

with part of a movie.

When I watched it again,

I couldn’t find it.

One night when I told myself the truth

in a kitchen.

The feeling of a thousand afternoons

in a place where nightfall

doesn’t pain me.

An autumn love

that wants to stick around.

The towns, the hippodrome,

the photos of grandma when she was young,

the Renault alongside the boats at port.

The seagulls, far away.

A scent of Mother’s Day,

the honey caramels,

the adolescent afternoons

of winter alongside the river

when we were happy

and didn’t know it.

The memory of something vague,

a hose on a patio that I imagine,

beach bicycles arriving,

one with a basket: mine

and you bare chested and, in the basket beer

and the beer in a glass

and a peanut floating

and all of this without talking about the future.

The clouds that form froth,

the golden sun that falls

and links the houses, all of them.

Just like looking at the world

through a glass of lager. Just like that.

There is a yellow that confuses me,

the yellowed memory of youth,

but I am young.

The youth that already aches of yellowness,

like the gleam of the medallion

on the little chain you gave me,

that I’ll lose one day

which will also hurt.

The stage lights going down on me,

the iridescent fish coming up for air,

the apple cake turning golden brown,

a coin flipping a decision,

a coin for a honey caramel,

for a kiss after

a beer, for nothing,

with the bikes left in shadow

of the fish that comes into the light disbelieving.

Because the river fish didn’t imagine this ray of light

that falls on the medallion you’re putting on me now

in the middle of the sand, between my golden locks,

as if immortalizing the space.

The time I sat alone

in the chill of the kitchen

and told myself the truth and felt

a yellow that came over me

gilding my eyelashes

and I was

in all yellows at once,

like the journey of a strand of gold

that upon joining its points

loses its form.

We had grown accustomed

to seeing the river as a screensaver

like an old and faded poster.

It took me living on the other side

to regain the emotion.

The islands look different,

their scent too far away to smell.

The river runs in the opposite direction.

There, during the swell

we can enter slowly, joining our hands

prayerfully in front of our chest,

opening them like an idea that expands

through the internal ramifications of the brain,

a sudden excitement

that casts light over all the previous

states of unhappiness.

A cast-out dog, his eyes closed tight

as if the sun were pointing its ray at him,

is missing the sunset.

Behind us, the skaters learn to fall down.

Sometimes I think about that very strange moment.

It was the first of January early afternoon

-we had partied the night before-

and you decided to go to the club, by yourself,

because you called your friends

at siesta time and they told you

to get fucking lost.

I know there wasn’t a soul on the street

and that you rolled straight down the avenue until the end.

Did you reach a point of clarity on the journey

as you saw the river peek

out from between the poplars?

It was such an everyday image…

But one year we saw the South African rugby team

arrive on the esplanade, rest

their inflated forearms on the railing

and take a moment to bawl their eyes out.

Or were you driving on automatic this time,

a little numb from your hangover,

thinking about light little nothings like someone

kicking a bottle cap along.

Would you have thought of me in passing?

You were alone. There was no one there to rescue you.

Listen to me: take a second to look at the river.

My head is on your shoulder

I’m sideways, you’re not, and my arm

crosses diagonally ascending

your chest, as if it were

the stripe on the jersey

of your favorite soccer team.

The trembling of the roof slates can be felt

from the north wind, a sustained murmur,

it’s not hard to imagine, two blocks down,

the water hyacinths whipping up speed.

A car passed and I thought the rain

had let up, I was mistaken.

If you were awake, would you feel

how our hearts synchronize?

This can’t be copied, like I

copy the rhythm of your breathing

which gets really awkward;

from time to time your lips stick together

and when you want to let out air

you press out a P after a pause another

p                                p                                           p

          p                               p

                           p                                        p

I’m not saying we should always sleep like two

connected question marks,

I don’t know if I could take a whole night,

but stay like that

a while

yes, I don’t know, a while longer

a while.

Another car passed and I thought

it was raining again.

It’s a matter of time that’s all

before your sudden body adopts

a different position, in which I

am excluded and can’t insert myself

without bothering you.

in the moonlit night

I dwell on

improper things

night blooms —

with a foreign soldier

intimate fingers

humbly awaiting your notice

rainy season’s morning glow

at the airfield

sea fog

if you don’t return home

should I move elsewhere?

good luck, weak

jaw of yours —

orchid in the cold

2

To once more climb the stairway

of the lost home (it no longer

leads anywhere), someone calls to us

in a voice quiet and familiar.

But we don’t need to respond.

The voice just calls to us, it is plenty,

as if nothing could damage it

in the endless passageway. A rain

that cannot drench us, does not tire

of closing in a favorite day.

One knocks at the door of the home

offered as a shy solace,

to our mortal hands.



Landscapes capsized in the sky

fruits rising from the sea hollows

winter through the marshes

summer through the dunes

from one church to another

country lanes taut like thread

where the meadow linen dries

the moon is the whitest

of all that’s been carved

in this quarry of stars

that space is mine

That space of sky

is mine

in the palm, bit of sand

sage, wind, what can it show the world

one or two teeth like a tilted hat, this water.

Everything is a whirlwind, the whistling wind the early clarity,

of the thunder behind the island, the green shutters.

That space of sky, just the right rocks showing in the window

Javier going down, the jet of water. What are they now, one, two

teeth, the stress, the anguish. What are the plastic Dracula teeth

now, forgotten in the sink of a bathroom that is not mine, who

is going to explain to me what is mine, who is going to tell me

what remains for me.

I await a paradise of outstretched branches that stop the fall

I await a grove, a “flock of trees”

Together, waiting for me.

That space of private sky, sage, wind

That space of sky, I am certain.

I will die in Paris in a rainstorm

Vallejo

And I in Montevideo, a nap in January, hot

when the girls put in their rollers in the afternoon

the old women of the neighborhood

drink mate on the sidewalk,

when the beach flies and laughs

like a butterfly

and all the air smells strongly of grape.

I will die in Montevideo in a nap in January, hot

when the sun starts playing with the kites

in the air over Buceo.

Here I will die. Content.

At the foot of the hill and its bay.

Beside the sea. With eyes open and serene.

The rambla distills docile hours. Not the ramblas. This rambla distills landscapes, slight rises of the river. In the solace of a summer or the clarity of the moment when a lighthouse inhabits the rocks and jetties and your dress falls quickly under the movement of an eager fisherman, like those ships that run aground; suddenly, and wear for a long time the glass or window of the sea, the desire so fast and so urgent because this is one, and it was so sweet to fuck you — which neither the fisherman, or the boat understand or know, and much less the dress —, that I am unable to keep my eyes open because love urges me and I feel nostalgia for this sleep, this dream that comes after love and the fatigue that saved me from the shipwreck, from your dress.

This is the clarity of the dream. Not the rambla. This is the dream, gentle grass, the hair or mane of a house facing toward the South, toward the rambla, or leaning against the wall of a cemetery.

This is the dream, the membrane or petal of an anemone on the sea, facing whatever rambla …

From here you can see the tree tops on the other side of the street

can see the half-built houses

and the tall buildings where the laundry flaps in the sun.

Hundreds of windows open onto the light of an airshaft that ends in a river or merges with the Prado.

 

That is the house where I once said I would live. Time has passed, so much now I can’t make you remember.

In the afternoons we went to get bread. Sometimes you let my hand pass over the walls. I felt the roughness of the sand and my skin turned rough and white.

We walked the railroad tracks while you talked to me of men and love. We tried hard not to fall off the rails, one foot and then the other as if we were walking along a parapet. Below, the emptiness, immense, holding up our flight. Waiting for the fall.

 

We brought the bread back and the night was so dark that we had to wait until dawn to open our eyelids again.

See, from here you can see the tree tops, the half-finished houses, the other side of the street

The essential idea is this — the man you love is connected to you

no matter what, but he’s also connected to the woman

     down the street with the small dog that barks at the lilacs,

     and she’s connected to the cashier at the market who’s a bit rough

with your grapes, but he thinks you’re ten years younger than you are

and he gives you free saltwater taffy and calls you

     darling — but he also calls her darling, and her dog

     darling, and the man you love along with the grapes.

The essential idea is this — all objects are composed of vibrating anxieties

— everyone wants a window or aisle seat and no one wants to sit

     in the middle. Call it deniability. Call it the flashlight you keep

     by the door never works in emergencies. We are all connected

by the blast that brought us here, the big bang,

the slam dunk, the heavy petting. We can’t always be pretty.

     We can’t always be the eyelash and the wink, sometimes we have to be

     the ear, sometimes the mouth. You are and are not the speaker in this story —

you are the bridge connected to the bridge connected to the man

you love and the woman you dislike who teaches spin class. It’s not

     personal. It’s not personal when the universe says it’s complicated

     and you have ten minutes to understand quantum physics.

When the man you love says there’s a new connection called supersymmetry

and it exists between two fundamentally different types of particles

     called bosons and fermions, you hear bosoms and females.

     You hear he’s thinking about the spin teacher with the nice breasts

and you burrow deeper. The essential idea is this — someone will always bruise

your grapes and someone will end up in the middle. Someone you love

     will break your favorite coffee mug and bring you lilacs. And you

     will be connected to people who make your eyes roll.

You’ll be connected to others who stand on the bridge and consider jumping off.

You’ll try to care for them. And you will not look your age, but you will

     feel sad when you look in the mirror because we all want to live

     a little longer, because the small dog has died and the cashier

has lost his job for stealing saltwater taffy from the bin, but he still calls you darling,

calls everyone darling, and today, darling, darling, darling, the flashlight works.

My neighbor who says fuck all the time

has painted a flag on the side of his house.

He doesn’t have room for thirteen stripes,

only twelve. There are thirty-six stars.

Hanging off the porch — a flag faded to white.

It has been there since September 12th, 2001.

When his son comes back from the mall

wearing a Who Would Jesus Bomb? t-shirt

my neighbor shouts, Whose fuckin’ side are you on?

The boy shrugs his shoulders and turns away.



It would be easier if the world were built

                    from commas, but instead we’re high

                                         on exclamation points, someone

slamming the brakes of the van in the driveway,

                    someone walking into the house

                                        and shouting, We’re done!

What we travel through daily is a period

                    of time, a minute black hole, a steady

                                        waltz, as if we are slow dancing

with death, the lover who never understood us.

                    My closet holds a world built

                                        from semi-colons, everything

is a full statement; everything is a part

                    of everything else. If my life depended on it,

                                        I’d find a push-up bra and a pair

of stilettos to lure death into a dirty bar,

                    but in my town, we survive

                                        in socks and sandals, a book

of poetry in our bag. I’ll take God for $100, Alex,

                    whether or not He or She wants me,

                                        whether or not, I’ve made

His or Her list. Maybe prayer is what comes after

                    the exclamation point and the apology

                                        is the ellipses in another person’s voice.

Life is saying we’re done and falling back in love

                    after the black hole closes shop,

                                        and we’re all left slow dancing

each other into another decade. And the flicker

                    of God, I saw it in the shoes

                                        of the other dancers,

saw it in the slight glare of the questionmark

                    saying, Hi, I’m new here, is this how we begin?

If it happened a year

from now, that waking numb

-drunk, exactly

the same, but. No bus ride

to get a pill. Instead a bus ride

to find him. How

everyone would stare as

I held my stomach. When

I was little I said belly

not stomach, thought it was

one big thing, breast

to waist. I know

he would never sleep

in my bed. He likes

his own, how

his arms and legs spread.

Every bird here is an osprey,

every kayak caught in mangroves

we must pull ourselves

through, branch

by branch. Our arms

mosquito-bit, red-bedazzled.

We drove beside a highway

brush fire, didn’t mind

the cling of smoke.

Walked on the beach

to the water that drowned

me as a girl.

I lifted you underwater.

Passed a knife from

your hand to mine.

This is why we slept

on the floor: to feel our

bones against it.

How many pocket knives can I fit inside

my purse? Teach me to walk down a street

like a man who can walk down any street

and be fine. Who killed the belly-up

rat in the parking lot? Are you my angel?

Be my gun underneath the bed. Be honest —

when I get mad, it’s funny. Like the man

at the bar laughs now when I say, no,

I won’t tell him where I live. Like my father

always laughed when he asked me,

“Who do I have to kill for you today?”

Today you saved on investing and the side effects

may include fever dizziness shortness of breath

you should lie down and

find out what your sleep number is

you should shelter in place

while every vote counts.

Today is paid for by the people

relief is slow when you are an island

and the death toll is rising but most

of these accounts have not been verified.

Today is an offering that can be

redeemed at participating locations

for a limited time though reports indicate

the gunman worked tirelessly.

Today was confirmed by multiple sources

and thoughts and prayers have been filed.

Today is an exclusive report we learned

about while getting the tough stains

out. Ranking members had no comment but

the pastor at the crime scene said:

“I do not understand, but I know my god does.”

Some people can go up to twenty seconds

                    without breathing especially in the middle

                                         of the night         I was writing a poem then

an arrhythmia set in. It’s about refugees, but it’s also full

                    of paranormal phenomena, it’s about food scarcity,

                                         and the thing is, it can’t save us. I believe

in the spirit world, I have no desire to encounter its edges,

                    to graze the lip of the cauldron, the flames braiding

                                         and unbraiding in my throat. Let us plan

to decolonize our spaces, let us avoid those who personify, imposters

                    rearranging words in a style that snaps and sinews

                                         without a pulse at its heart. Are we in love, any of us,

inside the rooms we inhabit? Is love the first

                    casualty of our ongoing wars? Let us plan, brothers and sisters,

                                         a museum heist or a freedom march, a lapis lazuli

set in metal that will not tarnish, scored thrice

                    in the way our grandmothers tattooed their chins.

                                         You cannot swallow a life

that large, the bones no longer

                    tender, the body

                                         changed by what it has carried.


The further I get from being a woman the less I’m stared at while eating. Eggplant parm, fries dripping truffle oil, fries dripping cheese whiz, appetizers washed down with gulps of beer never water. I’m not skinnier than I was pre-T, but I’m not fatter either. It’s the difference of: Maybe a chubby man is not the person you’ll go home with tonight (or any night), but you accept his hunger as legitimate. When I was six years old, and legitimately overweight, belly rolls dripping over a plaid skirt (oh the rich kids who witnessed this, like a pencil thrust through their 18 karat eyes), my friends threw away my Hostess cupcake and force-fed me a red delicious apple. When I was 31, my play partner baked me cookies and served them to me on her knees, said she liked the solidness of my body in words that seemed too convincing to be false. Still, some of us lie well. I said I feel sexy when I meant the apples in my belly come up my throat, bob with me in this rotten barrel.

No more axe body spray Polly says,

running her hands through boy’s

sun-in tips, their faux hawk crumpling.

Let’s go all the way tonight with the girl

at the end of the stalagmite bar

resting her drink between the spikes.

Put your hands on me boy says.

Put your hands on me Polly says,

pulling his tie / their tie

whatever pronoun brings

their skin-tight jeans closer to her hips.

Let’s go all the way tonight with the girl

boy’s not into until they’re four

manhattans deep, whiskey-cherry

on their collar, rubbing at it with

a napkin. Polly chatting both girls

up under oil-slick strobe lights.

Boy young forever in their own right,

dancing till his metal knees give out.

The further I get from being a woman waiting for T to melt my neck flesh already.

I know it’s rude to be this ugly because in second grade my teacher said It’s not over till the fat lady sings and a boy responded Sing, Jennifer, Sing to dole out the necessary punishment. Like how my classmates used my full name, mimicked me when I rocked back and forth (Jennifer, don’t be a freak / don’t cry down your fat cheeks), how rumor was I’d kissed another girl and this too made me worthless.

I dream a ghost called The Master belittles me in my too-small towel, but I’m never moved to shriek. I read liposuction forums, imagine my chin fat sucked through a blueberry-striped straw. In an alternate timeline, I go to high school naked but my body, recovered from dozens of surgeries, is fine, all fine.

All my life I’ve been a stupid little runaway

          & tried therefore to like philosophy

                     as beauty pageants

really wouldn’t work

          though smoking yes & beer & sex

                     a speck I guess.

But dipping tobacco no

          & pink trucks sorry no

                     & no football either

or deer assassination or coons up trees

          or weekends gutting pigs

                     & geese. Which is why

I tried with ideas to escape myself

           like ideas are Black Eyed Susans

                     or mice. But ideas

are not the Mason jars & homemade jams

          of the Apocalypse

                     & ideas are not

the shredded roosters & sourdough starters

          of the Apocalypse, & knowing that means

                     I’m just an old farmer

milking my cow in the dusk. Or an itinerant granny

          holed up a wily ridge.

                     Or a sleepy child

wheeling her little wagon

          down a sleepy road.

                     & dusk really is

the main thrill of it as in the point of it

          & also the fear of it

                     & thus nothing like an idea

though it’s duende yes of course

          & what we call the liminal

                     since there are bats here too

not to mention

          my beloved foxes curled up in a feral posse

                     like a party of furs

& the old & famous

          hard rain out there

                     just drenching us.

O the father was strange

like a smutty goat at the fair

with me in a little knapsack

he’d adorned in nudes to rile

the wannabe Nixon cow-

boys & Nixon bank tellers & sod-

busters & no coal miners per say

but little Nixon ballet dancers

& Nixon climbers of social ladders

& O the father was pissed

about Nixon & loud but festive

& drunk I know but loved

Wisteria which looked like grapes

in real life in Italy & on wall-

paper in Southwest Virginia

& loved Mark Twain & Pete Seeger

& washed my hair in Joy detergent

when he couldn’t get to the store

& said hamburger was dinosaur

& God was dead & honest I love

all woebegotten things like pigs

& birds midwinter. I love stars,

I love peaches, I love dogwoods,

I love asyndeton but not Nixon

& not war & venal plutocrats

& basic liars & bitches because

the father was strange & drunk

but bloomed like a fat moon-

flower inside dumbass little me

when I’d run off to mope

as I am doing now to escape saying

how the heart’s such a blowtorch

no matter how goofy & late the date.

Young light

skin Native,

I wanted to hang

round n strut round

Jamaica, Queen’s

rounded belly black

much the same

way white boys

just don’t.

Wanted to be more

than plexiglass

bystander round

Bernice’s Studio —

(of) Dance

much the same

way straight boys,

those without

fifty cents

worth of class,

just don’t.

Wanted to eat

Italian, Hillside

Cara Mia: Beautiful

Darling twirl n

roll round some blonde

angel’s hair

cross my knuckles

much the same

way breathless boys

living four-fingered

all hand to mouth

just don’t.

Wanted to fly

round feather-skinned

much the same

way fat boys

donut-holed up

under Queensbridge

just don’t.

Wanted to fade

bullets tap tap-

dancing

round 109th Ave’s

asphalt roof

much the same

way young blood

in this borough

just don’t.

Wanted to trade

the bent branch

of my birth

name, whittle

its shape

into any thing

sharper,

less round,

streets smarter —

same way my Queens

traded

her Algonquin name:

Jameco Beaver

for

Jamaica Rich

traded the roundness

of a glass bead,

broke herself

damn near

sharper

than the end

of a spear.

Akakagachi

as paper lantern

          as the cut bellies

of eight winter

          cherries

are my father’s eyes

          when he hears

of the giant snake

          in our neighbor’s garden

                     Shadows

          slither from his heels

                     while he makes the walk

          short with shovel

                     with knife

          with a coiled roll

                     of duct tape

          The color

has long washed

          from my Superman

pajamas yellowing

          quicker than

crepuscular twilight

          pooling at tiny feet

pissing myself

          in true fear

                     of his arrival

          with the snake’s

                     black body

          with the snake’s

                     shorn head

          Wrap it shut

he says or it will

          still bite

My small hands

          sticky with silver

tape. I peel apart

          beneath

the unhinged

          jaws of a god.

Dear Uncle,

          I heard you couldn’t bear

          witness to a black woman

          climbing the ladder

          of opportunity that was

          one of your twenty-six peach trees,

          so you cut

          every last one of them fuckers

          down with a chainsaw

          — blade right at the base.

          Dusted ‘em all

          — ten minutes flat, ha!

          Hard,

          I thought about equivalences

          for hate: maybe seeds,

          old trees, or an unyielding

          stump — the roots

          of a nurtured sprout,

          how strong the need

          for water — a steady source,

          how strong the need

          for a kindness

          of sun.

          Maybe

          you are fragile,

          a decanter’s mouth dripped

          into — decades of gardeners

          passing until you became

          a man, full

          of a kind of seed,

          of a kind of watering,

          of a kind of fruit.

          I want to ask,

          if you ever loved

          that razed orchard —

          but of course

          we haven’t spoken

          since I was just a sprout,

          raised and watered beneath

          orchard branches, then-

          budding with peach fuzz —

          here, I see myself — again,

          again I press

          a different tine, another kind

          of blade. Deep

          into my body, I search

          right at the base, I root

          for a different kind

          of seed,

          of tree,

          of fruit —

          my mouth longing

          for the flavor

          of fresh water.


Light, white enough to take over. Imperial light. Erasing hairlines, an ear, the edge of teeth,

the edge of skin, the edge of skin to skin, sky. The film’s large grain, summoned into bodies

by the dim eye of your permitted camera, now unauthorized. But this is not ekphrasis:

They called you the statistics man, the record keeper; you were made to shoot

mugshots for I.D.’s. Did they think in the after-hour you’d go blind? Instead,

the breadmaker’s stooped shoulders. Toddlers running to the gate. Women, aging.

You were shameless. The camera they gave you, hidden under your long coat.

The coat unbuttoned, click. The everyday ghetto, carts and shovels, now shadows,

now movement, blurred. Each night, you returned the day’s negatives to the dark,

your nails brown and brittle from midnight chemicals. You did not sleep. At dawn —

the shutter, release. Isn’t this Bresson’s decisive moment? The exit that opens

when one person looks another in the eye? When you dressed in the dank morning,

bringing the camera strap around, securing the machine to your chest like a bomb,

what did you know? That you had to? I never had to do anything. Would I know it, if I did?

“A square kilometer of hell,” the BBC called it. Feet, cut off. Lit cigarette ends. Drills. Abu Ghraib —
I’ve been told it means “father of strangers," but the Google replicates anglicized Arabic
into the English fill form where a father of strangers becomes a father of strangers, where babel begins
to rend sense. Abu Ghraib — where along the walls Saddam Hussein’s wise sayings are painted.
Where art says “There is no life without the sun.” I’m writing this to you from West Texas,
a decade after our eyes turned inside out: that new Christ, electrocuted, hooded. My students here
don’t know Abu Ghraib: West Texas has its own sun; it burns hotter, closer than the other one.
I’ve stopped making pictures. It’s the difference, in my body, between a button and a release; a click:
a consequence of an action, not the memory of an action. The other day my buddy told me about a book
he’s reading, in which the writer describes crying while he watches OJ’s Bronco drive. Why are you crying,
his kid asks. And the writer says: I remember the light. The speed of the white flat top of that getaway truck
against L.A.’s eternal concrete, a moving mirror. I remember the light, too — high-school journalism

class stopped; we wheeled in a T.V. cart. I was a child. My dad had died. All I wanted was to sleep.
Abu Ghraib holds 15,000; so did my little town. We had a Walmart and, then, a Super Walmart.
A big park with a lake and once a year we’d race hot air balloons across the sky and the blue hour water.
It was after that, after OJ, that news changed. That stories changed. That days changed
into drills. I don’t know how to tell you what quiet is. I will say it allows for a choice to be made.
What does it mean, to be a father of strangers? That you don’t recognize what you have born?
Or that you do, then turn to number the stars, knowing so shall your seed be, nameless and bastard.

How dare you. A boy with a camera bigger than your own head; a step ladder to the ground glass.
A grown man who saw in 3-D. There was a war on, for God’s sake. Then, another. And you, inconsiderate,
with your pictures of dogs, leaping; women leaping with dogs running; men, women, and children
(and dogs) swimming like it is their job. Happiness, like it is our job. There — in the middle of that fifth
or sixth or seventh war, undeclared, for which my country came to save your country
in another and inculpable country — your thrilled years shown to us, first at the MOMA then in Life.
Fast and overexposed. How does form mimic content; content, form? How does an observer become
the image observed? I don’t know. Years, I suppose. You worked on glass, tens of thousands of glass stereos,
the aspect so big you could make anyone believe. Two — of everything you saw. “A typical stereoscope
provides each eye with a lens that makes the image seen through it appear larger and more distant
and also shifts its apparent horizontal position, so that for a person with normal binocular depth perception
the edges of the two images fuse into one ‘stereo window.’ In current practice, the images are prepared
so that the scene appears to be beyond this virtual window, through which objects are sometimes allowed
to protrude, but this was not always the custom.” I stole that language from Wikipedia. You don’t know
what that is, but I bet you’d have liked it. Think: A Diary of Another Century. Think: A Daguerre Diorama
on a 13” screen. The whole world, both audience and figurine.

He’s beautiful —

but his legs are wrong, says my mother

when I show her a picture

of what my friend the sculptor made

out of chicken wire and plaster, a life-size horse.

In a pick-up, my friend and I circled the marsh,

beast in the bed she rode

red-jumpsuit-and-velvet-helmeted

as if she was a fox chaser.

She didn’t mean to look so fascist.

What made the horse wrong

was the angle of his knees

or something off with the fetlocks

or other slight accommodations made to support

the weight of the medium.

That horses walk at all is a wonder.

That we ride them, another. If he was real —

You’d have to shoot him, says my mother.

She said she sensed she was

           breathing easy

           walking the horse &

I thought she meant

           she was ashamed

           savoring a moment

of pleasure during crisis —

           wandering under

           animal-shadow, cool

at the road’s shoulder

           since what their tie offered

           was the opposite

of tenuous — brass-

           capped braid clicked

           to harness, hanging slack

like wrecked wire

           strung from the heavy

           circle of his jaw

to her grip allowed

           by his nature — kind —

           to be light — but she

had meant schadenfreude,

           laugh riot — her vision

           of the new fool — no one

should be President — reduced

           to retreat-and-skulk,

           his palace, stupid, beaten.

Couldn’t it be fun

           a little, watching ruin?

           I envied her then —

I envied her again.

Sometimes, still, I hold my hand to my eyes

so the sun becomes another thing sewn up

tied inside. I am making a mystery

where none exists.

                              ✼
 

To see can only be piece-by-piece.

To see an icepick shine, shine, shine.

Recognition is sly, mimicking the edge

between a door & jamb

holding back the empty hall

as if to say don’t come any closer —

but they did.

                              ✼
 

I held fast to what was safe

when I was safe. I gave up the ghosts

that should have remained reminders

of the randomness in each piece

of the world.

& blood wheeled around my iris.

& a blood-spoiled oasis

became the bargain struck by day

dimming days into another year.

                              ✼
 

Then: cell by cell the scar allays

its ridge of pink to white.

                              ✼
 

Then: I know what kind of world it is

by the sound of its emergencies:

Doppler waves of sirens,

red breaking blue.

The box fan bends the smoke

from oil drum barbecues

into anchors that strike the bottom

of my lungs.

                              ✼
 

What it means to change?

I wanted to kill

the air for touching me

until I couldn’t

remember differently

& now what remains

is the comedy of it.

How blood filled my eyes

the morning after the night

I said love

the very first time.


Know this has everything to do with you The cold slap to the back of the neck my grandfather took for yours You’re far away now A southern countryside away you are laying a midwest girl down across the stretching lawn Pain is a nerve resonating this distance I feel it every time I look in the bathroom mirror and account for the eyes of devouring / blue wide open / staring back I’d jam them down the drain if my questions weren’t already answered Know this has nothing to do with you It was Eisenhower who said Why can’t they just give up and die He was a man just like you are Maybe he acted in the only way he knew how So it is best if you stand witness This is not a Western film there is no bleeding sunset in which you / the hero / can reconcile yourself to Consider where you stand How your legs refuse to hold an unjust weight whether it be gun or stomach or climbing rope I miss my father and his children If you find them for me maybe I’ll let you back into the house I’ll let you understand what it means to come home I’ll let you crawl around under the front porch with me until you find what has or has not been eaten of their bodies You can’t miss their light / the land grappled / to their feet Their faces bang in my mind today It is best if you don’t stand at all This is the short way of saying get on your knees and beg

When the floods came my father refused

to sacrifice much. He took

the silverware, the coats, the pictures

of my mother surrounded by hunting dogs

long since dead. He gathered everything

he could. In between each netted armful he sang:

We are a people who spend their lives

holding onto things. He kept repeating

this to me as he fell from one fishing boat to another,

and under each boat a whirlpool,

and in each whirlpool the old man continued

to lose pieces. Now he is all but gone.

Today I admit I want to hear him calling

at the door one last time, but there is no house

to speak of. There could have been peace between us

had we fished it from the waters.

There is no such thing as ease

anymore. That is to say

my father lived under an old sky

until it was sold to Freeport

Copper and Mining, then he lived

in darkness. We were promised

nothing, not the casita, not

the children, not the burn

kit. Their god expands, their god

contracts. The mine’s belly

is punctured and collapses — I have to ask,

mi cielo, if we shot straight

down any dirt road long enough

maybe we could get back

to the start. You roll the window down.

You roll the window up.

Dear moon, forgive us the tie tack, the falcon feather.

Forgive us the golden olive branch. Our wish for peace

is our wish, not yours. You had peace, and now you have

an olive branch. Moon, what will you do with our hundred

two-dollar bills? Moon, forgive us the watchband. The hammer.

The Bible, as if you’re the one seeking your own source.

All the cameras. All the antennae. The nail clippers.

Oh moon, you’re literally holding our shit — we couldn’t

be bothered to cart it back to our own atmosphere.

Moon, once we stabbed a flag into you, as if you loved

our country, any country. You were absence of color and then

we pocked you all silver and red and blue. You were stillness

and then we kicked up dust that had never known anything’s kick.

Moon, once all our wreckage was a world away, and then

we appeared with our tripods and canisters, our larks

and catchphrases. I think, moon, that you must hate us.

Your molten mantle must roil, your iron core seethe.

You crest the dark sky over my house and your face

looks the worst kind of disappointed, like a mother when

her children have bloodied each other’s tender bodies.

Moon, say it’s all right. Say you understand. Look at me —

freighting you with a mouth I’ve invented just so I can hear it

say forgive. Oh moon, say you’ll forgive me for that, too.



Without belly or long claws,

like dust, I float from the spacecraft.

I hover, mute at the table.

I abstain (from such things as eating meat),

from drinking poison clouds,

from closing my face in sleep.

A thin dog-dream comes in a fog.

I feed it scraps of oranges.

He follows me in the street

and into the broken forest.

He does not roll forward in orbit

like the quiet Russian Laika

whose heart was destroyed in space.

The dream-dog whispers in my ear.

They said this to trap him, so that they could accuse him.

I say, I knew about this.

The stars, named their own distant words,

are so small they cry like cubs.

I have all the nights in the world.

Incoming tide, the cold spray.

The door left ajar admits everything —

shadows, wire-haired beasts,

insects to eat and die.

A woman sleeps in a hillock of rags.

A sparrow asks me a question:

Do you pick from the top

or eat windfall fruit?

Bones splinter under lights.

In the moving car, shattered things jangle.

I stare through the window, hold my fingers

to my mouth. I had wanted to be a nurse,

someone with a needle to suture bloody grins

opened unexpectedly on arms, on abdomens.

I thought I could learn the miracle of transfusions.

Instead, I entered a forest where birds flickered

through silence. A fallen fir, crumbling, lay at my feet,

a nurse log, fungi rising like ghosts from her trunk.

Her bones were soft, melting, blanketed with ferns.

Someone told me, Lift the bodies from the leaves,

from deep water. You, there, receive the crushed sockets,

the latticed, shiny scars.

Fascinating, the parts of us
that attain immortality before we do,

as if we’d sculpted ourselves into skyline

against the first gasp of night. I want to steal

the hair of everyone I’ve ever loved, shave it

right onto the pillow from their unsuspecting sleep

and carry it to the top floor of my obsession.

I have trouble letting go, it’s true. In an elevator, I’m

the last to push my floor, and I drink five bottles of water

at a time, scattered all over the house, afraid that if I finish

them, I’ll die. Same with books. Lately I’ve been

reading about President Antonio López de Santa Anna,

who ordered a full military burial for his

amputated leg. He dug it up

to transport from one home to another,

paraded it in an ornate, royal coach.

I dream of sparrows lifting the ten pounds

I lost last spring to the sun, pinking the edges of the city

with what I used to be. Body that I can barely keep up with,

you owe me nothing, not even your parts. Yet, I’m so hungry

for the vanishing lamps of your intelligence

I could eat my own tail,

I could pull my own lightning from the sky.

From this sorrow

I birth a family of sorrows.

I birth my own mother

but she’s already grown.

She’s not a woman. She’s

a sky stealing snow from winter.

I send up kites to try to reach her.

I tie love notes to their tails.

But, no, she’s not a sky.

She can’t hear me.

She’s a mink scuttling across

the floor of morning. I lay

out cheese to try to trap

her, but she won’t bite. She

roams the marshes,

a black flash

disappearing

into cattails.

I put on my tall yellow

boots to follow.

She’s in the middle

of the marsh, a pier

jutting from her stomach.

She’s a house

now. She has no doors

or windows. She grows

smaller. Just a speck

on a ledge in a room. She

holds a key. I try to steal it.

I won’t let her open

the cabinet

of her death.

And her lungs were horses galloping through

My childhood fears:

Bloody Mary in the mirror three times,

The Headless Horseman laughing under the old Chinese Pistache,

Satan sneaking into an unlocked window of my heart.

The pulse of my regret is nicotine-brown.

The color: elongated shadows on white pants.

Theme song: the hidden ash of the sea.

Now, the doctor carries her diagnosis gently to us.

Offers it from the doorframe like a newborn

Needing swaddle & milk. We must

All take care of it now,

This forest of worry

Making the sun seem smaller.

 
Weekly, the Saturday school teacher would remind us

that God is closer to you than your jugular vein,

how she would lift her chin and point to her own,

tap like a drum her stretched neck every time

she impressed this lesson, this sixteenth verse

pulled from Surah Qaf, and so that is where

I imagined God always, tucked where the sound

of throbbing and gurgling is loud, where He appears

and reappears in the form of rhythmic beats,

so accessible to my hands; closer to you

than your jugular vein I hummed when I spotted

the spot on his neck, a modest protuberance, felt

only between my index finger and thumb, this blotch

or blot, half dot, so many ugly words:

mole, blemish, pigmented, or as I stare at it,

a chocolate chip, half melted and smudged,

the color of pecan, drop of thick maple, a brownie crumb

lodged, pulsating faintly with all the power beneath it,

behind it, large heavy veins carry oxygen-empty cells

from his head to his heart — sometimes I pull at it

when he is busy, not paying attention, on a phone call,

pinching it carefully over and over with envy,

this beauty mark, a sufferer of my jealousy —

why don’t you switch places with me,

let me dwell in your space along the pounding

seafoam stem, the connector of my two favorite parts of his —

press my ear permanently to what moves between them,

adjacent to a mecca, every night falling asleep

to the echo of blood, neighbors with God

If there is a paradise

we arrived, as if at the far bank

of a river, and sat on a cool verandah

upstairs among leaves and

more shady leaves

                                         on earth,

it’s not mango season, they keep telling us,

so I settle for mosambi, sweet lime, for now.

Every day I drink half, leave the rest

for you to finish

It is this,

our hotel used to be a haveli; the family

still lives in one wing, the women

veiled like proper Rajputs, like

ghosts, sweeping the courtyard

                         it is this,

we have no family here, observe no holidays,

and I have given up my phone. Our

life back home takes on the warm

glow, the softened edges of myth

                                              it is this.

you say you don’t like graveyards, tombs,

even beautiful ones, but here we walk

among them and you in a cloud of parakeets

forget about death

My grandfather has a cut on his leg. A deep wound.

On the other side of the ocean, near Maine maybe, in a saltbitten house, there’s a man with

the same wound as my grandfather. On the same leg. A deep old war wound. Shrapnel.

Look here, here’s where they’re going to cut off my leg, my grandfather says. And his

finger points just below the knee.

I sit in front of him and nod. I recognize the wound. I measure the fear in my grandfather’s

eyes. So deep.

 

✼
 

My grandfather fears death. He smokes and fears death.

He sleeps most of the day. He says he can’t get any rest, that’s why he lies down and tries

to sleep.

Sometimes I wonder if my grandfather might not be rehearsing death, preparing his body

for stillness. All those hours lying there sleeplessly. The sound of cars. The air in the room

growing stale.

He lies down and tries to feel himself eroding. And he doesn’t sleep because he knows that

he is dying a little with every passing second. And so he smokes.

 

✼
 

My grandfather has a cut on his leg. A deep wound.

According to my grandmother, my grandfather is the bearer of a stigma.

I think, however, that he is more like the great sinner. My grandfather’s pain serving as an

example. His fear.

But she’s the one who tends the wound. So I imagine my grandmother sticking two fingers

into the gash. Then her hand. I imagine my grandmother’s immaculate hand. My

grandmother’s closed fist. Deeper. The smell of alcohol. Gauze. Deeper. I imagine the

truth, unblemished in my grandmother’s hands.

 

✼
 

The truth is that my grandfather’s body is its own victim, its sacrifice. A closed room.

We invented sin to make sense of this sort of thing.

And what if I fall asleep and don’t wake up again? What would happen then? Can you

imagine?

I can’t imagine.

Some people say I’m a hypochondriac because I look like my grandfather.

My grandfather believes in sin so that he will have something to fear. Fear is keeping him

alive.

My grandmother tends to him and every night she prays.

Together they go to visit sacred sites, little churches where they wash their faces or kiss

relics. They’re keeping themselves out of harm’s way.

My grandfather’s body is the truth. They say that mine is like his. I know it’s not, that my

grandfather’s body is holy.

THERE will be no Charon

nor towering elms.

Horses

cross no river

when they die.

Their memory disappears

at the instant

of the flash

of the blow

on their skulls.

It will all stay

under the shade

of cedars

beside the clay

road

which brings

the buyers

of meat:

from their sacred chests

from their loins

so often patted.

Even so, the horse

will blame no one.

Beauty dies

Simply

and will be found

in another body.

Silent horses

deprived of complaint

and prayer.

But their fear

will end,

and disappear forever.

NOW I've forgotten

the art of using the knife

I would like to remember

three horses

that I also lost:

a chestnut

called Bronco,

together we visited

a ranch

at the end

of a dirt road

that crossed a highway

with water weed verges

and a rubbish dump

where there were herons

and unreal trees.

The horse was three years old.

Then I had Farol

and Famoso.

My horses are not for sale.

Farol

died when he was gored

with a deep neigh.

Famoso

pricked his ears

for fear

and he would lift his head

taking two steps backwards.

From them I learnt

that not all wounds are the same.

Horses

smell of soaked grass,

of the sweat

of other animals,

of many leaves crushed

against the palm of the hand

and of small valleys

among the reddish dunes

of sunset.

The red leaves

struggle in the glass-

 

angels whose names

I don’t know.

 

I press them among the pages

of the dead poet’s book,

 

whose name I promise

to unlearn.

 

A little water

(glittering like vodka)

 

and their torture

seems attractive to me.

 

From the bus, I showed

Estera

 

the red tree

like the one in Kim Ki-duk’s

Spring, Summer, Fall … Winter and Spring.
 

I was afraid the driver

might throttle up

 

and she will per sempre miss

the miracle.

 
Forsythia or Hibiscus?

She asks, passing

rows of sofas, executive

chairs with arms, shower cabins

four-person hot tubs,

energy saving light bulbs,

metal-halide lamps,

table lamps, screws.

 

Hibiscus, but make sure it isn’t purple,

he says, purple is

common and vulgar.

The Chinese put the sour flower

in their tea

and fill themselves

with antioxidants

for the entire year.

 

Hibiscus, he says, pink or white.

These phoenix trees, do they not also bloom

in the morning of my past life

in the courtyard of my past life?

For three full days, the tree bloomed in the field

Powdery blossoms like little hands opening in spring

The wind came and went

Butterflies came and went

After three days, the wind came again

And the blossoms fell with the wind

During those days, no one walked past the field

No one paid any attention

We travel: space is what foretells us.

If there were a god watching over us, a

god of transit, detours, forks

in the road, then it must be a tiny

god. Staring out the window of

the train, at how the buildings slip away,

startled children running, I imagine that god whose

name would be a mystery because he’d accidentally

left it on the seat of a plane.

He’d have no rites or temple, would offer neither

solace nor proof, would be elected by no tribe. No one

would devote him words in matins or at meals; his

prayers would be blank dawns

spent in bus stations or airports,

his breathing muddied with the rain falling

in his bronchial tubes at that time of day. He wouldn’t talk

with other gods, who don’t exist, either.

He’d barely sing his song to whoever would go with him.

He wouldn’t punish theft or adultery: he’d know

that every path is a theft, every word

an adultery. He’d have too many children to choose

one to wash away our sins. Instead,

he’d force us to migrate, as if he could absolve

distance of its vastness, of its fear.

We’d walk so much that he could only

recognize us from a distance. His only purpose would

be to make sure the clocks still worked,

so that departures could happen, so that eternity

couldn’t seep in here. He’d be the god of

delayed flights, shuttered ticket booths, the stench

of piss and sleeping semen in public restrooms.

He’d make a body out of me, just one among many, without

the torment of abstraction. He’d exchange my eyes

for bitter coals, turn my hands to distant

animals. He’d reduce me to the ravenous

geometric certainty of motion. He’d show me that wakefulness

is not a state, but a task of destruction.

Here’s my passport. Yes, my

visa’s valid. I have the papers

to confirm it. The purpose of

my visit? Tourism. No, I’m not

transporting any alcohol or tobacco. No,

I don’t have any unpasteurized products,

organic materials, or unsanitary

trinkets. I haven’t been to a farm

recently; I can’t remember the last time

I did. I don’t have a license to

carry firearms. I’ve never

touched a gun. In my carry-on luggage

there are no bottles over 300 ml

in volume. The purpose of my

visit? I travel for the same reasons as

everyone else: out of innocence, or because

I believe what I read in books, that there’s

somewhere out there where my name

won’t reach me, where I can finally

to take it in vain. No, there are no whips,

handcuffs, vibrators, or harnesses

in my luggage. Or documents essential

to some nation’s peace. I’m not transporting

animal or vegetable species; I left my carnivorous

plants behind in childhood. Any organs I carry

are neatly tucked away under my skin,

some prematurely coated in rust

and fat. Oh, these pills?

Circulation can’t stay static; I can’t

have any baffled blood running through

my veins; my breath can’t stall

in my throat like a fist of fog:

it’d shatter my teeth and palate.

The purpose of my visit? Because I’m no

longer myself and my house is no longer

my house. You, sir, with your badges

and your uniform, your anthem and

your pledge of allegiance, you’ll never

understand that a country is a handful

of stolen words. And someday they

must be returned. That’s exactly what I’m doing

right now: I’m leaving the words wherever

I can, wherever they’ll let me, even if

their taste has soured. I’m paying off

a debt with these bleary words, which blink

in the zenith lighting. In the city

where I was born, everyone has their debts and

there’s always someone to collect them. There,

miracles are a danger like any other,

a stray bullet, a natural disaster. There, all

skins wake with the same innocent

hangover. The purpose of my visit? Because

in the places where no one speaks my language

the body is a disappearance: there’s a

transparency that suddenly gangrenes my

flesh, no syllable can restore me, no one

can see me. But I don’t travel without a suitcase.

My city is made of paper. I can fold

it up and stuff it in my pocket;

it’s shaped like a notebook, like a knowing

touch. There, the saints brawl,

change water into rum, drive Empire

motorcycles, and sleep off their trifling eternity

in clay statues. In my city, we

carry our dead in our pockets.

You can’t leave them at home; they

disappear, they tear off into the beyond or

are stolen for resale—they don’t leave

so much as a little pillar of salt in exchange.

It’s not really a city; it’s a slow

fever that eats at the valley, haggard,

furious. The purpose of my visit? I’ve spent

years dreaming of a whale that swallows me up

and shelters me for months behind its plaster

teeth, in its belly’s soft night, before

it finally spits me out on unfamiliar shores.

Take my hand, let’s go to our sinful paradise! …

Resisting the firmaments’ industrial plan,

May came back for us in the middle of winter,

and a green meadow burst into bloom,

 

where the apple tree, in full flower,

bent its fan of branches over us,

and where the earth, like you, smelled sweet,

and butterflies made love in flight …

 

We’re a year older, but isn’t it all the same, —

old wine aged another year,

how ripe fruit-of-knowledge tastes lusciouser …

My love! Gray Eve! Hello!

You see her sitting alone on a rock, away from her new platoon. Her head draped in her mother’s wedding pachhaura stolen the night she became Those-Who-Walk-at-Night. Her arms wrapped around her rifle as if it were a beloved’s body. This is what you came for, armed with your Canon 35 mm: the face of the war razing these Himalayas for seven years now. You should have been here last Sunday, when her platoon was surprised. How she stared at her sisters’ throats bloom into black rhododendrons until her comrades tossed them into a shallow pit with shrouds of dirt. How could we possibly know what she is feeling now? All I can say is: how easily she could have been your sister, or mine, one of over five thousand of whom neither of us can recall a single name. But you’ve an assignment to do. So you kneel and aim your black lens at the sickle moon on her cheek. So you blur the forest behind her, where the crows have gone quiet. So you keep the muzzle out of the frame: there’s no telling how a bayonet can pierce the sky and the sky still send us the sweet rain. You say, Bahini, think of all the black rhododendrons you saw, yes, every single one of them, yes, beautiful, yes, yes, that’s it, and make your 35 mm gasp and gasp again looking for the perfect shot.

What day? I was born

when the river was yellow

                                                          every morning

                                                          a sickle moon falls

                                                          from your cheek

with fever

                                                          I can never touch your hand

                                                          twice

everywhere bodies fell

                                                          like a hacked rhododendron

I fell in love

while crossing the Kausiki

                                                          this is how my story

                                                          begins

wild wild horse

legs kicking rabid

rapid mane I held

I was river river

                                                          blue with secrets

                                                          and no salt

I stayed in the water

until my only lungi dried

on a rock on the shore

                                                          you melted

                                                          three winters

                                                          in its unspooling

a man passing through

the suspension bridge saw me

when I returned

the village was a hive

she turned the river

into milk

                                                          how do you see river

                                                          in river

boy my skin was that fair

                                                          what punishment for Actaeon

they bombed the river

pink with stunned bellies

when a net of boys waiting

in the shoal reached

for the fish the fish

shredded the river milky

                                                          was Apa one of them

men is no river

                                                          my palimpsest blood

the river births

the river

                                                      an ocean away

                                                          when my tongue craves sugar

                                                          I make kheer

who knows what day

I was born

                                                          two butter lamps

the distance between the shore and the shore

                                                          one for you

                                                          one for the Kausiki

my memory the yellowed

water in between breaking

the branches of the moon

                                                          a bowl of rice milk cardamoms

all I remember is

                                                          you open your mouth

                                                          you are no more

I lived

                                                          the lamps

                                                          I leave burning



Unable to go back

to sleep, I listen to the walls

breathe. In the kitchen I open

the pantries one by one

for no reason at all.

Sometimes I find things there

I never knew I had.

Yesterday, for instance, I found Ama

sleeping in her bone

china teacup. Wrapped

in a maroon chhyuba,

even in sleep she carried

her prayer beads

in her rain-bruised hand,

her breath caught

between thumb and finger,

her arms folded arctic wings.

The cup was there

when I was born. Handleless

like one of those first

Chinese tea bowls. The cup

is so white it’s pink. Outside,

a blue heron

sails the kaolin sky,

primary remiges of one wing molted

from years of drinking,

the body tipped to a side

to compensate

for the drunk wing.

I like lifting it

with both hands, she said,

the weight of a filled

cup on my palms.

How many cups of tea

this bowl must have held?

How many times raised

to Ama’s lips?

How many times washed

clean and put away?

If you lift it to the moon

in your window

she opens

her blue wings.

I wanted to ask her:

Now that the body is dream

what do you do when you’re awake?

Do you sing my childhood tales

to the snow leopard cubs?

When was the last time

I touched your cheek?

Are you comfortable there

in that bone?

But she was sleeping,

so I made black cardamom tea

with loose leaves,

poured two cups,

a spoon of wild honey for me,

two for her.

I left the spoon in her cup

the way she likes it,

placed her tea beside the china

she was sleeping in

and closed the pantry.

Ama, did you know

it takes two thousand leaves

to make one pound of tea?

Did you know

when the wind blew a dried leaf

into a pot of boiling water

served to Shen Nung

he drank the first cup of tea?

Did you know

blue herons prefer dead

trees to nest and each year return

to the same tree?

Some nights

I hear an unintelligible

sound coming from your wall.

What can I do

but offer this

with two hands

through the silence

of a filled cup.

With the blade of his paring knife,

he bisects, then quarters, slips

steel through sugary lumen

to prise dark gold from its heart.

At the table, where we receive

our portions of sweetness,

all the world seems caramel spun.

I savor my share, lick its sticky jelly

clear down to the oily paper.

Outside the September kitchen,

the moon rises, glazing the tips

of the crook-necked pine.

Inside, I want to hold this kindness:

the moon, suspended in its syrup

of sky, the salt of the yolk flaking

into the crevices of my tongue,

and my father, still seated at the end

of our honey-oak table, slivering

the day’s leavings into strands

of emulsified light.


Someone delivered them

to my doorstep, the box

tucked up in thick brown paper

and blunted at the corners. I could hear

their tiny hooves clattering inside,

staccatoing the soft walls

of their cardboard cage.

When I slit through the tape,

the smell of their fear curled

into the room. Green-black irises

flashed up at me — dark, glass

bullets tracking the rift in the roof,

the enormous, fleshy moon that now

hung above it, emitting sounds

that tumbled clumsily from between

stained teeth. Hush, hush,

it kept on saying, yellow jaws

waxing. Please, don’t be afraid.

She wasn’t there when I started playing,

and it’s a song I have not played in a long time

so it requires a little extra concentration from me,

which is why she seems so suddenly just to be —

appearing there in the empty space before

the porch of the shack and looking up

and most of all listening. For deer always listen.

They can hear you lick your lips

fifty yards away, it is said, and I’m reaching

the second time through the chorus now,

which consists mostly of the repeated title,

and “yeah-yeah-yeah.” The thing is,

I’ve slowed the song way down, and I’m finger picking,

not pounding with a pick, and with its couple

of minor chords, it sounds almost like a ballad,

or slow and sad somehow, at least. Even

the yeah-yeah-yeahs I try to work a little extra from.

So, yeah, it occurs to me that, indeed, I am performing

for a deer. And I want her not only to appreciate

the miraculous fact of human music but also of me.

Performing for her, hell. I’m playing

and singing to her, all the while aware —

despite her beauty, her impossibly big brown eyes,

her listening — that it would never work out between us.

It’s a mild day in late autumn. She’s probably pregnant,

I’m older than half the trees around us.

But the look on her face is so intense, so pure

in its regard, that it feels like everything else in the world

has gone to that place everything else in the world goes to

when you are looked at that way, especially

if you’re singing, and the worst thing

that could happen at such a time is for the song to end.

So I keep singing, she loves you, and yeah-yeah-yeah.

The confusion you feel is not your fault.

When we were younger, guidance counselors steered us

toward respectable occupations: doctor, lawyer,

pharmacist, dentist. Not once did they say exorcist,

snake milker or racecar helmet tester.

Always: investment banker, IT specialist, marketing associate.

Never: rodeo clown.

Never: air guitar soloist, chainsaw

juggler or miniature golf windmill maker.

In this country, in the year I was born,

some 3.1 million other people were also born, each

with their own destiny, the lines of their palms

predicting an incandescent future. Were all of them

supposed to be “strategy consultants” and “commodity analysts”?

Waterslide companies pay people to slide down

waterslides to evaluate their product.

Somehow, that’s an actual job. So is naming nail polish colors.

Were these ever presented as options?

You need to follow your passion

as long as your passion is not poetry and is definitely a hedge fund.

If I could do it over, I’d suggest an entry level position

standing by a riverbank,

or a middle management opportunity

winding like fog through the sugar maples of New England.

There’s a catastrophic shortage

of bagpipe players, tombstone sculptors and tightrope walkers.

When they tell you about the road ahead,

they forget the quadrillion other roads.

You’ll know which one belongs to you because

it fills you with astonishment or ends with you being reborn

as an alpine ibex — a gravity-defying goat, able to leap

seven feet in the air, find footholds where none exist,

and (without imagining it could ever be anything else)

scale a vertical sheet of solid rock

to find some branches, twigs, or wild berries to devour.

Klingon, Parseltongue, Na’vi.

People invent imaginary languages so imaginary

citizens of imaginary worlds can speak

to one another. Elvish, Ewokese,

Dothraki. You can learn these languages,

come to a convention with your face painted blue

or a leather scabbard bolted to your back,

and talk to people who will understand you.

I understand what language feels like

when you’re not understood. More than once,

I thought some other planet might be home.

Once I saw a man punch another man

until neither looked like a person.

There are hundreds of reasons like this

to long to be from some other galaxy,

century, or dimension. Reasons

to put on a space suit or wizard’s cloak

and hope no one will recognize you. But it’s not

these costumes that amaze me; it’s always been

the languages. The way they reach

for something that can’t be said

in our tongue. In the only language I know,

there are not enough words for parabola

or isotope. Too few phrases to say I’m

sorry or I’m glad that I found you.

Though we’ve been married for years,

I wish we met when we were children.

If we had known each other in the year

you spent alone on Earth without one friend,

we could’ve been aliens together.

I’d have those green, four-fingered hands.

You, with your glow-in-the-dark antennae.

Words in the form of strange whirling noises.

Low chirping machine sounds.

Wisps of static, lamentations of rain.

Only you and I would know what it meant.

Your moon-eating dog is about to kill my favorite elf warrior
because I don’t have enough land to summon

the Hand of Emrakul or a Blight Dragon.

Gone too, are my Dawntreader Elk and my Mantis Rider.

I could drop a Sphere of Safety card here, but again,

not enough mana to cast an enchantment.

This is how it goes: my resources

for the world never match my hope for the world.

And so, America continues to march

down the same streets, shouting

Build that wall! and Fake news! and Flat Earth!

Meanwhile, I’m stuck where I’ve always been, naïve,

trying to believe in magic, in wonder,

in spells that can change a man’s mind,

heal a wound, charm a Sun Crusher

or teach a Carnage Tyrant to trample

the countryside with dignity, curiosity and tenderness.

It amazes me that people like Temperance Brennan exist.

Even if she doesn’t actually exist. That people like her exist.

The world is full of people that murder people

and there need to be people

who can look at the remains of the murdered,

even when the remains are unidentifiable, people

who can glance at a radius or ulna, and tell you:

how long ago, and how old, and were they in pain,

did they like dancing, and how death arrived with a heart

full of malice and an ice pick in one hand.

I have no idea how she sees what she sees.

When I look at things I see only the seeable thing itself,

not the thing it was, not the thing it could be,

not the thing inside kept secret from the world

because the world would bring it harm.

I look at buildings and don’t see the wires and pipes

behind the concrete and plaster. I look at my front lawn

and don’t see the earthworm beneath it all

with its multiple hearts sobbing in the dark. Thus, I conclude

Dr. Brennan (author, FBI consultant, forensic anthropologist)

is a modern superhero and should be enshrined as such.

Her superpower is not the ability to solve murders,

but the ability to look at a pile of bones and see a person.

Today, most people are not able to see a person

even when looking at an actual person.

I’d like to think I’m better, but last week

some guy called me a libtard and for five seconds

I forgot he was a member of our species.

I hated him, just a little, but multiply that feeling

by a few thousand years, and you have the Problem

of Civilization. Last week, an old episode of Bones was on TV.

There was a scene where Brennan examined a skull

alone in her lab. I paused it because a single frame

reminded me of Caravaggio’s Saint Francis in Prayer.

In the painting, the saint looks down at the skull,

the skull stares up at the saint,

each one studying the other,

trying to solve that original mystery.

They’ve been this way for centuries.

The moon is showing
her naked butt-side as I walk home

asking, what is poetic about the moon

or back of something, the hung open

sky that is everything & nothing

like a moon or body, because

it's always poetry

when you say body or moon

& when you say butt

the line stops, music

split as though something inside

has broken, but the moon

broke long ago & we’ve forgotten.

So why is there a pleasure

in the wronging or the being

wronged? The toughness

in my great-grandmother's tongue

was like two moons once, avocado

& its seed, the body swallowing

generations to bear more

broken moons & when my love

grabs my ass so hard I think I feel

his hands reach the place where once

I carried life, there is a part of me

that looks up at the sky, mouth waxing,

body both the crater & the rock, body

both the birth & birthing, body because

when I say my   my                      my enough,

my body enough                    possession realigns,

when I say my body, my ba ba ba ba,

I hear my Babushkas

who told me your behind

is dirty told me poetry

is clean & shining & not

about the body, told me yours

is not a place that one should touch,

taught me touch

is everything & touch

is love & touch is what the moon

is made of, so when my love

touches my ass & I admit

I like it, the shame of it,

the dark side & the light, shame

the waxing reach, shame

the opening & everything

it carries, life

& shit & shit

inside of life &

when my son came out of me

they feared he had already taken

a shit inside, but the first thing to emerge

was not a scream, the first,

from his two, tiny showing

butt-sides was shining,

black coal, a stone,

a poem, a body,

a brazen new moon

out of the old.

Inside:                     springs : wood : lint : moths : hair : spiders :

                     cotton : condoms : salt : sweat : spit : so much

                                skin : blood : tea : cough syrup : carbonated water :

                     carbon : honey : paper : nails : nicotine : polish : ash : nitrogen:

                                the Russian red-gold wedding band she wore

                     until it wouldn’t fit her swelling

On top:                     the body America gave her : heavy : soft :

                     sinking : her back rounding metal and fabric

                                to canoe : her back won’t float : aching

                     from the past : aching for it more : they’re doing

                                x-rays she told me : waves and waves:

                     she’s always drowning in the dreams : the pain

                                is never there when I wake up she says :

                     insists it’s not the mattress : refuses something new :

                                tells me to stop blaming surface :

                     anxiety and immigration : tells me I don’t know how

                                to pity her : if my body can bear she says :

                     a body : an ocean : this bed can keep on bearing mine

Underneath:            the sales receipt

                                for Sealy Beautyrest

                                Plush Pillowtop Queen

                                delivery included

                                as a child she slept

                                on a wooden board

                                for her scoliosis

                                woke broken

                                termites in her hair

                                under her nails

                                between her gums

                                her mouth a bed

                                never again she said

                                will anybody tell me

                                what I must bear

                                beneath me

We called the ratchet chick

around the corner a bird

as if we ain’t wanna be free as her,

soar through our ghetto without watching

our feathers land on brown-green grass.

She knew how to make them fists fly,

slathered herself in Vaseline, an oil slick,

could knead a nose with her knuckles,

then get a girl to her knees in seconds.

And we watched. And we wondered how many times

we had to swing our arms, semi-circles in the air,

for our brown-skinned scapulas to part.

We wondered what it felt like up there.

If the wind brushed against her skin

like a hand or gushed like water,

if she ever got tired of the sky

like we got tired of the land.

Only a bird like her could be fly enough

to rock gold hoops and rock a man to sleep

with her warmth, shield him with her wings.

Make every man crane his body with want

as she flies by. We called her a bird like we ain’t

inhale the air she pierced to hold it

in our mouths, hoping the taste of flight

was just as freeing as the act. We called her a bird like

we ain’t wanna be the warm blood flowing through

a girl so capable of flying away from that place.

We lined up our bottles on the black TV stand,

displayed empty what was once brown,

insides sap sticky.

Everyone who came through

our dented door envied

our trophies.

We said to our friends,

yours ain’t got nothing on ours

meaning we know how to drown

better than you, can sink our misery

and challenge it to buoy,

dare our throats to stay afloat.

Our collection gone be filled up

by the end of the week,

we bragged, thought being the first

of our families

justified our wreckage.

Just so they wouldn’t be able to damage us.

Every time we gulped the last

of a drink, we’d arrange our bottles

according to height,

without saying how difficult

this life was, without saying how easy

it was to make the body

an anchor.

When I say it started with power

lines that were buried

below ground, I mean the children

I want are missing. They can’t be seen

without a microscope, yet even the shower

drain needs a respite from blood. I mean

the body is a basin I empty & empty

of birds. The word woman is stolen

from wife, not womb. See: to own;

to be owned. God only knows what I own

if nothing inside my body can be trusted.

The man I love lies inside the dark bend

between my past & future, where I’ve lived

as the city a thousand stoplights ago.

When I say I’ve been happy, I mean there

are some heroics I can muster

& marriage might not be one of them. Somehow,

every city looks habitable in hindsight. Like winter,

as it squares off against time again

tonight. When I say I blame myself, I mean

the wind will not be held. I mean the wind chimes

silver with hurt. I mean I love what I can’t have

as I love anything — full of greed, yet

unsteadily. See: the scattered horizon

of my heart. The flightless trees,

unbodied after the fall.

After                he tells my friends           how awful I was

how I laid there       unwelcoming           where are we fucking

going he’d said      as if he deserved all doors         flung open

another gap-toothed prayer for beer                     instead

of food                  instead of forgiveness           as I strained

to hold myself inside                the tree limbs            stitched

with sky             as I strained to believe that I was ever

young         that girl           sick with the wind’s exorcism

the moon            slutting               in a valley’s gullet

a man’s mouth           on each word          I couldn’t save

for myself            the dawns that arrived like shame

to settle in the trees      I’ve said nothing about

that night the dark the trees the sharp glancing pain

that came & came & came               how I couldn’t stand

on my own for hours             or was it years

my body   mulched              mistaken         for an invitation

an entryway          I shouldn’t have had to enter

this story      alone          this sad this sorry     starved

lash-less      I’ve never made a wish        on anything

I’ve lost           I wish  instead        for a night

that could be safe          from all this dark

“Cremator On,” push.

Om Namo Narayanaya

Mantra for our keeping.

Om Namo Narayanaya

Spoon parting corpse lips.

Om Namo Narayanaya

Condole the mortician.

Om Namo Narayanaya

Gangajal :: water.

Tulsi leaves :: spades.

Jasmine :: fragrance mask.

Six pinda :: rice around

the derigored body.

Black sesame :: fists.

Chandan :: sandalwood.

Soul :: barefoot on cold floor.

Kumkum :: turmeric.

Embalmer’s grey :: patience.

Ghee :: fuel.

Gangajal :: water.

Om Namo Narayanaya

Refrain :: the mangled tongue.

Om Namo Narayanaya

Hammer the nerve.

Om Namo Narayanaya

“Creamator On,” push.

Om Namo Narayanaya

Flesh to fire.

Om Namo Narayanaya

Gangajal :: water.

Om Namo Narayanaya

Gangajal :: water.

We remember each other from where you hang

from ambiguous suburban maple. At night, displaced

in sleepless leaves, you fall, an unripe fig.

 

 

 

Fruit falls because of our gaze.

Gravity is an angry, unseen thing.

 

 

 

I am tamarind between your teeth —

chewed, bled sour.

 

 

 

I flinch in your vein.



Once boarded on the plane, I buckle.

Turbulence reminds — I have never

piloted a thing. Mother taught me

every sound I know, still,

I say she would not understand

my writing. In the agarbatti

smoke I shun, she mores against

rebellion, scolds in proverb

about the dog who smiles shaded

under a moving cart’s awning

thinking he pulls what moves. Gada

taley kutaru chale, badho

bhar mahre mathe. Moving

sounds absent the signified. What

meaning detains my tail wag? Forgive

that I’ve run from air that carries.

I fainted, and now wake, beside a treadmill

in this asylum of treadmills. There she is,

again, wordless but the mantra above me,

maala in hand, seeds shedding

petals I admire, and in the spirit

of my country, claim mine.

I walked you out into the fortress of living biology. I cramped biology to the toilet, and there was a lot of blood. I took biology to the pharmacy and said, Give me more of these eggs please. I took my womb then to the moon and said, Don’t I matter? I took the moon into a picture, and I drew her yellow. I made the sun stream my nose and glass my glasses so that my eyes were so dry I felt that dry. I felt dry inside, my eyes. Everywhere I looked I could see your skin. I could imagine touching that skin. I took my fertility to the grass and offered my basket and said, Let’s have a picnic. And I made tea and scones and they were amazing. I can really bake. I can really make this stand for the gut feeling you have when leaning over the deathbed of the neighbor of the son of the bed of the death. I took the balloons over to the birth instead. I took the present over to the birth. I took the friends and the fire and the grass and the picnic again. I took myself and then I left myself. I left radiant and figured and lost and yes, lost, that’s what it is, it’s loss.

The babies hold themselves to my chest, a bouquet really, an arousal of new milk and pee. I think about them from time to time. I mean they’re holding so tightly to my chest, and I’ve already gotten rid of the sling. No chance of falling really. This is how I set it up, though, all of these babies. To deal with the anxiety of caring to deal with loss. The chance of the daisy or rose or lilac ripped away for my little ones they will be so many. The babies and their eyes. Always a stare but their mouths. The holding. The playground the slide the playing. The ball. The hit the knot in the one baby’s head and slight scrape. The other babies fall asleep but this one keeps awake. The babies and their brains. Their vision is developing. The tumbling and the brain against the skull. The babies in my sleep a dream a capsule a must. My sister’s baby on my chest. The babies are spiders. The babies devour. The corpse flower now to blossom the baby. The five-year-old baby at it again. The claw marks on my chest. The cradling and the nails and the napping and then again. Cut the tiniest one’s nails block of feet. The tallest baby resembles a statue. And I let him go. I do that and what a bee, a lark, see him in this area see them all. What a different kind of door to the self are these babies, carapaces of a self, a bug.

I broke time in half because it didn’t matter. I took photos on my phone of my daughter’s hand my hand my grandmother’s hand. I carried phone lines out to the farm and then made calls, kept the phone in my pocket, tied my thoughts back through the window. I stopped and had lunch with my grandmother on her farm on my way to LA and she said, those 10-lane highways oh my oh my. I stumbled over my peas and carrots and smiled and never returned. I didn’t return to the photos of the hands with their furrowed knuckles. I keep them stored but the clouds already look like this, hands all over a sky, clenching at the probability of blue. But it’s luminescence that I see while driving, staring at the cut of woods, making that tree so distinct it’s really the light the low temperature. That something can shimmer up like that, a leaf, the glowing of what. I want it then, time, make the grandmother the daughter the all of it a blessing in disguise trying to hold it with their fingers and whatever hand I touch I think I could know her. That any highway will not be smarter than a grandmother. A dash a road to return the turn of sky the line a highway something like that a second. Detect our brief hour all dried up in this, no, her land.

I’ve come at this all daughter and dear and wrong. The advice we give, how flat and flatter we could feel or thoughts that slip underneath a wisp a what. How we drink the tear ducts of playgrounds together little one on my knee. How we are wet with intention and hold pale thumbs. Think about it, this eggshell we’re giving it away so easily in the pot stir it. Think about it, the inner bones of the thing. I’ll walk with my new body then in this park, and it’s new again. Say it’s summer, and the beast of the air holds my hand. Speckle me with sweat, sweet one, slushed and following my heels. I can’t wait to tumble this year. I can’t wait to cyclone the mud on my arms play it. Inside this tire the air is filled and waiting. I’ll dream a sea a future without a continent without you. I’ll hinge knee-deep a map to the wall to where I will go and proclaim that nothing, everything, is wrong.

Code red
means that we have to pause our lesson

have to file into some hidden space

means that we musn’t talk though

they all giggle — try to check their phones

& light the whole room up from beneath

a spooky sleepover trick where we’re all

lit from below — become the ghosts they ask

me to tell stories about — please tell us

a scary story ms detiberus & I shush

them wait for the fake gunmen to shake

the door & scare us into silence

this means it was a drill after all just

another disaster practice — reminder

that our world is still a series of stacked

spheres — glass blown so thin uneven

footsteps down the hall could break us

no such thing as a safe space — maybe

there never was & I have fooled myself

thinking this body could be shield or brave

enough — bodies warm still on top of other

bodies down the street in charleston

up the road from where I was baptized

in newtown — in orlando in vegas so many

frantic bodies running away from

no I won’t think of that now in the dark

office bolted shut — not sitting in traffic

after the last bell — the armed school officer

waving me on — not when I hear the echo

of dropped books tunneling towards me —

instead I’ll dream the red of my country

as poppy fields — countless unblinking

eyes refusing to turn away — my fists not

idle but worth a damn — red roses

gift for the beloved means I’m yours

forgive me — prayer of the penitent

color of the heavy heart beating with

a knowledge before instinct before

duck & cover & quiet & please —

a bullet whistles incessantly

at some precise height,

its movements predicted

so accurately I know

when to step a meter

leftwards, when to duck

my head an inch, when to push

away from me the child

that asks for my embrace.

When I learned there was more

than one language, I raised a finger to my tongue

in wonder of what it lacked. When I learned

there was more than one language, my neck warmed

from embarrassment. My parents had kept secrets.

I began to suspect everything of concealing

idiom. Outside, trees would shiver codes

in long shadows. Kitchen knives would glint sequences

when held. A boy understands most what he touches.

I heard cielo and pictured a horse-hair bow on taut strings.

Luz was the verb for all that was and would be taken.

My children have yet to tongue the empty space

in their mouths — that special gap histories fall out of,

their cavities of singing, their cavity singular.


Into what flesh do the teeth of a nation sink?

Is it the flesh of the spirit pinned to my body

like a sad insect? And why does my laughter

sound like the language of a contract?

Will the forests, as they’re saying,

erode into dunes? Is the night as placental

as I imagine it? What happens in the silence

of a father’s empty promise? Of a Father’s?

In the second it took me to hit the ground,

after my brother pushed me from our roof,

was the look on his face one of regret

or discovery? Does the disambiguation

matter, now? The stars of ahistoricism

burn bright tonight, don’t they, as children

wish upon the burning acres in countries

that their parents mispronounce?

Who will be around to substantiate the past

with all these music legends dying?

God is drunk on human epiphanies again.

There he goes, lobbing them down toward earth —

doesn’t he recognize all the damage he’s doing?

Will he ever explain himself?

Instead of a father
a volcano. A girl puzzling through long division between eruptions. A girl working hard

to discern the intervals between disturbances. It was a kind of having to duck from the

pumice. It was like the chunk of anthracite in your 3rd grade classroom, the one the

teacher couldn’t stop talking about. It was like the chained dogs at Pompeii — it was that

pitch, one of the many greatest hits of the 70s. Steadfast like breathing in the finest

particles, the ones that lodge in your blood. Like a cubic mile of ash and mud and rock. A

seismic jolt followed by an explosion. It was like a heat surge scorching every eukaryotic

cell, its Golgi apparatus, its smooth endoplasmic reticulum and its rough endoplasmic

reticulum, each you kernel singed.



This is Trump country I say to myself,

turning right on Rio Vista, left on Skagit

into a muddy parking lot. These

must be the ones who are angry

the teachers have placed a sign on every door,

puerto. Because a notebook is a cuaderno,

a nurse an enfermado. The teachers

are mostly white, but everywhere

there’s encouragement: You got this, sister.

Take this moment to remind yourself

you’re awesome, everywhere salmon

heading upstream, bulletin boards

plastered with A+ papers and tests.

In Mrs. Agosto’s fifth grade class,

the children write odes to artichokes

and avocados, an increasingly-bruised

banana. Madeline calls me over to her group:

Can I have this yam, like, to eat? How do you

cook it? On a stove? Words unloading

from her mouth like cases of canned goods

at the food bank: We’re living in our car I’m

hungry we have no money can I have it.

Red carrot, she had written. Elf hat. Viking’s horn.

It is as if you came from an underground universe.

It was a fat worm, orange poop, unicorn horn,

but mostly, Mr. President, it was food.

Surpassing danger
has always been impossible,

the body a spruce-root basket,

a twined bag woven from husks,

though hard for me to say, this I,

this sugar cube of silence, motionless

plinth rising just east of where it gets

ugly. Don’t know it, can’t know the yellow

and black police tape surrounding

the Quik-Mart, traffic nuisance on my way

to visit a friend in Renton, danger I drive by,

don’t live by, tap my break at the four-way,

sail by Rainier Beach High, Henderson

and Cloverdale, streets equaling stay away,

not my music, not my winter lion. Surpassing

anything has almost always been a lie,

though the catch is the almost, keeps

ice crystals from forming on a life.

When the storm drains drain in reverse,

seawater gushing into the streets,

when a red moon tide is not what’s

causing the seepage from underground,

when five-star service, when having it all

cannot contain the inundation, when water

creeps up driveways, under security gates,

floods Lexus SUVs and Mercedes,

100s of millions will know surpassing danger

is like surpassing one’s impossibles,

one’s moon-jelly self. Whose dead

will float by like the bodies loosened

by Hurricane Agnes in the wake

of the Susquehanna? Not my people

or their epic poems, not my thesis

on the history of the bird, not a one

of my besties, my darlings. Not my beloved.

Or were they penguins? 3 million

boiled into lamp oil

                            & their beaks sold

as children’s masks during summer festivals.

Listen, I don’t know if the last part is true.

My mind adds extra details to every story.

Like when my dad buys kitchen knives

at garage sales, it feels ominous.

He says, no one can ever have enough good knives.

I’m sure people sell used kitchen knives all the time.

             Serrated blades are a hot seller, amiright?

But the year we got a dog,

my dad’s coworker stabbed his wife

until she played dead

& the cops never found that knife,

so I worry about the history of everyday objects.

I shop at Target since vintage & antique

are ways of saying pre-haunted.

I get the heebie jeebies easy. I have goose bumps

thinking about the smell of antique promise rings.

Listen, I shouldn’t be hypocritical. I’ve told all my lovers

that my body is full of ghosts,

                                              but who hasn’t, right?

I’ve told them to please not touch

the scar on my thigh.

                                It’s from a hunting knife.

I’ve told them antique shop rules apply:

you break, you buy.

When I’m driving, I begin wondering about cars & dogs

left on the roadside.

                            Especially those near rivers & lakes,

would I ever leave mine abandoned like that?

I read once that over half a million people disappear

every year in the U.S.

                             & there’s not enough milk cartons

for all of their faces because of millennials

             who’ve ruined the milk & cereal industry.

I’ve heard the mind forgets trauma

if it loves its owner enough.

But, listen, that one probably isn’t true

                     I read it on a message board in 2006.

When I can’t sleep, I read wikiHows

about erasing myself from the internet.

It’s easier than you would think

to leave & never be found. It’s easier

to start new, as someone else sometimes.

If someday my car is found abandoned by the river,

my cell phone vibrating in the knife drawer,

would you listen for me late at night

putting my key in the door?

Would you believe me if I told you I left

something important at home & came back,

put my head on your chest & just listened?

unraveled yarn, scribbled egg, broken slinky bend

on the pavement, inverse hills, nonsense circuit, bowed

grass, stick figure intestine, graffiti teeth, tumbleweed

string, sky writing, o throw, ladle spill, blood roll on

pollen loop, saddle stitch, curled spaghetti, ash

death spring, infinite e, chalk chain, unending bone-

egg spring, yarnstick, e bend, slinky ash, unending bone bend

the pavement, chalk ash, scribbled death loop, infinite lasso

Holes in drywall made by a fist

are uneven, erode. They leak —

steadily, steadily — dust.

What arguments gave rise to them

you ask — these craters pocking walls to the side of windows.

Holes make a living room appear askew,

deranged. Whoever wanted out couldn’t get there.

Or maybe they were made to scare a lover —

she froze, amazed, the first time he swung

for the wall, jaw clenched & on impact

the fight flooded out of her, limp

now, not even screaming, dazed,

taking in the concrete nature of her

fear, a dense & solid thing

she knows must fit inside her brain

despite its size, refrigerator weight,

its trick of slipping

into dreams she’ll have all week

of dust, propelled in storms

across the base, the sure report

of her erasure —

Blue veins rising in my hands

like so much plumbing. Feeling merely

mortal, I’ve seen dog hair matted

in margins of our bathroom tile

as though for the first time, as though

it were someone else’s brief.

I’ve taken a dog’s worth off the dryer’s net,

made myself a beard, if only in mind.

And caught in my canine beard, this barking:

joint language of dog and human tongues.

Tongue is lengua; lengua is a word for meat

my father had to talk me into trying.

Children, so sure what not to eat,

will stick their fingers into anything.

What do Z’s kids have that mine don’t,

except bodies, souls? My once-was

wasn’t ever fully here

— mist of a whisper, breath

you make appear on frigid glass.

The breath you make.


city dogs explore the ranch’s circumstance,

ice-green walking stick on river rock

slick with liquid centuries

lion slipping from the rescue zoo

on streams of August breeze

suppertime endless for insects unmoved

by citronella

never to fall

hero to the flames

this music waits

to be spelled out

just as there are snakes unseen

in obvious places             Michael’s precious grass

engraved by their design

what has solitude caught

in its jeweled glimmer-web

of amplifying chirp and thrum

but solitude

glance down the creek canyon

underneath a hairshirt of cedar

see striated limestone arcing

out of sight             an actual homeland

nest of the heron’s millions of blue years

o to be a crow with talons mean enough

to hold on among your qu’rans of miraculous naphtha

among the kuwaits of panegyrics

and stars bad weather cracks open like eggs

o fakirs yes I’m a muslim but then autumn arrives

go on revoke my alphabet my luculent uniforms

I have been ratified by explosions

and sulfur mines caving in in the eardrums of waves

lianas overheard

by the geysers of my blood and amber secrets

of myrrh and slingshots

the pistolwhips of the sun the flagrant blows

of boa’s belches

of peril’s imbecility

my foam and guano body

my bucking cutthroat

soul

rebukes the street flowering like a scar

with umbilical pollen

this is not the weapon

this nursery of incurable words

that slays me slaps and crucifies me

following a cetacean sleep

I am an Ursa Major ramadan inhaling

a casserole of bitter grubs

but you rooted around in the beriberi swellings

dissected the vast river of rubber nights

my thoughts wore down into cups of clotted blood

I spit my heart out

and my name the fig tree whitened by mosquitos’ sight

the inverse of saying stamens

like your flesh chanted out by wounds

o shoddy argan tree of barbarism

I toil

in the wet eggy mess of your pupils

I circle and undo your hennaed smile

wood pigeon with dragonfly wings totting its era

with a beak of gas and hoarded bullets

you sprain red my daybreak

macerated in the alcohol of brawls

with an acrid whiff of awkward reigns

which brings to me the flutes’ final mirage

and the fire-hecklers in the wind’s tonsure

mustang that leers

at each chest missing its epitaph

o to be and to be of your bloods

to gnaw at that snitch the monsoon

white of circles (your lymph bothers my obelisk eyes

but this pond frightens the blue ducks in yours)

and leaning badly on the clouds’ teeth

I am the night that denies your privateering

for one last drink of strong moon and trances

my eyes of red oil carry you into these circles

flounders burst

bursts the absinth into yellow mango tree

in your eyes bound to the song of a heaven creeping

among your old earthworm faces

where is the albumen weather I love the weather of shadows cracked

where my mercurochrome frosted-night eyes cry out

the dictated star

that comes alive in the marsupial fingers of music

white of circles (here rolls here the cry no longer soothes)

of tranquil crime of inaudible circles

I am the belt the coffle the thunder

I am the rifle the grenade I am the eagle

and the worm-eaten void of your face at a distance

We carry the old rifles of the colonized

we stress our rage until our faces are twisted

against the ardor of nudity against the scorpionic sun

we carry the bomb our single torso swaying

we honor the sawdust of our navels by the harbor

too hard those old hibernian kings OUT OUT

Stiff hide

hide

a tambourine my fear a jackal corralling and wiping the mucus

of the dead

newly recruited into my parricidal administration!

my flute enlists in and finishes

the ambush your rebellion won’t pass by

busted island of my friend Césaire a Hun according to Faye (was he wrong?)

An autonomous void according to the stage and a black musically enamored with neuroses

according to

Sartre

preposterous! A friend descended from psychodermic metal!

ha! the forest eons ago

dead with no pandemonium THE LITTLE METAPHYSICAL TURN!

I throw ferns into the kettled marl I tempest

I light up Africa I spider I mite

my alcoholic snow and my little cup

I find my skin under a derided heaven I slip

between it all

the black.

I set revving

plagues beautiful as your women

in the depths charred by starless asthma

and I lone runt enter among the worst stegomyiae

to where the sea hacks up its blue song which a jackal

disembowels under the arcane anger of your udder

no

longer a dove!

it multiplies it is white it is

standing up

did I say

blood without Bandung

so poorly argued such is fife but when

then will this hydrocarbonic vine explode?

my language stumbles violet over it my isthmus language!

we drag behind us

the childhood of spiders (MUTILATED)

country of exile broken thirst old oaths!

I insurge against myself It spins yarn from the wasps

of the nefariously beautiful black slut-bird

while time grinds gold ingots to dust!

  Dragging the asphalt on a sweltering midday one dark shadow

passes along

          The shadow is calm like a digital clock

          A swarm of air appears from some unknown place

          pours over the shadow like barley tea from a kettle

          The odor of ditched slaughter

          (So it was an animal)

Plugs are unthreading

from every part of my body

suspended like umbilical cords

I open the door and go outside

Foul air

clusters at the end of each plug

people everywhere

walk with plugs suspended from their bodies

charged by the world’s rage

in the spaces between

pebbles clothed in the air float buoyantly


Can’t you please press

in a bit more?

Enter so that my breath stops, no, so that my body chokes

My equinox sails, my wails,

portholes drilled for dawn,

here I am, schooner-man with skin of wood!

Who will deck out my core, to the hatches,

who will flesh out my aloe words?

No, don’t cover me with only a screecher sail —

to hear me, you need to reach me, o so fast

far from pitch, law is ditched. So many voices

squawk in my royal sail blood: talk, bird!

The sunken coolie, the skinned man,

cut short, cut short, listen!

A fallen man become flesh!

I want to go to the grand bazaar

to seek at last the saffron of shadows

o refrain from your refrain

the hoist of spices clears the remains

o refrain from your refrain

for these bodies heaped on the wind:

cries of cumin: cries my journey’s route

cries of thyme: cries my future

cries of coriander corpses awaiting return.

And the bids of roots chased away

my terrified dreams all the way to hell.

At the prow of wordless waves

I remember your shadow

passing over these statues

to read the real death.

My flesh is colder,

your dream in miniature, more real.

Wait, through the breeze.

Wait!

Before I depart

through the azure door.

I am

the only runaway slave

who didn’t flee the volcano’s crush

when coral raged

and the sky collapsed —

the only runaway slave

who didn’t escape.

I placed my flesh

in burning mountains.

I told the oceans

my cry is made of salt!

Because the sun

delivers shade to my door.

Star, cythère cythère panaris.

O night skies, so clear

that when I lay me down in the sea

I’m released to my ultimate country.

Your two hearts forever apart

make us remember this strange endless time:

not once in my uprooted life

did I suffer from so much forgetting.

But in the gleam of glabrous chins,

I stopped all the chitchat;

we started to hunt

for Mira, Aldebaran, so we’d no longer forget.

I no longer have a piquant shadow

far from all those names coated in ash:

who danced before Queen Apsara

nacreous hips, spark of masala?

Star, s’y taire s’y taire panaris!

souvenirs, my god. when the mind will happily wipe itself clean in the effort to forget. a couple of soldiers behind the lines at amiens range through the empty houses. they take a beer jug pocket the lace-trimmed choir robe of an altar boy. into their heavy field kits goes the loot. they do not know their history. they go through the houses and see their history but they cannot understand: the spoon on the table the chair by the door the dress in the suitcase. there is a howitzer on the beer jug. there are howitzers at the front. tomorrow the front. tomorrow the things in the kit bag in the ditch in the muck. tomorrow the lacy robe in stiffened fingers. tomorrow the house will be empty the chair overturned. a cat will come. tomorrow blood will trickle from the wound the soldier will lie in the sinkhole rain will fall. grass will grow over him and the robe in his kit. the altar boy who no longer is one will go over the meadow that no longer is one. will look for something find something he wasn’t looking for. take it with him.

i saw something in a museum. it was a flagon from the suburbs of rome. memoriae it said felicissimae filiae. felicissima went to the baths filled rejuvenating water into a little bottle. felicissima look at me from across time let me see your white shoulders. filia the man who is reflected in the glass of the case next to me was he the father you were so precious to? the sloping forehead the light hair broad wrists. i could invite him for a water at the museum café while you wait here until my children are grown. here says one to the other is where our mother was with another man. no says the other they opened the windows it was a different room she wasn’t here. do you remember says one when i had my first kiss i never wanted to wash my face again. do you remember says the other the time when in the mirror my face looked to me like the face of someone i had seen dead on the news.

herodotus writes of the cloaks of the scythians made of a number of scalps sewn together. that has little to do with us. unless you consider hunting trophies. just as carefully prepared and presented. they hang over the dining room table and the marriage bed but you never hear the word enemy in either place. all the more frequently though you’ll hear the word for a fascination with the other. hi medea says jason you are an awesome woman you are — a real battle broad come into my bed and help me to bring the golden fleece home. o medea says jason — in his europe after she has killed their children — you don’t understand a thing. you have no idea how to cope you are — a beast is what you are. see that you get out of here and go back to that barbarian place of yours beyond the pontus.

What is that there

it is winging against its tether

with every glance strikes

at anything that

could be called beautiful

if the beast were not kept

on such a short leash if it did not

wolf down its morsels

like impositions

beast that cannot say fatherland

rears up at the end of the leash and barks

wrong are sentences that arise

in light of this particular bend

in the river and particularities

of the soil or how

buildings arrange themselves

all of that drives quickly into the beast

not in language where doors

are covered with doors

this love a fox without sentences

gives tongue

fox from the raised hide

(are there picturefoxes evil cunning)

you were always

too small to be a real foe

hair bristled on your back

patches of your coat in my binoculars

think of petting

your way of making it through

all traps without becoming a prize

after the shot and ricochet

a long gaze as if arising

from the bullet being there

the same

fox chasing your tail

Words exit you

of attack and defense

as if it were bait you pull your tail

through the logic of my sentences

fox who unsettles my thinking

with your creeping

after places (ring road

weir and clearing)

that are so temptingly graspable

so much more than that which

with no place pursues an afterimage green

and wandering of your color

a text of deception

but with real places

so the speech

catches its own tail

It doesn’t matter what fills you, your palms what breasts,

what depth, what deep breath,

it doesn’t matter what you’re silent about

or who you talk to in your sleep, they don’t hear it;

calm down, and as if you were waiting for something

important, wait for morning,

turn to the wall, imagine

you’re sleeping, like the pictures burnt into the film

you forgot about — anyway — beach, smiles,

forest wind, forest.

Winter Saturday mornings, when we don’t have anything to do.

Simple, matte, heavy porcelains.

A comfortable chair. The putting on of a necklace.

The snow in the silver antique ashtray on the windowsill.

Liberating, incessant laughter that lasts for minutes at a time.

The seagulls flying above the bridges at night.

When you don’t think you have a lighter, but then you find one in your pocket.

Watching other people fish.

Pears. Currants. The quiet of agave.

Taking someone’s shirt off for the first time in your life.

The dead streets at Christmastime. A good cup of coffee.

The trace of a brushstroke on a five-hundred-year-old painting. Knowing anything by heart.

Traveling alone on an empty bus. Old action films. Old newscasts.

Being the first one in the car to spot the ocean.

Looking up at the North Star. Making the bed. Waking up hungry.

The naivety of centuries-old lexicons. When you’d rather walk home.

When this park, in which I suffocate at night

like a lost bug in a dead girl soldier’s lung,

lights up from the rising sun.

Bring the cup of horchata, the trays of pineapple

the women with rainbow handkerchiefs

deploying flags of the sun.

Oh Simidor!

In the four corners of the courtyard

I’ve thrown my shelled fists

and the call has not extinguished.

The children bathed in the den

of green leaves,

and the elderly in heavy cuffs of snail shells

drink orégano tea

from jars of baked earth.

Oh Simidor!

I’ve given my portion of song,

my portion of song to the sacrifice.

And now, I wait

for the day to stay in my city,

but if it’s with precision

that the day stays,

the portion is no less precise,

for each one, its doves,

its sheath of garlic.

Bring the full decanters, the ripe bananas,

and the jarred water.

Open the dance,

warm bodied virgins of lemon balm.

The moment of trance arrives

when the crowds dance among the midday roses.

Come down, Simidor!

Come down from my mountains

the madness of my artificial fires.

Yes it’s exactly when the day stays,

it’s no less precise to celebrate,

the celebration of man, celebration of hearts,

bring the grenadine, honey pudding, the rugs,

call to the children and opens the gates.

Oh Cantarella!

I’m not talking about any celebration,

more like an actual promise

growing in the highest branches of the trees that extend

on the green footprints of a duskless day.

I’m telling you, harvest the sheaf, eat the rind

perfumed by the earth.

The day of a hundred thousand kisses is coming

in which the birds will build their nests

in prisons.

Oh Cantarella!

All the crowned heads,

all the peaks of joy,

the voices in deep choruses,

the wings freed, bells raised in the air,

proclaiming the right of the first born light.

And it’s a vast explosion of music from the highest sap.

The man recognizes himself and declares: victory.

Bearer of ember and greenery,

here a village of victors

precipitates the fall of clarity;

the one who keeps in vain is the promise,

won’t comprehend

the signs meaning.

Here is a triumphant town,

open the celebrations splendor

(not of today, but of yesteryear and legend).

Which is the voice that might speak,

which is the voice that says:

victory is over the city

and in the pigeons throats

because the spectrum of living rock

is trusted to purity.

Let’s return to one memory —

time was made from the nightmare

of night of man of iron:

Oh misery over the city!

Nightmares and noises of steel,

endless over the sand.

I’m talking about the night when the star was wounded —

now that day is installed,

here is a town newly born

precipitating the slopes of clarity,

and I, a poet and citizen, penetrate the crowd,

in the fires

of artificiality and the song of the flags.

✼
Here I can take a stab at an image: some trees that float this side of the storm. Then, an enormous bellows that sharpens the fury of existence, even of that which doesn’t breathe.

The letter f is effective, even if the consonants sound off.

On the floor, the clothes come and go with the tags still on.

That’s how I can start, but I doubt slowly and with a couple of glasses of wine in hand. I don’t know; that way we’d be only a step away from the papers of someone sentenced to life, even if it’s been written about before.

And now isn’t really the time to look too closely into any corner.

You need to let yourself be carried away, the way you’ve always done, to let your name keep shedding weight. That’s where the poem should come from. But no. Someone said: it was right there, under the sugar packet. I read it in a comic strip of random phrases. It’s true, even now I can hear a young girl saying: “don’t make me tell you twice.”

And very close, an old man whose hands hurt.

 

✼✼
 

T. S. pulled the name of his sad song from a furniture store in, apparently, St. Louis. Then there was Ovid, Dante, Baudelaire, Gérard de Nerval …

Me, I’d like to have written The Celebrated Mistakes, Juan de Zabaleta’s miscellany. Or Robert Burton’s Anatomy.

We’ve gone into the neo-Byzantine Church of St. Emmanuel and St. Benedict. Corner of Alcalá and Columela. We wanted to see the faithful. The benches, their backs, their alpaca coats. There are lots of kids, and they kneel. In here there are good houses with warm dessert.

Of course: it’s Sunday and the grandparents have made sweet chestnut cream and stuffed hens.

The priest says we can go in peace. We leave, and the cold enters our mouths as fast as starch. We — she tells me — know the reason the sky is so blue.

All you need to know is how to plant, the sermon said. I couldn’t disagree more, but everybody hushes and takes millstones as communion.

One day, leaving school, I ran into Brother Luís’s gardener. Flustered and in a hurry, he left me with two pink Altea tomatoes. I wanted to ask him about the Tagus, but a jackhammer prevented me. With salt and a little oil, the salt of fish scales.

 

✼✼✼
 

That’s poetry; so is the rest, Eduardo Espina said.

I keep going down the street, but not always down. Madrid is a city of miraculous unevenness. From Canalejas Street, you can see the dressing rooms of the sky.

Today is like that, and the birds know it.

Under a single coat, two girls pass me on the street, talking intimately and smiling together, not looking at each other.

The horse chestnuts cast no shadow: hanged men sat down to watch the boats pull in.

The verse should pass me going down the street, immediate as smoke.

And that is the poem, what it will always be: an attempt.

Yes, I know: Keats only wanted words so he could write them down. That was his mistake.

His epitaph says it all: Here lies One Whose Name was writ in Water.

My doula taught me

          that certain herbs elevate:

                    albahaca tied with palm frond

to loosen the slingshot

     of the windpipe.

                    Manzanilla for days

          when the ghost demands a dirge

and submersion.

                    Some also burn

          though she never gave them names.

Instead, she pointed to a dark

          shed and warned me to look

                    for the same absence in others

then hold firmly to the spade.

 

                                                  ✼
 

There was no beginning

          and no end.

                    A field hand

          stood sentry

                    at the river’s pulse,

half his nerve shaved off

          the bone,

          his family dangling

from the notch of his collar.

There was no need

          to pose his limbs

into a rail tie.

          He was already dusking.

                    But he roared

and the cavalcade

          limped.

                                                  ✼
 

There was no wall

          raised to behead

escaping animals,

          those in the brush

                    and those pleading

for rest.

There was no end

          and no beginning.

The same insistence

          carved the delta

less elegant

          than the river.

The same willingness

          to stamp a hierarchy

into the river bed.

                                                 ✼
 

My father was born

          with bombardment in his mouth,

jailed and beaten in Mexico

          for calling the Virgin a whore.

He arrived and was promptly broken in

          by a sheriff’s pistol. His body serape

protecting us from all harm.

When he left, cicadas wept.

When the jeep wheels trampled

          his grave, he woke with a siren so loud

the river unfurled its ears.

Who knew the weather

          would surrender its fists?

                                                  ✼
 

Someone in a uniform

lit a match

          forced it down

a gravity

of throats.

And there was no congratulatory

fire when the wall rose.

And there was no light

          when butterflies cracked

against steel teeth

          their bodies graffiti

of warning.

There was no beginning

          and no end.

Wherever there is fire

there is mourning.

                                                  ✼
 

The river’s twin:

          a giant coppery stag.

                    To build it

fingers were pried

          from their daily devotion

forced to read

                    the manual

          of their own maiming.

          The dead in their festoons

dotting the highway.

                    My mother rising

like a monstrance

          baking pan de muerto

crushing pepper and cumin

                              on her headstone

as if she had never disappeared.

          She said the wind

would vole into a voice

                    plant its bugle

in every ear.

          My father rolled

                    another cigarillo

in his grave.

          He told us the water

would still be there

                    when we disappeared.

There is no beginning

          and no end.

And who will feed

                    the new monstrosity?

And who will raise

          the offspring

of tickseed and steel?

slowly I let the owl escape

          and after the owl light

that would fill the body

          in place of pain

a cotton knuckle

          fills a peacock’s house

its bright plumage

          frozen in place

          in lieu of skin

ash that sparks

          when a guitar is too mournfully held

in place of muscle

          warmth of desert floor

rock loving rock but not demise

          nothing dark

in place of the fist

          that animates

a slab too stubborn

          to be rolled away

a bolt is built

          into its skull

and so it stays shut

          no one, nobody, goes there

without a blessing to offer

 too much of our blood is pleading

                    alternate refuge for submerge

                                                                          which is muscle unknit

                              a whole other person without prop

                                                  most of the body is empty

          an unwilling lock

                                                            every doorway capable of closure

                              every bone capable of rupture

                                                                           a person is a collocation of strikes

                    not of mercies

                              mercies reflected in broken glass

                                                            are by definition wingless

          a missing wing reveals the anchor

                              two wings loosed from their bark

                                                                                          form a confessional

                              most of the body held together by breath

          lifeline, from birth to indivisibility

                                        once shattered, shattered

                                                                                               remade, a pox

                                                  what is there to trawl

                    reflection: a salvage

                                                                      birds rush to unpiece collapse

                                                  buzzard, vulture

                              the dove, surprisingly

with urn-like wings

I want something to happen but

I just don’t know what — with a head

full of smoke, nothing fills me up.

Pears, persimmons, ice, lust

lust — Maybe I need

a woman, a motherless dandelion

to rub emptiness with me.

In the perpetual dinner party of my brain

the guests are tired. They want to go home.

I’m hooking them at the door with my remembers

flirting with the hostages

at my all-hours discothèque:

One fingering sheet

music with her born again

virgin bible study. One kneeling

before a toilet in a bathroom full of SSRIs. One kissing

her dying father and one ignoring his call.

One spread out and reading Nietzsche

amid styrofoam takeout containers. One licking

a mushroom with Dan or Ben or Tom. One arching

on the Persian carpet. One tattooing a kite to her ribs.

One sliding a fishnetted knee between another’s

stockinged legs. Us girls, sad and high.

We never know who is big or bad or wolf

until he has loved or left or made a meal out of us.

I am tired of being devoured.

I make a model of my sorrow, and kiss her.

I’ve been waiting on my misery like a man who won’t come.

I used to live on crumbs

but I too am a wants-to-be-touched thing

that wakes late at night

late at night in the house where no one keeps me.

While I’m ten fingers deep

in this ashtray of an existence,

he’s good at living.

This infuriates me:

driving off to Little Dume

to swim in the ocean by himself.

It’s the smartest thing to be —

kind to yourself. I want to learn

from a man like that — how to drown

the phantom selves

creeping up like sea foam —

how to thrust

spectacularly

into the singular

body      so the ocean fears me.

To remove all contents or possessions from

                              To entertain

                              To empty completely

                              A long narrow shape (especially of a woman)

                              To rob, ravage, ransack, raid, reave, rifle

                              To fire a bullet from a rifled gun

                              To rip the sheets from a bed

                              A sequence of images telling a story

                              To tear the thread or teeth from

                              To lay bare, devastate, sack

                              To tease

                              Example: prisoners, down to their underwear

                              A main road in or leading out of a town

                              To dispossess, leave bare of coverings

                              To barefoot the child always drawn from behind

                              To press the eggs from (a splayed fish)

                              To gut

                              To peel bark and branches from (an olive tree)

                              To excise the midrib from (its leaves)

                              To milk (a cow) to the last drop

                              To deprive someone of

                              To confiscate

                              To take one’s clothes off, shed one’s clothes, unclothe, disrobe, naked,

                              expose oneself, reveal oneself, uncover oneself, denude oneself; delude

                              oneself

                              To divest

                              To unfasten the fittings of or take apart (a machine)

                                        to inspect it, to adjust it

                              Example: a tank piece by piece

                              To hundred dollar bill

                              To slip out of

                              To dismantle, disassemble, demolish, deny

                              To take to pieces, take to bits, take apart, break up

                              To recall Al-Dawayima, Deir Yassin, Hula, Tarshiha, Jish

                              To clear, clean out, loot, pillage, plunder

                              To, often polemically, insist the nuance that exists between a “battle” and

                                        a “massacre”

                              To use for or involve in performance

                              To concrete the tents thereby creating permanent refugees

                              To paint upon a camp entrance: Gernika 1936 — Palestina 1948

                              To make the body believe lies about itself

                              To hear over a megaphone in one’s native tongue today is judgment day

                              To sell off for profit

                              To scatter like the people of Sheba

                              To desire no sense of permanence

                              To undress

                              Suddenly and into the dead dead sea

Were I a stenographer,

I’d write down everything

rain says. A camper, I’d set up a tent

in the Rothko room at the Phillips.

A heroin addict, I’d live in the ‘90s.

Jesus, I’d change it

to The Last Brunch. Quiche Lorraine,

mimosas. I’d not take

a police psychologist’s job

for anything in the world, other than

the world. And why do we say,

Shot his brains out,

when there’s just the one? Were I a priest,

I’d only do straight weddings

and gay weddings together, couples lined up

down the aisle and around the block.

Let there be happiness and love

in bulk. Were I a star, I’d shine

binary. Were I smart,

I’d have been Jane Goodall

and kept my mouth shut. Why tell humans

apes are great when humans

are terrible at leaving apes

and well enough alone. But I am

dust, and as such,

I’ll eat an apple

and be happy to give my shovel

a treasure map and beg the two of them

to dig the world. Were I a pun, hon,

I wouldn’t be that one. Were I the Big Bang,

I’d whisper in the ears of flowers,

Take your time, this was all for you.

Loss conflates without thought of scale

or decorum: eleven Jews shot dead in a temple

in Pittsburgh; songbirds pushed up a mountain

by rising temperatures in Peru

until there’s nowhere to go, an escalator

of extinction; Trick or Treating

forbidden in a neighborhood in town

where the only danger is fear of the dark;

a cow shot in the eye across from our mailbox

because a motorist had a gun that could;

two people shot in the head in a Kroger

for being black; a season of dull leaves

falling, junkyard oranges and reds;

growing difficulty retrieving my name

from memory; tiny bits of plastic

in everyone’s feces; tiny fits of crying

as I walk through the dairy section. Yesterday

I saw roses walking away from a hothouse.

Heard clarinets singing goodbye.

Watched my house write a suicide note

and begin striking matches. Today

someone told me about a Jew

who wasn’t killed in Pittsburgh

or the concentration camp he was sent to

as a child. Who was late

for service and warned not to go inside.

Who should have been gassed, hung, shot,

bayoneted, had his head smashed

against a wall, been driven over

by a truck, a car, history, been impaled

on a fork, on lust, been eaten

by lice, inmates, rain, snow, or just

thrown from the edge of the world,

but is alive right now in Pittsburgh

and getting ready for a funeral today. And instead

of pinning a piece of cloth to his chest,

is ripping the pocket of a favorite suit,

I hope, hard and fast, so a wound hangs

from his standing, his walking, his shadow,

the tatter of a flapping tongue

that belongs to his heart, that tells you

a beast has clawed at this life, and devoured,

and failed to kill the sun.



Looking at a bird.

Looking at the moon.

Looking at a bird looking at the moon.

Sharing a cigarette with the trees

outside my hotel room.

Waiting for Pegasus.

Standing in my socks.

Finding a yellow knife in my coat pocket

that doesn’t belong to me.

Stabbing a beer can.

Dropping the knife in the trash.

Wondering what kind of bird

sings for a man waiting for a horse

that flies. This bird.

Wishing I’d taken more acid when I was young.

Imagining myself in armor in the pool

reading The Unbearable Lightness of Being.

Children a thousand years from irony

competitively splashing each other

for the prize of shouting, I Am The King.

Never be the king, I whisper from behind my face plate.

Everything is happening at the same time.

You are here and I’m in your bedroom

looking at your slippers. Why yellow? Why open-toe?

There are only surprises, including how little

I understand. My head is on fire

and I think it’s because I’m looking forward

to what’s on TV, when the truth is, fire

has to be somewhere, I have to be somewhere,

everywhere has to be somewhere, why not here?

If someone loved me                         then cut the birds from my tongue

expeller-pressed the air from my lungs                     one wing at a time

dismembered me                                       could I	look back with the

lotus eyes of compassion                   see how they stain themselves?

gouge and bleed?                              Could I join them in the darkroom

dip negatives               in a chemical bath                               peg the damp

curls of nascent photographs from our lives

                                                          on a clothesline to drip dry overnight?

Would you judge me a fool if I said my love

is a parched well that never quits reaching for the aquifer?

Born under a water-sign, I fight different                               Canyons are hewn

by a licking stream                                           a tongue worrying stone after stone

like loosened teeth       My love-song is a blood-song           survival-song

The bird boxed by night sings for us both

Today in the taxi someone was again having a blowup argument. The other day it was a mother and teenage daughter. Today it was a young woman on her cellphone breaking up with her boyfriend. It’s like a cake that fell in the oven.

I thought about the Lord swiping Her translucent screen left to float people ahead or right to weigh them down.

Kafka said: for the first time I saw how untrue and childish is the conception of me that my mother builds up for herself. I thought I felt old powers, as though they had been untouched by the long interval.

During their argument there was a smell of petrol in the air.

Today in the taxi I drove for ten hours. I was in all five boroughs and New Jersey and got not one tip.

Once there were factories and foundries across from railroad trestles. You could see them beyond the pink gauze of the cherry blossoms and their white edges that formed the skyline. They smelled of incarnadine muscle, the folks who toiled there. On the streets were patterns of maps, the peoples’ memories that overlapped, and became each other like a maze. Private and public warrens. People loved the idea of the city from their marrow.

Someone said ideas are like mice. You don’t know where they came from or when they’ll come again. If I were a mouse I would make circles, gnaw on wood, and pause only when I smelled bread.

Tonight in the taxi I brought a guy from 6th Avenue and 23rd to West 92nd Street and he was complaining that his wife promised their three-year-old blue gum and how sugarless gum gives you cancer.

His wife wanted him to stop and get gum before he came home and he disagreed. I drove him to a CVS as he praised himself for his tolerance and good judgment in the face of his enemies.

A Cathar fragment said: If the world were not evil in itself, every choice would not constitute a loss.

Who knows if the Lord, snapping a blue bubble into nothingness, deliberately added a chemical, vinyl acetate, that could harm later humans. What did She mean by injecting that sugar into the bloodstream?

Today in the taxi I drove the movie star Carey Mulligan from the Upper West Side to Park Slope. I recognized her blonde face and perfect porcelain hand from the movie Drive. Among the many similarities between me and Ryan Gosling is that we both drive Carey Mulligan around the city.

My whole body was running down the stresses. I hate gratuitous celebrity sightings. The sun was a peach more pushed aside than struck down. I felt completely like a driver, or maybe a writer.

Kafka wrote to Felice Bauer and said he drew up a list of things he sacrificed for writing. Just as I am thin, he said, and I am the thinnest person I know, there is nothing to me which, in relation to writing, one could call superfluous in the sense of overflowing.

and now the doctor asks if depression is a family
and I say my family is too black to bask in the moonlight how my skin rips thoughts from my pretty head and I say I want to peel my layers     lay them out for all to see how small I can become and I say too black I go to church and come back so clean so new some child no time for anything but a soft breeze and sun too black to look at my skin and see anything past the galaxies I hold inside me too black I hold the words under my tongue let them simmer there and I see nothing in stars but an absence of a black body that loves them enough to keep them covered and now I am bubbling over I stretch my hands toward the twilight and ask it to hold me I would gladly offer the bits of body I have left for a chance to be too black for this haze I say too black and the words come out snake-like and slithering over me. I’d like to stay here in this dark — this too black.

When men and women say they like the things I like,

          like Caravaggio and the stars, I want them to shut up,

because it’s not a pick-up line if we’re all looking

          at the same sky every night, and make a wish,

honey, because it’s not a come on, or a turn on,

          or a turn me on against the wall at a museum

in the middle of the day as tourists watch, and oh,

          go a little harder — just a little harder, and boys

and girls and girls and girls and boys and boys

          meet in front of masterpieces, falling in love,

and we all know the endings of those stories,

          but have you seen Caravaggio’s painting of the four

musician boys — all identical, almost unclothed,

          porcelain skin, string that mandolin, and have you

ever been so infatuated with someone you wished

          upon a genie that they’d quadruple right before

your eyes dressing and undressing in a montage

          out of an ‘80s film starring Anthony Michael Hall,

and yes, it’s a little greedy — a little barbaric,

          Barbarella stripping in space — to want four of

the same person, but isn’t it lovely to have four

          times the flesh, the skin on your hands, massaging

their back down to their butt, I think, one night

          when I’m figuring out which of the five love

languages I am, and all I want is physical touch,

          because it’s existed since the Stone Age — all chemistry

and dynasty and history, and let your man serve you,

          every night, or as my lover whispers, “My pleasure”

to me on the phone, a voice that makes me want

          to be a little barbaric, a little Barbarella, naked

in space — what a babe, make love to him in

          zero gravity, which is such a Double 007 move,

plus the martinis with extra olives plus the gadgets

          in the bedroom, and touch me, light my fire, baby,

and we’ll light a fire here, paint some animals on

          the wall like our ancestors, and oh, you’ve got me

going so hard, you’ve got me going so hard,

          paint on my hands, markings left after you

bring me down to this earth — into your arms —

          into this zero-gravity space of just you and me — all

I need is your physical touch with a side of olives.

When my friend, F, reads my palms, I’m alarmed

          when he tells me that I’ll have five great loves

in my life, if the five lines underneath my left

          pinky are any indication, and I think, well,

That’s one lover too many, and I can’t handle

          this Justice League of my hands, and which one

ends up being my Wonder Woman, the winner

          of it all, the MVP lassoing me towards him —

how Hunk of the Year becomes Hunk of a Lifetime,

          if mangeants are still a thing, and just imagine abs

spray tanned across the runway, because you’ve got

          to admit that there’s something about a man who can

master his runway walk, sashaying away, butt cheeks

          exposed, taking that crown home to me, donning

an apron and cooking me some ramen, add in egg

          and corn and seaweed, and in this landscape

of the couple’s palace of tomorrow, I worry

          about the state of my current lover, the way

my hands fit so perfectly on his broad shoulders,

          down onto his back, the way I worry this won’t

be forever, because as F says, and we all know,

          it usually doesn’t work out, the way I wonder

if I could ever love a man who hates tofu,

          unless it’s extra firm and burnt to the crisp,

which makes no sense at all, because isn’t hating tofu

          like hating bread or rice or cheese or wine or fried

anything, and am I even still a Chinese woman

          if my partner hates tofu, and in bed, I think

about all the recipes we’d be missing out on,

          going out for burgers instead — tasty but standard.

But what about my mother’s Cantonese tofu

          and tomatoes dish from my childhood:

                                        Brown the tofu on both sides.

                                        Take two or three fresh tomatoes,

                                        and add in oil and water. Cook

                                        for 10-15 minutes for a boil down,

 

                                        then the secret ingredient: a dollop

                                        of ketchup. Mix cornstarch with water,

                                        mix it well. Then add in soy sauce

                                        in the pan, some green onion on top.

Oh, how I loved waking up to my mother

          cooking this dish, at eight, and at dinner I’d add

tomatoes atop rice. Now, in bed, my lover

          describes how he can’t handle the texture

of tofu, the way he doesn’t want that kind

          of party in his mouth, and I know he’d take

that mangeant trophy home, do almost anything

          for me — so why can’t he just process the soy.


I ask my parents how they feel about having

          100% purebred Chinese grandkids at their age,

at the dinner table, when my brother’s home

          for New Year’s, showing off his perfect

Cantonese girlfriend who doesn’t speak

          a word of Cantonese, who isn’t dining with us

because she’s at a five-star restaurant

          in Hong Kong after flying business class

when she’s not on business, and I add more beef

          to the hotpot, more enoki, more shrimp, less hate,

but I can’t help myself when my brother hasn’t

          been home in five years, didn’t visit my father

during his heart attack, and poof, now he thinks

          this fourth-date marriage to a good Chinese girl

solves everything — the promise of family legacy,

          but nope, I hate to break it to you, brother, but

Chan is about the most common name in all of

          China, and we aren’t rich or bluebloods, so what

are you even talking about with legacy, marrying

          a woman you met three months ago, and I drink

more Tsingtao, get a little sad while my brother

          adds more scallops and squid in the hotpot just

for me and he smiles and then coughs from

          the gochujang, the Korean hot pepper paste

and so do my mother and father, and I think about

          endurance, how I hide my boyfriends from my father

who wants 100% purebred Cantonese babies

          out of me, but no one controls my body, no one —

how nine years ago at a stoplight in Washington D.C.,

          my brother asks me about any girls or guys I’ve

kissed, as if anyone has to choose sausage or fish,

          one or the other — when the real answer is all,

                                        and I miss the innocent times

                                        when I wasn’t uncomfortable at stoplights,

                                        when we’d make grilled cheeses together:

                                        butter the pan, take your white bread

                                        add cheddar cheese on top, let it melt

                                        add salt and pepper, flip the sandwich,

                                        and wow it’s ready, with a side of ketchup

                                        on the plate: dip your cheesy bread in,

and now I wonder what century he’s living in,

          but I’m the one remembering my mother’s stories

about the fortune teller: how my brother will

          end up with a doctor and how I will end up

with a handsome guy, and as I drink more

          Tsingtao, I think about my own lover, who’s worried

I’m only dating him for the sake of dating what daddy

          hates, but I tell him over the phone, No, I date what’s sexy.

My friend Rita jokes that all Asians love corn,

          and I wonder if there’s ever been a study

conducted, a correlation the way five-star

          restaurants in Hong Kong always begin meals

with corn soup then oysters then steak and lobster,

          and why, oh why, do we keep aiming for western

civilization like it’s the height of all sophistication,

          and keep your surf and turf, because my lobster

needs a little ginger, a little garlic and soy sauce,

          and look at this Cantonese corn soup right in front

of us, ready to be devoured in its egg-droppy

          goodness, and hello, I’m reminded of childhood

summer mornings of my mother cooking this soup

         	that’s been in our family for centuries and centuries —

          Take chicken stock and eggs and half a teaspoon

of sesame oil and salt and pepper, and oh,

          creamed corn, and taste the most delicious

soup in the world that my mother remembers

          from her childhood of Grandpa coming home

with knockoff watches and dolls with glass eyes

          after work overseas, and how he’d start cooking,

while my mother and her sisters and brother

          played with these life-size dolls in an apartment

in Kowloon the size of a rich person’s

          walk-in closet, and that right there was all

the happiness in the world, of a home-cooked meal,

          of clouds of egg whites my mother tasted

light and fluffy in this mixture of corn,

and when I was a baby, the only mush I’d eat

          was carrot or corn flavored, spitting out anything

else or giving stank face to my parents,

          and when I was four, in Kowloon, Grandpa

picked me up from school, took me shopping,

          buying me corn-flavored puff munchies,

while we looked at snowman paintings

          and toy turtle aquariums, and a fishing game —

sink the rod, capture the rainbow fish,

          and oh, how Grandpa bought me everything,

then off to the grocery store we went

          for creamed corn — at checkout, me eating

snowball-shaped mochi ice cream, and no,

         	I wasn’t too full for the greatest soup in the world.

I’d like to order a lover wrapped in bacon

          from your secret menu, because I’m a really

hungry Chinese girl at this drive-in —

          give me all meat, all man, 100% Grade A

all-natural cut with a side of sensitive,

          and don’t forget the condiments in the bag,

and isn’t this ideal? Having your cake

          and eating it too, or having your beefcake

and eating him too, or having your studmuffin

          feed you strawberry cake in the bubble bath

like you’re both rich and happy with unlimited

          wardrobes and private jets, and I want to feel

like women with enviable thighs, in erotica

         	winding up their men: she winds, he drools,

          she winds, he drools — her boy toy or man toy,

and I want to lean in for a kiss after telling

          my lover about wrapping him in bacon,

because bacon tastes good on everything

          from deviled eggs to mac and cheese,

and Heart Attack Burgers on secret menus:

          three greasy patties and bacon bacon bacon,

a little melted cheese, and once I watched

          an interview with a starlet who said how

melted cheese was her favorite food,

          and no more beautiful words have ever

been spoken, and let food be your fantasy:

          how children believe that the moon is made

of cheese or how adults want to live in houses

made of gouda, and in Hong Kong, my cousin

          Janet recommends cheese hot pot with chicken,

and no, that’s not the same thing as fondue

          also known as the 2000s version of romantic:

dip your date in cheese, or take me back

          to the drive-in, and let me order some #1s

of hunks of men on bread dipped in cheese

          and some #4s of man sandwiches: cut

and chiseled to perfection with tomatoes

          and special sauce, or what about some #5s

on the breakfast menu: studmuffins both sweet

          and full of whole grains and buff buff buff,

and why is it that I start giggling when my love

          and I start talking about food — pass the sauce,

                    please, I’m ready to eat you up, order you again.

I coiled low in the moss, my sleek back striped with two yellow stripes, my forked tongue flicked your load bearing ache, that is what happens when you are born with your legs fused together, agile in the water, agile in the slippery grass, agile in the missionary position, but high centered on the traffic bump, high centered on the knife, high centered within the shipping container, that is what happens when your eyes are fog lights sweeping the sweet grass on the promontory, sweeping the sword ferns, the tasty beetles, the bitter slugs. I could pull the entire forest between my jaws.

She said chime, she said horn flies, she said cleave to the walls of the Lodge. We avoided the stain on the mattress; kept to separate continents. She said salt, hay, thistles, and mussels that cling to the logs where the river gorges into the sea. I heard moored boats groaning in their slips and called out to her fine bones that refused to be named. I said straighten your spine, walk forward, and pray the forest retains its shape despite the burning. She placed a black cloth over my eyes to create a certain conflagration and described to me the rabbits’ keening and the foxes’ small teeth igniting fires in the straw. This was where we stepped and also the places we avoided; this was where we inhaled and exhaled and tried everything, but she could only climax to pain.

You state that you have circumscribed my blue veined heart. But I have three: Lion, Lizard, and Goat. Plus three heads which I arrange into a dark blaze. Your pale gestures smart my windpipe and smack of this extinct world. Dragged up just above the surface of an algoid body of water, the slivery blackness consumes the sloped flesh and slicks into placenta. Who eats who and what happens? In this place our blood froths as milled ocean spray, a frenzied feeding, but it is this place where you must also avoid the boxcar abatoir. I shake my heads back and forth while you try to make sense of my multiple mouths and differing hungers. I refuse mirrors; I refuse your gaze though we both know that looking away will not prevent infection. In this place, there is no resistance in distance. I dare you to laugh, writhe in your backward body smear, swear that you cannot see my three heads, swear you can never love me as you kiss all of my foreheads before you sleep. The smoke between my heads thins, following wheel ruts, abscessing in the black slots in the scar tissue where I tried to make you less whole. Laura, your hands devour everything they touch.

It's not a Syrian child washed up on the beach, it's 
a rolled up greenish-grey exhaust-stained carpet on

the northbound shoulder of the highway. It’s not

a German shepherd, coyote or fox battered to the side

of the 5, a half mile before the Balboa exit. It’s curled

up, holding itself. It’s nylon fiber, not hair or fur bristling.

It’s not a lost dolphin lying in shattered windshield glass

or homeless person too tired to take another step. It’s

not another body-bagged soldier. It’s a piece of rug,

being passed at 70, 80 miles an hour by thousands

every day. Don’t think about it. Put the radio on.

What’s the matter with you?

Home: it is the undergrowth in me

that grows over, that tangles and

takes cover and is awake and cannot

be staked down. It is the vine

or brush that will not be burned

or groomed or cured or curled,

at its bracket or martyr or marrow,

at its emptiness minus branches,

an answer or a bruise. This poverty

in me you mistake for sleep. This cape

I wear as if to cope. This open door

like a sore healed over or a shape

one may shift. This part of me

adrift or lost at sea. This part of me

the blight one cannot cure. This

part of me unsure and bearing witness.

If I am a story, this is the caesura.

If I am a cello, this is its string.

Home has an ownership of me I milk

or battle. Home has in me a rattle

I make of the way light falls, voice

another breathes. I grieve its likeness

like a lover. I grieve it now that it is

over. I dig for it like gold. I bury it

in the ground. Store the fat. Salt

the meat. Understand the starve to come

until it blooms like moths. Not one

sound mimics its hover. I feel for it

and its smother, its smock, its collar,

its wool coat, its clover, all I am

when with another, all I am when

also alone. Its wolf tone or soured liver.

Its hospice or clouded mirror. Its

ribbon, rack, or battered father. If it is

a beaker, I am the experiment. If it is

the bubble, I am the reaction. If it is

the laboratory, I am ready to explode.

We come from three generations of gunsmiths

and armorers. Our pride name is Swahili for dust.

We sew necklaces together from doorknobs

and knucklebones and eye sockets and teeth.

We weep at the sight of sugar cane cut.

Our headlamps reveal the skull of a jaguar,

precise stone men, staircases hollowed, a two-edged

knife. Sacrifices seem another form of astronomy.

Pyramids predict the face of the earth. Our gardens

grow fructose. Our hands fill with cake. We emulate

the rasps of frogs. What we ate is processed in the liver.

Legally hunted lions hang, wilted to bone.

We poison livestock. We rescue rafts. We patrol borders

marked by marooned populations. Our spines

are the spokes of motorcycle wheels. Our longships

empty. Our rodents stow. Our goldenrods produce toxin.

Our gallflies perch. Our offspring hatch. Our onslaughts

happen. Our coral reefs pulse. We exit through fences

we then repair. We survive the dry season. We crave meat.

Our dark manes correlate with robustness. Our Asian carp

are tenacious. Our wildebeest rank high as prey.


At last, I have found my assassin. At last,

I have struck gold. When my past hissed

with cobras, you let me sleep. When

I was falling, you brought the ground closer

and made gravity of flowers like a kiss.

One body moving is a seduction. One body

is a practiced leap and a parachute

unsprung. Only the scalpel knows the passion

of blood. We soothe it with cold and sing it

to sleep. We leap at the chance to be blistered.

We listen and stiffen. We pivot and reap.

My rib cage could be a wasp nest built

of paper. My hand could be the slip of sand

across itself to slake the great unknown.

Snow coughs along the windows now

and listens differently to the pure. Snow

brocades like cotton. Prayers, like burdens, go.

Before I could make

white friends the one

I did have came over

after school to watch

Yo! MTV Raps and I went

into the basement only

to emerge later with my

father’s shotgun

and of course he went

even more white

because this was supposed

to be a joke, the type of shit

thickheaded boys laugh

at until their sides contract

into spasms.

          I mean, I laughed

even though I knew it wasn’t

that funny, even when I had

checked the gun for its emptiness

three times over,

I knew he probably

wouldn’t laugh but I was

committed to being the good

son who remembered

my mother collapsing

into a stove after work

and then a couch and then

work again and again

my father retreated below

the house

          and sometimes wouldn’t

come up for anything,

even if it was something

          he could tear apart

with his teeth. The men at

his job would whittle him

down into a cross until

he believed in it, stringing it

around his own neck,

and when I say

men, I mean white men

          because what other kind

is there? And yes, I know watching

my friend spread himself

in fear was like ensuring the parachute

on someone before pushing

          them out of a plane.

I don’t say

that to say he was a jerk

to me or that he deserved

it — it means his parents

got him a Starter jacket

for every team he liked

and I never felt right about

not refusing the one

he handed me down,

the one my father said costs

too much and maybe

he wasn’t talking about

the jacket anyway.

My friend’s parents

accidentally

bought him two of the same,

but the gun, he said that wasn’t

cool and he was right

          and I could never really

figure out why I aimed a hollow

threat at my friend except

to say that I probably gave him

something I know so well

it rubs my back

during slumber,

but his parents

never could afford.

My Lyft driver says you shouldn't call your children smart
& I guess I understand what it means to be named

many things but most often after the worst thing

you survived & I guess humility got a lot

of guys laid in college for being mysterious & I

guess there’s something to be said to be loved for

the downswing and not just the seduction

of your beveled edge & I guess the only difference

between flowers being thrown at your feet or being

thrown on your grave is what you

are expected to do next.

Here is what I know about my unmaking:

My ACT score was higher than the age

the smartest kid I grew up with ever made it

to. I once spent a night breaking windows

and the moonlight rinsed through them

because what would I do in college anyway?

I was once a beautiful bouquet of new stalks,

but nobody told us what it takes to bloom.

So many of us were pulled up, root and all.

You don’t wait for something to flower if you were

only taught what the ground will take.


The soccer class wasn’t

designed to be all girls

but sometimes you get

lucky and sometimes

your daughter finds herself

surrounded by hard charging

boys who ignore basic

requests so you test her

with the older class. Here

she looks eight years

old but is not eight years old,

running with the other jubilant

girls, passing with the inside

of her foot, kicking with more

ambition than control

and every so often they play

a game called sharks and minnows

where their coach makes

an elegant apex predator

and kicks the soccer balls at the girls

as a form of tag. You can

imagine the playful screams,

you can imagine the girls

minnow, lungs darting

away from the would-be fang

of the sea. Once in a while

they invite the adults to be sharks

and I hope I’m the last, I hope

the girls will always run until

their chests are as empty

as a boy’s promise. I hope my aim

with a soccer ball is near miss

enough to recognize the pattern.

I hope games will always dress

themselves as games and water

will feel different against their

darting bodies when the game

is not a game but math is simple

so I know this will not be true

even as I keep missing the girls;

sidestep, jump over and around,

taunt and giggle until it takes

all of the language from them

and I think for them this is a good

life so far, this is joy and translucent

and because I haven’t tagged anyone

with a ball in a while and my role

could not be more clear, I begin

to kick the soccer balls harder.



I like my men
w/ a hint of oedipal struggling.

Like ‘em tall, like ‘em mean, etc.

Strapping

in their moon shoes

because I carry too much,

because I am always spinning around

them — slicked back pompadours

dark w/ water from the bathroom faucet

for dancing hip-close w/ glitter tulle and kitten heels,

girls eating up the leather. A ponyboy, play

pretending like

a mid-Atlantic accent.

Me? I’m just pigtails twirling

a parasol next to a flock

of pigeons pecking over a cigarette

on the boardwalk, paying them

no mind, humming Happy birthday mister

president to no one in particular.



I ask permission to spit:

          a sphinx

          a barn owl

          a boy who bums a smoke

they look away           //at me//                     I hate this, I hate men yelling and not//

not knowing their danger

                              People talk about a proper time and place, but sometimes you end

                              up talking about death at a Chili’s over a plate of chicken tenders

          //and that’s just how shit goes

Most people think bodies are mannequins

when they see them where they don’t expect to

          like when you see dried-up petals

          and think someone must’ve spilled a bag of chips//

                                                                                              Can we just order a pizza

It’s always better cold and in the morning like

          light pillows sex coffee what

          have you

                                                  When I blow a man, I like to be over him

                                                                                          while he’s flat on his back

like I’m looking cautiously into a well

                                        and when I’m about to gag, I think of England

                                        and gag anyway, because that’s what you like —

because                            in a lot of ways, you’d like to watch

my head explode like a slow-motion watermelon

                    dropped from someplace very high//

But you’d also like for me to swallow the thing

like the moth larva from the bottom

of a bottle of Mezcal                                                 never give it back

          Wake up. There’s a rapist on the loose.

          Pushed a woman into her apartment as she unlocked it.

I leave myself
at home. I walk around past
midnight w/ Ken doll lump,
mons-pubis-only, and go
grocery shopping, blind drunk
w/ power and fluorescence.
I tie a plastic bag around my head.
I’m your Scary now. I’m your clown
standing in the dark.

I’m on the corner of the sidewalk and it’s raining,

because of course it must be. For the car

to run the red light, for the darkness of 7 p.m., for the

crunch-splash-shatter combination of the impact,

for the metaphor, it must be. I am on the corner

of the sidewalk, waiting to cross so I can drink beer

and read a book alone, surrounded by strangers

with no interests or stakes in me. I do this often,

reading by myself among the drinking.

Is it gauche to compare the beer taps to rain? The trajectory

of my life to that SUV? The relatively good outcome —

no injuries, no one going too fast, just smashed front ends —

to how I survive despite my best attempts at self-destruction?

If it is, well, I’ve gone and done it, haven’t I?

I’ve put the words down, as if I’m not desperate for you

to tell me it’s ok, to forgive my lack of art here.

I have a confession: I called 911 and crossed the street.

I drank two beers, took a cab to a hotel

where a man I’ve never met told me I was a good boy,

who whispered Happy Birthday when he finished.

Tired and railed as the dawn

devours pages      Mine eyes have seen

the glory of intricately woven babies’

breaths connected to the flight paths

of eagles

                                    Somehow

the monoliths ring in the streets

which are snowing themselves silly,

though disappearing as they will      I am

falling

             lightly

                   	      still

                                    Same as you

and everybody          I furrow my brow

                                  (in concentration),

like faint blue fruit juice, and say as many

beautiful things as possible

                     	                        to hear them

echo through you, and so eventually

                     	                              back to me

I wonder if anyone I love is even awake

right now      And then, as if in answer

to my thought, Melanie’s first

of the morning footsteps

                     	                clunk

                     	                        through

the house, which is reassuring

in an ordinary way       I’m not looking

for epiphanous calamity, a dramatic last call

in the wake out behind me

                     	                        I just want to know

that all is not lost, that forgiveness

is common-sense-easy to acquire,

that today will be a lot

like yesterday and tomorrow,

the continuance of something

that we get to be a part of

at once both familiar and alarming

It isn’t really clear who’s in charge

          in my heart, but I bought the wrong

amplifier     I meant to get the commie trash one,

          but ended up with the upstate New York one, so

now the astro-turf rocks rabbits and footballs

                    hand-assembled     Thus, we’re all still

neurotic as fuck around here, taking trucks of pills

          and driving them through walls to not feel it

so much     And some guy in my email wants me to listen

          to a plant’s singing tongue in my mouth, which

isn’t what it sounds like     Nothing French about it

                    I just spent two years obliterating

French from my vocabulary, so au revoir

          poodles and bulldogs alike     I want my wife

not to worry like she does about how wildly

          we’ve all got our applejacks in a wad

She deserves a full-on molecular spring     But

                    seriously, dear, our daughter’s gonna be

totally okay     Our twelve year-old’s gonna be fine golden strings

          She’s an astronaut, even if she doesn’t know it yet

Sometimes the space race stinks like weed,

          and sometimes the weeds need to practice

their abjection     The vomit comes in waves

                    of pink     The vomit comes in drones

of ink             I think you hear me

          like a transistor question-and-answer session,

all those leaky caps and resistors, fluttering

          in the glow-in-the-dark moth rink of moons,

curlicues of milk fat and butter on paper

                    Effulgence and galactivity and

look into my woof     No need to freak in the angel

I will not machine parts

With the devil

Not precisely

Not crudely

I will not be a party or party

When I celebrate

Elephants will chew the heads off

Holograms of baby punks

And the fire will flood

The long floor

With fire-blood

In the slaughterhouse

Of division

Do not forget

The nerves that connect us

In spite

Of the North Pole

And the South Pole

And the partisans

And the penguins

The devil

In chemtrails

Between us

Rocks out

But we rock out harder

Pressed together

In blossom

And he needs to know it

The motherfucker needs to know it

All the motherfuckers

And the pies with their crusts

And the eyes with their crust

From crying too much

On our own terms

So the treetops fall

From the apples in reverse

And all the work stops

Unless it’s good work

Take it or leave it


I want you to see yourself

In the glow

Of my face

Which is radioactive

So problematic

For the olive trees

And the Kubla Cons

And the ex-marines

Who hang around

The post office

Skulling

If you don’t know

What skulling is

It’s not sulking

So cross that possibility off

Your list

It’s something weirder than that

The color of eggplant

The fog of teleology

To be sure

I don’t ever know why

Anybody’s the way they are

It has something to do

With their parents

And also all the drugs

I take two Ibuprofen

And a swig of my wife’s beer

My blood has a parachute inside it

The color of Jesus’ wooden cross

Which still fails to convince me

After all these years

I don’t change my ways

And one of the marines

Says my hair looks cool

But what he doesn’t know

Is that under my hair

My skull contains

A bloodbath

Of chemicals

You’re soaking in them right now

And I’m soaking in yours

And when we unstop

Our drains

All the love pours out

And the street begins to purr

The marines fall back

We only ever see

What we’re looking to see

I see myself

As the small part

Of a penny

I hope that’s enough

To make you look

And keep looking


In a car in Ohio, I am sitting

against the sky eating blackberries — truly

the biggest ones I have ever seen

in this life. They were grown in Kentucky,

which is just across the river.

There are many farms. It is nice

or it is night — but one or the other of those

is a mistake. The radio plays

something dripping with juice. In Indiana,

where I’m from, you are far enough away,

I think I feel at home here — Fuck the lord

and praise him both! I am sitting in my car

and my amygdala’s an owl. America’s most daring

white rabbits come to pet me.

To fail. To come to naught.

Naught, as in zero. A round figure,

an enclosed absence.

A course-correction. A test

of viability. Via

as in viaduct. As in

a long, elevated roadway, a bridge

composed of several small spans

for crossing a valley (valley,

an elongated depression, a hollow

between uplands, especially one

following the course of a stream).

Most commonly, an overpass.

A flyover. The states

in the middle (Idaho,

the Dakotas).

Just passing through.


If I said — remembering in winter,

the Japanese maple’s shock of yellow.

If I said — sunflowers, lion’s manes

in a vase, in a flaxen room.

Or daffodils and raincoats

in Seattle, in June.

If I said — primrose,

pitch of golden orioles,

wood thrush,

low harvest moon.

Or amber tree resin,

puss weeping wound.

If I said bile, jaundice,

eyes sallow, too soon.

Yellow, I’d say.

Caution, yellow.



Abandoning one’s father, arriving in a strange land far away

 

     wandering
     longing
     for my father’s
     jeweled palace —
     shall I sleep
     in this hut
     on the dirt?

I have no one but you — why do you cast me aside and flee?

 

     if you forsake me —
          throwing yourself into
     
     the eight-fold salty roads —
          
          will I sink alone
     into the waves of old age?

You died here, but I wonder in which world you were born

 

     leaving me lost
     in the dark
     
     with no guide
     
     — where will the moon
     again come clear?

Like gathering clouds, love hangs here,

a black, impenetrable veil on my heart.

Does a stranger emerge from this body?

My eyes, throbbing.

Oh, these grieving eyes. ‘O ia – ē.

I will weep for you

as the mist of Nanualele flies,

engulfing the uplands of Honokalani.

Oh, my sky. ʻO ia – ē.

a few minutes

          split from the day

like the first blinks

          of a child’s eyes

drop by drop

          around me rain

raised a tall glinting wall

but fear mixed in the makeup of the stones

and the thick chill wind

          sighed in my throat

rain hit the windows

          and fell like pigeons

and when it stopped

          the tall wall toppled

and the wet horizon

          gasped for breath

the rainbow melted on my tongue

the moon swollen

like a lump in my throat

the cypress a brash

neighing of the soil

the pine
a mass of ken

its shadow snags like gossamer

on the thistles’ prickly cursive

I can hear

the river’s rushing phrase

muttering

perhaps

no word so crystal

as this


 when rain

rinses the flanks of leisure
          toying

with the wet soil of parting
          dreaming

of brushwork odysseys
          mired

in its own muddy freedom

I miss the garden of my childhood

          a little picnic

and in the middle     something
                    glinting

a bunch of grapes

          covering over     all

                    conjecture

dizzy with repairing silence

          I lean

against a tree     I want to grow
          inside the plot

                    to the last leaf

          but

O motley misery

something reaches inside you, your biological scaffold

          like dreams tucked behind every bend

in the track. your trains, your thoughts

          derail. your movements

blur. someone seizes the palazzo ducale

          of your cells: your shoulders

and legs begin to jerk at night

          and increasingly during the day to the rhythm

of a hissing rat fight .. a constant whine

          rising from the garbage paradise below

your airshaft window, sleep that won’t come,

          that makes you pale as the madonna

denied word from the angel. but there is no perpetrator

          when you wander, the palaces have committed

no crime: old crones heavy with mascara and lipstick

          soak their feet and rasp:

we are peaceful citizens in a peaceful city

          yet something moves within you

and you know they are lying. in every church

          in every kiosk tintorettos and beaked masks

are the currency. a disaster zone

          for every synapse. an unrelenting attack

you find so thrilling —


the laboratory mouse slumps

          urinates

clutches at a frayed cable

in the calle

you’ve tasted the water

there are fountains in every campo

bubbling from mountain springs

          yes water, but water

that reflects your image from the inside:

you drink, look into your self

and see your organs

the decaying remains of grandeur

swimming in a canal grande of blood

          as if your sewage system had failed

bones totter on every wave of light ..

no one can be rescued

in this constellation

          not the doges or the popes

          not you or your child

everything disappears

in an onslaught of beauty

          everything fails, and succeeds

His hair is tied back with rubber bands beneath

          his motorcycle helmet and the visor

reflects back the incongruous neon

          as the heat beneath his crotch localizes his thinking:

he will fire after the man orders his drink.

Afterhours are precincts, delirious with workers,

          starved by their histories and even more ravenous

than this boy idling in the alleyway. The cash

          in his breast pocket an advance just above his heart.

The wrong light of the parlors erases the dark,

save the silver chain of the target’s stopwatch.

          And how the night’s field opens and compromises

a breastbone — a spiraling bullet’s pirouette and

          the crocus-like mechanism of blood on a shirt,

opening because justice is a question and the answer

          is a secret, isn’t it? To gun the motor past the scene

and the virtues of the age. The heat between thighs —

          the high of the report shocking the thumb

with the pistol’s kickback and the promise of the payout

          all because of God’s work. Isn’t it God’s work?

This fever? This heretofore? This magical scald?


Even if he is wingless — a lesser god,

a look or a flash of anger, a wrong touch

as he passes — perhaps leaning out

to bump a shoulder to summon an eruption,

so that the monster rises because he loves it,

that shadow in the alley, that bad confession,

even though he remembers how easy it is

to cross his thumb under the handle of his knife

and look at the dulling eye the way

the dull-whiskered carp pressed its lips

to the air as the blade slit from the anus

to the edge of the jaw — so easy to slice

the fish, its tail circling slightly, quaking

with awareness and the last look, even that look

he has grown to know, that look beyond the stars

which have long ceased to be, even then

it is never enough to fill the moment because

there are always more moments and so many

stars and the hard, black sea that says nothing

but yes, even that sea has long lost its place.

Cratered, yes. A hollow worth a dozen

swallows. Or a halo, even. O that’s not

echo or even known. Having smoked

it to the filter. Having no filter and no

corner to disappear to. Pulse in the vein

that shuts the alarm. Glaze in the eyes

having stayed awake. Flick of the tongue

with the breath on the run. On the blink

and abandoned to field gray snows.

Bow to the wrecked trawlers along the bay,

home to crabs and limpets. Idle — idle

in this last life. This last beloved

and indifferent pore. Core hewn deep

into liminal history. Into a kind of sleep.

You must lift your son's languid body
off the couch, tuck him into whatever

soft breach of the covers he can needle

into. You must lift your own tired self

beyond the threshold of the door

and snuff each candle till the smoke

writes the hours into the quiet house.

Must lift each pillow from the day

where new dangers thrust their heads

up from the anchoring grass. Each living

rage beyond the break of the horizon,

past your sight even on this cloudless day.

Because the future drives on new tires —

because the plateau piles everything

you love back into dust. We drive our pick

through the mineral of our apprehensions

and put our loves to bed without stopping

ourselves. Without pausing despite our worn

trunks. Without stopping our breath of song.


I’ve made my old man get up

& spin me to “Dixie Chicken.”

He says I like to lead, but I can’t tell.

        We fit right in with these folks.

For once I am younger or the same age

as women who also have roughened faces.

I watch them angle through the smoke

of one of the last places to flout that law,

swimming in nicotine, bewildered

by a world grabbed & lost flicking by on TV.

            It’s March Madness.

At the bar, old men tip back Bud Lights

& look up to watch elite athletes —

young & brown & lean — running

the court in uniforms bright as battle flags.

I both identify & deny identity here.

I know the arpeggios of Bill Payne’s

piano & I can sing along too,

although the melody flattens out

when I see everyone else knows

the words as well.

                    Couples dance

to this music that’s all miscegenation.

Those Alabama-Canada boys worshipped

at the altar of Muddy Waters

& a blackness they could imitate

& only sometimes understand.

But we are very white in here tonight.

The bikers & the rednecks — grooving

to a backbeat Jaimo set down solid as love —

do not commingle easily with other races

& there’s sticker by the cash register that says,

A taxpayer voting for Obama

is like a chicken voting for Colonel Sanders

even though

        many of these folks

have mixed-race grandbabies & are counting

on Medicare & an SSI check each month.

Darrell at the bar is from my hometown.

He was a union organizer at Pannill Mills

before they closed down, another working man

burned by NAFTA, knocked to his knees

        never to get up again

                (at least in this world)

turning mean, & I can barely hear him

above the TVs & Whipping Post

playing in the other room.

Now I know what redneck originally meant

& how many of us here descended

from Ulster Plantation scabs.

I’d like to say the anger isn’t mine,

even as my feet are held to the same fire.

I keep a careful check on the word

that sometimes takes shape in my brain.

I study the crescents in my fingernails

& hope somewhere down the line

there’s a good reason I don’t freckle.

All my family chokes

                                        on the hope

they are better than a black man.

I fit in so well here.

                    These people

know me for their own & it’s beguiling

to be part of the tribe, even as I follow

that slide, Blind Willie McTell telling me,

Wake up, Mama. Turn that lamp down low.

I should have named my daughter Freedom.

I should have bathed her newborn scalp in rain

collected off the tin roof of Granny’s house.

Mama said, A whistling girl and a crowing hen —

neither will come to a good end.

She heard it from her Mama.

But what she really meant was Whistle, dammit.

But what she did was teach me how to whistle.

Mama and my aunt and even I

used to grease ourselves up with Hawaiian Tropic

and stretch out on itchy grass in Bassett.

The first heat each spring was a calling.

Small gnats would stick to us.

Cigarettes were delicious then

and gave us something to do

with our fretting hands, our fretting mouths.

Our slick fingers left stains on their paper.

Mama and Audrey would say:

Put the baby in the washtub.

Put the washtub in the shade.

Here is In Cold Blood. Tell us what you think.

I wanted to be Truman Capote,

the God-listener, the filter

through which violence passes

and becomes rain.

But mostly I wanted to escape —

the way Tru did —

the Alabama, the Kansas, the Bassett

willing to prop our heads up on a pillow

before blowing out our brains,

where folks don’t see much wrong

with death by hanging.

I grew up in the sort of American town

where the women wore floral print dresses

to church and it was assumed we would stay home

and make babies and seven-layer-dip while

the men watched football. The basements

all had black mold. Occasionally tornadoes

tore the rooftops off our homes and schools.

Power lines crackled overhead.

One of my teachers was fired

for bringing a gun to school.

I filled the hours with biking down

long empty stretches of road,

the unbeautiful lawns and concrete,

dead trees, occasionally dodging cicadas.

Later it was dates in pizza parlors, babysitting,

homecoming with hairspray and shiny dresses.

When our parents were around they mostly

yelled at each other, sometimes about money,

sometimes about the troubles their boys

got into that week. No one there was innocent.

We didn’t drink the water and the air burned

in our lungs and throats. Once the river caught

on fire, a blazing miracle of poison. In elevators people

spoke about local teams, how well they were doing.

The well water gave some people cancer,

but the government suppressed all the studies.

I saw them by accident.

Just like working at the children’s hospital,

I saw that they used to experiment on children

with cancer, giving them x-rays and doses of radiation

to see if it killed them. That was years before

I got there, but I didn’t forget. It seemed every building

had its secrets, rats or roaches, children underground,

fire alarms that misfired, emergency exits

that never lead anywhere. I outran my origin story,

I learned poetry instead. I huddle close to the rocks

and mountains, stay close to the whispers

of the sea, that say, forget, forget, forget.


When the birdsong came out of your mouth,

when the fig tree grew from my stomach.

The sunflowers bowed in the dusk,

the shadows of footsteps around us in the dark.

We forgot our names, but remembered

the sweetness of a small apple, from

roasted squash, the stickiness of fruit.

The earth cracked open

and crackled, the trees went up

in smoke. Still we persevered

intertwined. We believed

the stories of immortality, we wrapped

ourselves in the scarves of leaves and stone,

we let the sound of water lead us underground.

We forgot to plant a gravestone,

we let the earth swallow us whole.

Moon, hearts, stars, flowers.

All of the above. And by above I mean where the stars are pinned, winking as they burn.

Because I’m not allowed to talk to the moon anymore.

Because the moon has amnesia. A sideways smile that always becomes a blind eye.

The moon is a recurring mistake, history’s dumb rotation.

If you’re going to touch me that way, I want you to look at me.

If you’re going to touch me. Which we’ve agreed will never happen.

But let’s say I could address you. Let’s say a rag-rich page lay before me, blank and white

as your deckled skin, and I’m the one in the morning coat, a velvet collar for my chin

to brush against, consumptive quill in my grip, blood spot on my handkerchief.

What would I say to your vacant expanse? Something like, Moon, this time, take me with you

when you go. Or, Moon, are you really that cold?

Isn’t heartache sweet? It tastes of everything you ever wanted. The rain-soaked lilacs

I pressed my face into as a child, knowing, even then, something I needed was there,

unreachable.

If you’re going to touch me, I want you to drink the water from those lilacs.

You start where you always start, with the body. You like

to get close, imagine body as landscape, yourself supine

among furred hills, muscular plains. Let’s be more specific.

You’re restless. Let’s be direct. You’re unreliable.

You shift. You’re itching to get back to that dark, leafy spot

where you trampled the grass, culminated your heart out,

crossed innocence, that narrow divide. When it comes

to infidelity you’re torn. You’re tempted to define it

as being faithful to what you really are. Let’s talk

about that, what you really are: turned earth, sticky pith,

bitter milk of dandelion stems. Admit it. In this creation

no matter what gets sowed you’ll always be slut,

never gardener. Who wouldn’t ache for something new?

You keep busy. You count all the beasts, catalogue

every flying, crawling, swimming, wriggling, curled-up,

unfurling you can find. You’ve got books, big ideas.

But you’re forever cleaning up somebody else’s feathers

and wax. Leaning on a broom, giving in to nostalgia

as robins burble their evening song, you watch a boy

aim for the net, over and over. You almost feel the ball

leave his hands, each near miss trailing a helix

of disappointment and aspiration. Awkwardness

punctuated by grace. A boy becoming what he is. Making

what he can make. Practicing. You made him that way.

Gray sack, slowly deflating balloon. Where the wasps

have gone to, I haven’t a clue. I know nothing

about the world’s physicalities, the facts. I make things up,

draw pictures, play a game in my head. The nest fell.

Maybe I hit it with my broom. The other wasps are probably

looking down at me from a canopy of maples

on my walk, tracing invisible dotted lines down the hill

past the red house with a room shaped like a silo

built by a man who’s dead. His wife lives there alone,

and she isn’t eating well. I keep worrying

I should do something, but I don’t. Next to her

there’s the guy who’s always hosing down his driveway,

raking gravel out of his lawn. If we were in a fire

or on a sinking ship, I wouldn’t be the first person he’d save.

But if wasps were chasing me and I banged on his door

he’d open it. I’d stand on the mat

careful not to track in mud and we’d talk

about how terrible an angry wasp can be, and when it was safe

I’d leave. That would be our common ground,

like the wasps and me: no sting, just recognition.

Why do they call it a slight when it’s really a slice, a sky

shot through with August lightning troubled by glowering

cirrus? Lowered, low-pressure clouds, brows, the glare that begat

your corresponding squint. Your ache. You can’t keep telling

that story. Everyone’s shifting in their seats, desperate

for the exit. And you say fuck too much. It’s unbecoming,

doesn’t become anything. Unlike the actual act of unprotected

procreation no seed gets planted, becomes bloom. No begatting

ensues. Therefore, learn to ignore. To abhor. Rhyme

when nothing else will do. Know that sound is a barrier

you punch through. On the other side is what? That cave

where the first people painted their dreams? We called them

something. We made them nothing. Begat them out of history.

White-washed their walls. We can do that from here. Steal dreams

when we can’t find ours. What’s left is a box of toy soldiers,

like the ones my friend methodically cut the guns from,

so her son wouldn’t know people shoot people. Wouldn’t want

to shoot. It didn’t work. He made a gun from his finger,

scrap of wood, half-eaten buttered toast. He begat his way

to death in the abstract, all those plastic men holding nothing

in their arms. Pointing to the horizon where a white whale

breaches and spumes. Another blowhard story of obsession

and possession, tit begatting tat. I’m rubber you’re glue.

Got you back. Got your back. I want you back. Which leads us

to singing. Because we’ve got to use our mouths for something.

Kissing, if possible, whistling, if not, which keeps us safe

in the dark. (They say.) (From well-lit rooms.) Calls the faithful

dog back to us. The one who stole the bone, buried your heart.

O the heart, you knew you’d end up here. Fuck. Sing something.

Spanish and it all comes out like

carnival, todo alborotado. Say luz

and the pulse of a shantytown splays

open, talk of baile and think of nights

in los teques at tia haydée’s, bodies sweating and

swelling under porch lights, songs that let you

and the boy you like touch, for a moment,

for a few moments, in between spins, watch

it crawl out here, mid-sentence, turn you

warm, leave you aching. Say it in English now,

witness all the bulbs in the house rupture,

feel your body swing back and forth, back and forth

slow, when you drink too much after a late

shift and don’t want to go home to the boy

who doesn’t let you dance. Shhh, don’t say

it in anything. Keep it here in the in-between,

before the mouth opens and splinters everything.

Sleep in the middle of this desert road where you float

in hazy orbs at the marked border where there is no language,

where everything is just beginning, where everything

is taking its first breath and it all comes out like

dawn, all comes out like a barefoot waltz in sand,

where even if you tried to name it, it wouldn’t feel

how it feels here: all of you, doused in morning’s red light.

(On Love)

It happens behind the church

that used to be a dentist office.

The boy you like rips the tails

off all the lizards you named.

Legs crisscrossed, you watch them

run away half-bodied, tails left wiggling

behind on hot pavement. ¡Los mataste!

You shout and he smiles like he’s telling you

a secret you don’t want to know.

Gafa, they’re still alive, see?

Offers you the torso, arms flailing in his grasp.

The tail — it just grows back.

 

(On Identity)

You collect frogs, hundreds of them.

Tiny ones you call baby, pretend birth

in the tub before Mamá is home.

One by one you hold them in your hand,

kiss their heads before they jump

on your knees, call to them by name.

When you start school, your teacher

walks you towards the tank in the back

of the class where everything is still dark.

You follow the green light leaking from the

glass where a bent plant sits amidst foggy water,

bulging bellied creatures circling an island

made up of small rocks and electrical wire.

Watch black inkblots swarm along the panels,

the closer you get the more they terrify you,

make you wail and run outside.

Your teacher chases after you,

laughing. Gabi, they’re tadpoles!

Hasn’t anyone ever told you?

That’s where frogs come from.

 

(On Belonging)

At Yolanda’s pool party you stare at the tank of

sea turtles in the lobby of the community center,

listen to the sounds of the other girls screaming

while the boys yank their legs underwater.

By now you have learned the shape of your body

in skin tight swimsuits and shirts clinging to the wet outline

of a bikini top. Memorize the stomachs of all the

girls in your class. In the bathroom where you all change

wet bottom around your ankles, urine sprinkled

along the toilet seat you sit, thighs pouring over

the rim. Stare at the ankles of the brave ones changing

together, comparing breast sizes. You want to be

less quiet, less strange, less space. You imagine

intertwining arms with them, confessing

embarrassing stories to each other.

You watch their feet outside the stall, how

they move with each squeal and shriek and

lip balm shared secret and they move like they

are clumsy dancing until they leave in laughter,

together. Curl and uncurl toes in the puddle

of chlorine and mildew, awkward hatching of

something foreign crawling towards the first light

you see — the moon’s reflection on water,

just a sea of streetlights.

 

(On Leaving)

In Florida every nice neighborhood sits

next to a swamp, an El Dorado furniture,

a motel where the curtains are always drawn.

There’s no hiding here, no use in blotting sweat stains.

Hair always curls here, makeup always runs here,

skin always blisters and burns on sand on metal

slides on car seats on pavement on patio chairs.

Humidity sticks to the windows to the wallpaper

to your mind, makes a grown woman break

in the middle of the check-out aisle at Wal-Mart.

People come here to die, leave their pets

behind in the lonely red light of an ambulance.

You are raised on field trips where you pry open

the mouth of an alligator in some swampy marsh of land,

where Indian statues greet you at the door. Power of your ma’s

broom when snakes rise from the mouths of all the toilets,

mob of fire ants gnawing at your teacher’s feet

fumbling through their angry pit, everything here invades.

You are splayed open by boys who cook

crickets under a magnifying lens, steal the snout

of a pig during dissection. In this place, where everything

is bubbling and awake, everywhere is a pavement on fire.

Look down, all the tails left behind,

they’re still moving.

It rains too, in the Midwest, gentle

                sheets of mist almost floating. Nothing

like the wet shrapnel of June

                and July back home, sundry fish in hot oil

crackling on the corrugated metal roofs

                of your house. In Wisconsin rain

pedestrians don’t bolt and scurry under

                awnings at the first menace clap of thunder.

Hard to believe that this is the same

                rain that once shooed you home every afternoon

on the other side of the world. But for now, you stand

                in that rain, awaiting the 81 that will take you

back home. Droplets alight on your face,

                almost dry, like dust. And then peals, suddenly

not rain,

                        but laughter, boisterous charging downhill

                though the gutters. Banter the warm

gust of wind that slips up the hem

                of your sweater. Is that — could it be — yes

it is. There’s a group of friends on the corner

                creating rainfall, appropriate typhoon

most familiar to you. O,

                Diyós ko, you want to dart across

the street towards the hurricane

                and cry, kamustá! Saán kayó galing?

International students, din? Matagál na ba kayó dito

                sa Madison? Do you know how long it’s been

since I’ve spoken like this outside overseas
                phone calls and conversations with myself

in the cavernous jaw of night? Isn’t it sweet

                to hear one’s language left

in the ordered streets? the sparse

                chatter filling you whole, whole

with the lullaby din of tricycles, the call

                racing toward the open

                                                        market? Your body

stops on the ball of your foot. Huwág,

                no, don’t run towards them,

not yet. Don’t be the fool with garlands

                of tears in your eyes, regurgitating gratitude

for their singsong signals.

 

                                        Instead, strain

                your eager ears — what are they

talking about? where are they going? and how can this

                rain possibly be so soft, yet drown

out the familiar? And there: Selamat

                malam! one calls out as the group begins

to fracture. A pair of mouths remain

                on the corner while several others

continue walking down the street into mumble

                of darkness. It’s not salamat, wasn’t thank you,

it can’t be. They didn’t say ingat! before parting

                ways. Then, the screeching brake of lightning: it wasn’t Tagalog;

                wasn’t Filipino. Maybe Indonesian

or Malaysian. Maybe something from some Southern

                islands, only if you were really lucky —

The American rain starts to build

                almost the same gibberish downpour you know

by heart, by skin, by mouth. Ayos

                                                    lang. It’s okay.

                Eventually you’ll forgive the fishbone

lodged in your sorry throat, choked up

                with all the language you will ignore

later: the neon signs, reflective boards

                with their codices of bus schedules,

the waterlogged man on State Street, begging

                please, please. I’ll take anything you have.

My student says he has no hometown.

He’s lived in sixteen houses and cities in his nineteen

years of being alive. San Diego, Bozeman, Mānoa.

I ask why. He says Army Brat and smiles,

the word brat thrust out like a searing brand

of pride. He submits a story where the protagonist

is being tortured by a deflector from the CIA.

At workshop, his classmate says she feels alien to the language

in the story, all military jargon that I forget

myself. She says she feels lost. Lost as in displaced. As in given

the conditions I have no home in this text. No point

of access. My cousin is the first in the family

to receive citizenship because of his recruitment to the Air Force.

It’s been eighteen long years, tenement to picket

fence: Newark, Providence, Virginia Beach, now somewhere

in the bowels of Arkansas. This June, his sister marries into

an American family. I’ve forgotten my score

on that English aptitude exam, the penultimate step to a temporary Visa,

but not the busted air conditioning, the whitewashed room,

its Styrofoam ceiling pockmarked with water.

Headsets clipped to our temples, we are adjusting

the volume on the microphone, says the automated voice. Describe

the city you live in. Describe the city you live

in, mouths the room over and over again,

mishearing the instruction as mimicry. Describe the city

you live in? We’re from all over

this country of erasure: Pasig, Lucena, Tuguegarao. When asked

about his plans after college, my student says he would like to follow

in his father’s footsteps, travel the world, keep it

safe, see all God’s small people smiling

in gratitude: Damascus, Siem Reap, Marawi.

And I envy him because he still has a life, maybe

thirty, forty more possible hometowns, ample space

to change his mind, the broadest margins where he could

rewrite a story where this time evil is somehow still

defeated, the uniformed hero leaves

just enough space for any reader to make herself a home.

In the stories we’re always the Israelites. Moses in the wilderness

drawing water out of a rock. In another iteration of this life,

my throat is parched. Sweat in my hair turning to salt

crystals, baking like food under the sun. In this life we aren’t rich,

but when the light’s right, we stroll in the gardens of wealth.

We live adjacent to its beautiful bronze gates, could waltz

in and out of its French doors, leave our umbrellas in the anterooms.

Go back to our rented house and dream of another

brunch in another Greek restaurant. In the photo, they splash around

the rooftop pool of a friend’s uncle’s condo, pretending to wash clothes.

Maybe in one translation of heaven we’ll have swimming pools,

gilded pits of shellac and tourmaline we’ll be made to fill

mouthful by mouthful from a nearby brook before we’re allowed

to swim in it. In this life, wilderness is a mouth. It must first be made

full with the right bodies. Reclining in our wicker chairs, the country is half

a world away, tinted rose-gold through our sunglasses. The swimming pool

isn’t ours but the here and now is. We hold these blessings

to be self-evident: of course the Lord provides. But how

do you portion blessing? In this water crisis, nobody has died of thirst yet,

but people die of thirst every day. We’re never Pharaoh and his foremen;

if anything, the wild reeds swaying in the river, complicit in the flow

and ebb that nudges the poor baby’s basket to the incensed aqueducts

of a palace he will take his first steps in, a sovereign country

a world away. Name and baptize me there.

It only takes a couple of hours for a turkey vulture to smell carrion

to stand a couple of feet away from the carcass, to wait for the skin to soften, to pierce.

It only takes five days for vultures to descend. To test if dead. To peck at the body. To tear.

To make a hole at the back of the neck, right behind the ear. To get at the brain.

Pigs are used because they have long been a proxy for humans,

scientifically.

Pigs are dressed as immigrants. Bra, underwear, grey T-shirt, jeans, sneakers

toddler sized, large enough to cover their tiny pettitoes.

Pigs can be a proxy for humans,

metaphorically.

Birds of prey undress the dead,

shred shirt, rip jeans.

Bird beaks rip stomach, play tug of war

with the intestines.

Vultures can be a proxy for humans, too.

They carry the limbs away, like little gifts, like to-go-boxes they can eat later,

like convenient carryout.

By Sabbath, they drag what’s left of the body.

20 meters up a hill.

On the ninth day picked clean, hardly

anything left.

The second pig, was placed under a pile of rocks, because scientists tried to replicate

how immigrants will bury the dead.

Under 115℉, a pile of rocks acts as a conductor, roasts the second pig. Unearthed

by ants who chip at long bones, carry the pieces to an ant hole a meter away.

In a town nearby a domestic dog came home with a piece of bone.

Dogs piss on the carcass. Gnaw bone like play toys.

Dogs can be a proxy for humans, too.

Scientists used to argue the desert preserves bodies. Hypothesized it took a month before

decomposition.

The government count of immigrant deaths is based on the number of bodies found.

The government says the desert does not discriminate.

Scientists now say the official number is an undercount. They say: this is an environment where

people can be erased.

They debate: who is responsible?

They say pigs have long been a proxy for humans.

Because God asked Abraham to murder      his own son.

Because Lucifer was an angel      before he was the devil.

Because a Honduran father dies alone      in a cell,

      finds release through a self-made noose.

Because his 3-yr-old son was untwined       from his hands.

Because a baby’s lips are unloosened from her mother’s

      nipple, so both could be detained.

Because this is ungodly.

Because this is ungodly.

Because this is ungodly.

Because God filled Egypt with blood, locusts & gnats.

Slid sinister. Made death out of innocence, killed

every first born in their sleep, before slicing open the Red Sea.

                                                                                                                    Remember, even God

                                                                                                                    dis members

                                                                                                                    bodies



After two months of your sickness we got used to feeling

          stuck. Insuranceless and miminum wage’d,

you tell me the doctor at the free clinic refused to look

          at your throat. His lungs are garbage,

she told the nurse, assuming you only understood

          Spanish. Outside, the world burns

apocalypse. Deportations and decapitations.

          Our bodies, two commas locked

into slumber. Outside, the sound of police sirens gash

          the night like swollen banshees.

Miami is killing us. I cry for the border. For its sweet.

          Your voice husks the thick of this city, answers:

stay.

          Tiny cysts pock the red of your tonsils,

white. The doctor theorizes it’s caused by the black

          mold beneath our walls, fuzzy tumors

soughing our inevitable poison. And what can we do?

          What can we really do?

Besides walk past the stench of human feces,

          and piles of ass wipes our landlord gutted

from a clogged pipe, left outside to rot-

          stench, to teach his tenants a lesson

on property. By now we’ve become unfazed

          by horror. To the lingering feeling of inferiority

poor people learn to hold like lead

          in their pockets. Like pebbles

in a stream who learn to carry the water’s weight.

          When you tell me you coughed blood, my body

deflates. And I am gone. Your voice, a distant moon

          echo, calls for me to home. I breathe like fish

out of water. Sistole paralysis. Convinced I will die,

          again. And you, the broken

angel that will carry my carcass to the point

          where the river splits into two

countries.

 

What's good? Big fan here from way back in your

Derrick Comedy days, black boy, big-city adjacent

just like you, like you a corny dude turned, well,

kind of cool on the cusp of 30-odd years running

in less the perfect circles, Billy Dee Williams cool

but watered down a bit like Kool-Aid for diabetics

at the cookout who still desire a little sweetness

in their lives, so when I jot down “how are you?”

right here, on this page, know I really mean that

as if we’re already familial. I mean, get your money,

black man! I dig it, I bang with the track honestly,

but tell me what life is now that you've actually got

real cheddar, a sum you can spread over the rest of

your days, and your children’s, like butter that we

can't help but believe in. Obama butter, if you will.

Something real that used to be just an unattainable

idea. That’s America wherever you are but this is

America over here, also, and it doesn’t always feel

so good; I don’t feel so good, my stomach slowly

turning to stone, and I bet you can understand why.

There’s a lot of long days, a lot of hard questions

pointed at the back of my head as the gun is to

the guitarist’s in your most viral video, his dome

bagged in a burlap sack or something, your eyes

so big and so scary and so damn scared (to me),

your hair unruly and probably breaking all kinds

of combs as if laws of possession, but that scene

is only one small America, and one that's kind of

a myth: black-on-black propagandist magic but

with the wires still visible everywhere. And that

brings me to the point in the video when the choir

is caught up in the spirit as they’re supposed to be

and then sprayed with bullets by way of your own

prodigiously talented hands: help me process that,

please. Charleston is my last name so we don’t need

to rehash the allusion at all, but damn. If there was

any point it shouldn’t have been you it was that one;

if there was any point it shouldn’t have been us —

it was that one. You’ve given me the glorious gift

of Atlanta and gave me a migraine with that stunt,

which somehow even shortchanged shock value

since I didn’t see a single white person have to duck

shots during the whole video. And I do appreciate

the risk associated with that idea, not as an artist, but

as a brand, a man with bills to pay I probably can’t

even fathom. I, too, have to rewind and watch back

what I say before I say it, daydream the whole sorry

scene where I get escorted out of the building with

carceral bracelets chaffing my smooth wrists. Still,

my disappointment stands given how frequently I’ve

stanned for you through the mixtape years batting

back many a side-eye, before the tag of genius was

put on you by the masses left comfortably in the lie

of their lives by a choice to keep the burden of blood

entirely on us, the burden of national reckoning on us,

which I want to say is because you knew we could

handle it, that we could take it because we’re always

taking it, but if there’s any credibility left in the word

brilliant in this era of easy superlatives and hot takes,

you should’ve known we were fed up. You should’ve

known, Bino. You probably did and then did anyway,

but we don’t have the time for that, not these days.

Because this is America: can’t have us slippin’ up.

1: From the Tent Set up in the Backyard

For a moment you vacated your crown of sacrifice,

bibley jesus god of my mother,

and blood dripped down my forehead instead.

In my eyes, the red drop a cloud on top of water.

I’d just passed a cigarette to the girl

two years younger than me, cloud sting

folded over the sky and the tent

where we hid from June afternoon light,

humid air the humid breath stuck

inside my sticky eye corner, you told me

I needed to reel back that Marlboro,

she was too young, it was too soon

to invest in coughs like those our fathers shared

over Busch Light beers numbering impossible,

bleeding from eyes, it turned out,

was the conscience showing itself, even if

she’d develop the habit like I had already at eleven,

the taste for smoke, the need to watch

evidence of breath coming in,

curling out, I’m still here. She handed it back,

I smelled the skinsides of my knuckles

burn when I pulled the lit softness back from her,

it’s difficult to hold a cigarette’s thin waist

without crushing it when you first learn.

I unzipped the tent so she could stumble out,

breathe clean air. In the backyard that day,

you let me free a version of my mistaken self

from one of my mistakes, you,

the bibley jesus three-headed type god,

god of Marlboros thin like other girls, breathing.

 

2: From the Highway I Walked in My Speedo

That summer I wore a Speedo swimsuit

two sizes too small because the brand

let me feel smaller and Olympic-sponsored

and the color made me feel like a body burned

blue gray, fabric metallic, taste of fleshmelt smoke

that tongued its way into my mouth

every time the charred bodies filled my eyes

from lower lashes to the top of my head

slicked clean off, some clean blade

mining my memory. It was my first hallucination:

it circled round and pillowed open

my sleep’s soft stomach with its needled fingers.

Blue sky tarped over me as I walked

my four-mile country road walk, farmers called

the loop a section. I walked alone and thrilled

a little every time a car slowed down to ask

if I needed a ride, felt my torso melt from my spine

until it hung sticky from the waistband

of the canvas pants I’d pulled on over the Speedo.

Never when the car slowed to take me —

or was it overtake? — did I wonder where the stranger

could take me other than some palace where

the studs were girlmatter-stripped bones, I imagined

that, where we’d go, the basement floor tasted

like metal, salt, dirt, limes. I imagined

but on this walk had seen: sky blue through to bone,

then cloud-choked, suddenly, thick welted

clouds like factory fire. I walked past the steel factory,

so I stopped, watched, waited. A trumpet interrupted,

tiny horn dropped cartoon into a corner of the sky —

it inhaled just once, sucked up all the smoke, every cloud.

What happened. What had happened, gone.

My brain still searching the palace, darting from body

to body. I turned to walk back down the hill to my house,

my eyes trained back to the gravel I kicked up, stones

burying themselves in my shoes, blistering

my soft soles — were you the trumpet, god,

or the sky? The getaway car that never hearsed me,

or my organs melted down to dull gravel

shoeing me burned — were you ever the sun?

 

3: From the Seat of the Riding Lawn Mower

Vodka my body more than water by fourteen,

but first, scotch at eleven, and the very first: beers,

warm ones, left in the four-car garage

filled with junk my mother screamed at my father

about every time he came home for a weekend

every other weekend or so, my hands alone

flipping the tabs of eleven warm beers. Drinking alone,

I saw you from the seat of the riding lawn mower,

the one my mother didn’t let us use since

the gear stuck that summer, and she couldn’t turn away,

cut herself in half driving into the barbed wire fence.

I want to ask you while I’m here, motionless,

if you were ever the fence, or were you the gear?

The scream my mother’s guts bled onto the grass,

or the scream she gave to warn my sister and me —

You girls stay away from me! First, she’d screamed

my father’s name for help — we’d never heard her need

him like that. God, you looked like scotch,

like hell, like dusty old can metal drinking me

empty empty empty — god, I admit I heard nothing

when you spoke to the congregation, so I stopped

listening, but I could still find you when whistling

through a blade of grass on our house’s grassy acre,

I found you in the dizzy walk from forbidden

machine to garage and back, swaying, that first hard drunk.

My mouth the next morning stung, tasted of the fields

surrounding me, my head a lightning bolt,

finally oh finally I prayed without assignment,

that morning the first time my head felt fit for my body,

what was done to it, the answer to prayer is

when you first know the size of your own pain, stop asking.

She refuses to smile for each photo he takes, despite his soft-talk: dame una sonrisa. Flashclick — lips pressed firmly together, no teeth for a new country. Sonriete mi’ja. Flashclick — one brow upraised, to question his familiarity. Una sonrisa linda, como tu nombre. Flashclick — the glare she’s learned to give men who insist she perform for their desire. Vas a tener una nueva vida. Flashclick — a scowl for the false promise of a life she’ll be forced to accept against her will.

Most boats this afternoon have cast off into the Gulf taking

the dark-skinned men who bodies always smell like the sea.

Barefoot on the beach, with only the wind whistling through

their hair, the girls tiptoe across the seaweed-covered shore

unbothered. They approach the berthed boat on the beach,

la surgida, to ask the old man who fixes its hull to please take

their photo. Just turned thirteen, Proserpina stands between

two girlfriends in a sleeveless floral dress — hand-made by her

mother — head bowed, squinting, a thin smile etched into her

lips, a mother-of-pearl beret clip to keep the hair from her face.

Borrowed from her stepfather, the camera catches her dress

still tucked and tied between her knees from when she alone

waded hip-deep into the water, the other girls only watching

from a distance, knowing Proserpina’s mother had asked them

to stay away from the beach, to not step foot into the water,

unescorted. But in the water, eyes closed and alone, before

the boats would return with men whose skin would be turned

white with salt, she imagines — the sand floating over her feet —

of her life outside the peninsula, a place where she would not

be just two years away from being a woman, but remain a girl

tightly holding the hands of her girlfriends, unafraid of men.

On centuries of stone, seventeen men seated in four rows

pose for photos they’ll later send home to their families:

wives and children, siblings, parents: un recuerdo de Palenque.

Months after clearing what bulldozers and cranes have left

behind: with axes, saws, picks, shovels, short-handled hoes,

and machetes, dressed in their best — newsboys, fisherman’s

caps, fedoras and straw sombreros; single and double pocket

buttoned shirts, high-waisted trousers, pressed and cuffed; in

wing-tips, two tones, and romeos still gleaming from their last

shine — Juan sits (third row, far left) his hair parted off-center,

fingers interlaced, twenty-two years old, and the youngest of

them all. The foreman collects from each of them a few pesos

to pay a native boy to guide them to the Big Water, the House

of Nine Sharpened Spears, the Great Temple of Inscriptions,

where they’ll take group photos, until Juan splits off to trek

to the Temple of the Sun and the Temple of the Cross, walk

through the Palace courtyard, through the Temple of the Count

to the ball court. He’ll send home to his mother a letter written

in careful cursive by lamp light stating that he his wife, and two

children, who have made the journey to Chiapas with him, that

they are holding things together — a lie he’ll enclose with photos

and mail three states away, while his wife gets up to breastfeed

their daughter, whose cry in this moment, can barely be heard

above the constant uproar in the nearby jungle, full of darkness.

Baptized by my great-grandfather

          in a stagnant puddle of rainwater

— zancudo eggs laid and hatched

          on the water’s film-thin skin — I

am christened: charco: he who in

          shallow pools searches for muddled

reflections among riverbeds cracked

          with thirst. Un criatura, I’m brought

back into the world, buzzing, hungry

          for breath, sweat, to fill my abdomen

with three generations of blood. What

          I carry in my bones is ausencia.

✼
When I say his name          I smell muddied daffodils

When I say his name          my grandmother wails

When I say his name          his follies, on the tip of my tongue,

                                            write home to ask for forgiveness.


Awake beneath an onyx sky you crack the blinds, inhale

night’s fading ink. The air is your mother’s breath on your skin,

the only steeple is the church of palms in the neighbor’s yard

dropping vermilion fruit on the grass. On another coast,

everyone you know is sleeping except for a boy you love.

In his body ticks a clock that matches yours. Darkness seeps

from the blades of palmetto the way water leaves your fingers

after a bath. To see the darkness, one must look darkly. Hours later,

this boy will feed his cat, perform his daily ministrations

like a mother. What is parenting but a prayer for one’s young.

Outside, the white ibis of dawn unfurls the potted mint,

its ribbons of scent. Son, your shadow lives in my eyes.

When the clinical psychologist sent me his webpage and resume, and suggested we explore a relationship potential, it reminded me of my sixth grade algebra teacher, who used to deduct points from my grade for not showing my work. Were I to show you my work just now, for example, I’d tell you I’d just finished Carmen Boullasa’s novella Before and had begun Mary Ruefle’s My Private Property, which I read with half my brain still in Before. Though two weeks ago I’d read Ruefle’s On Imagination with such delight that everything I thought for a week after was phrased in her syntax. And this, I’d imagine, is how I would approach the meeting with the clinical psychologist. With half a brain in the last story. For, indeed, I’d begun Before last month in order to test out F’s new beanbag for reading. Earlier that afternoon Amalia and I had blown enormous soap bubbles, played dominoes and badminton in the Park with Sebastian and Delfine and their four daughters, Lana, Mia, Or, and the third one whose name I can’t remember just because it’s indecent to be able to remember all four every time you run into them, whom we’d met by chance. After Shabbat I watched Maleficent again with my daughter (the last time we watched it the battle scenes traumatized her). And all morning I was thinking of red lipstick. In between F phoned; when I told him not to come over. When I said wow you must really hate talking on the phone if you’d rather jump on your bike and ride it here and then go back and it’s now 10:20pm, he said that phones were for Haifa and Tel Aviv or Jerusalem and Tel Aviv, not for Tel Aviv and Tel Aviv. But then again, I thought, as I am showing my work, they are for covering the distance also between inside a bar and outside, between two blocks, if you’ve passed something. I’ve also looked up the words badminton, which I always spell badmitten to myself, Maleficent, and I double checked to make sure I was spelling Boullasa and Ruefle correctly, which I was. In sixth grade algebra, Ms. Lili (we didn’t know what to call her as she’d just gotten divorced) would deduct 20 points from my grade. It wasn’t that the answer came to me in a dream or by intuition. It’s just that I preferred to do it in my head because I was always out of erasers. And one day I told her, look, you’ve been giving me 80s all year for not showing my work, and I’ve still got the highest grade in class. Who do you think I might be cheating from? Which may be why, instinctively, I don’t want to get to know any clinical psychologists in an intimate manner. After that Ms. Lili began to give me full marks, and also, I began to show my work.

  (1)

The deer do not know

the earth is round.

Somehow

they bear their young

anyway, in Vermeer’s

blond glow.

By the lake I sank

to my damaged knees,

not having met

any citizen of memory.

The lepers drifted

westward, bleary

in their treaty-dances,

their prophet’s

muscle. In this posture

the revolution

began, spinning lazily

backwards

into presidencies,

lush & unrestrained.

 

          (2)

I can write no more

about bread

than about tin,

each of which

the sunrise presents

to me in turn:

Tin or bread, bread

or tin.

I once held a gun

while cancer

rucked my blood’s

cast-iron

vein. I convoked

a parliament

of bridges,

to which I pled

my scabbed kinship.

Bread or tin, tin

or bread

they chanted

until, at length, I

left that island.

Nothing burned

more brightly than

the oldest

ladder, its rungs

silver with

splinters. Are you

not astonished,

the sunrise

demands, swigging

its chalky nectar.

I am a war

is what I tell it, then.

It nods, it

has read the book,

it can see

time’s other motion.

 

          (3)

I painted my bed

with pomegranates

& turtledoves:

I wanted

to worship there,

in the crutch

or crux of memory.

For six nights

I set the cut

flowers of dusk

in a vase

next to my bed,

let them sing

their silent hymns.

I hid my garments

from my

old man’s beard,

blessed them

on their journeys

reckoned according

to the algorithms

of dry planets.

Instead I hemmed

the lashes of

love’s stone lyre,

its dense &

superscripted vowel.

Dawn met me

in bitter knots,

knocked

a continent

from my right hand.

 

          (4)

Here I am, with my pulse

of thorns.

My limbs are churches

at which my navel

worships.

They ascend & descend

like frontiers,

bleak about their frayed

edges. I have

stopped all the clocks

again, so that

we can weigh the yews

without further

interruption. Be a throne,

my physicians insist;

be a thirsty

spar. The greatest

honey sheathes

both our armies, Master.

 

          (5)

At my summons

a lamp

left its burden

along the old road.

It brought

bells with it.

I traded the bells

for a city.

I slept inside

night’s

insomniac eye.

May I go then

the lamp inquired.

We paused

at the edge

of the orchard

my father planted,

pruning hooks

glinting

in both our exiles.

 

          (6)

Let the thirsty wedding

launder

our venous baptisms,

let them dwindle

in the city of shepherds

where no shepherds

ever come. I lay

my ash against a myth

& recite

the catechism of pollen.

My lungs are the dawn

no sun

will ever witness,

a helm of trembling

erasures. Like breath

they fragment

as they char

into vows: vows, &

all their lucid shadows.

In the beginning, God created the apocalypse.

The smoke clouds shrank until nothing was dark

anymore. They fell out of the sky, and when they

hit the ground, they were tiny dead blackbirds, still

waiting to be fed. They had been waiting for eight

thousand years. The ground roared into God’s

earhole, furious, animalistic. Nothing was animal

again. The earth shook like a glass ball trembling

in a jagged metal container. Tiny bits splintered off,

flew into people’s eyes, into God’s. It’s never too late

for apology, but sometimes, there are too many glass

bits in your throat and it won’t come out properly.

God, with these glass bits in his eyes, was seeing

mammoths. Wooly mammoths he created long

ago, their coats thick and skin-close like memory.

His life flashed before his eyes, which is to say, he

was seeing the end of the universe. A girl was

weeping in the corner of that universe. She was

weeping because nothing would be the same again.

I was weeping because everything would be the same.

So it goes. In the end, God created you. Your breath

smelled like rosewater, your head was wreathed with

silk. You looked like a memory. I wanted so badly to

call out, but I knew you wouldn’t turn because you were

all that was left in the world, meaning I was no longer

in it. Meaning God was no longer in it, or that in this

world, you were God. I knelt at the altar and prayed.

The heart flickered within the chest

and generated heat, a tiny version of the sun

placed in the center of the chest by God.

And therein, we find the first fabrication.

The second? That the heart was the seat

of a man’s soul. So strong was this belief

that Galen insisted the heart was

most important among organs, detailed how

tiny pores in the septum of the heart

allowed blood to seep from one side to the other.

So adamant was Galen that centuries later

clear-eyed Da Vinci and even Vesalius

chose to depict these pores despite the fact

neither one observed them. Sometimes

belief overrides truth. In their filthy journals,

the early missionaries recorded the way

Aztec priests ripped the hearts of men and women

out after cutting through their ribs in a single slice.

But this cannot be true. The ribs are a better armor

than many realize. The priests made a quick slice

from the umbilicus up and through the diaphragm

to reveal the beating heart at the bottom of the chest,

visualizing it clearly before extracting it.

Once removed, they kept the heart

while discarding the body, the feeble thing

tumbling down the steps of their pyramids.

When a patient tells me her heart hurts, I know

she is not having physical pain. I have studied

figuration almost as much as I have studied the heart.

The heart longs, flutters like a bird, and even sings.

She says her heart hurts so much it brings tears

to her eyes. And I nod to acknowledge her truth.

What else can I do? I have not held my beloved

in my arms as he gasped and died. You see,

her husband had heart failure, fluid filling his chest

more quickly than the medicines could help remove it.

He drowned. On land and breathing air, his heart

failed him and he drowned. And when my patient

tells me she kept her husband’s heart, kept the

bloated heart that failed him in a box lined with

red velvet befitting a king, red velvet trimmed with

white rabbit fur, more than a small part of me believes her.

Some things are easy to ignore. Take the liver:

it is so incredibly plain. Believe it or not, the ancient

Egyptians were the first to consider it. They chose

to keep birds as a source of food and developed

systems to fatten them by forced feeding. Believe it

or not, we were not the first to dream up ways

to capitalize on the natural world. The French,

as one would guess if taking an examination,

were the ones to refine this forced feeding.

Is there anything the French have not refined?

They created guidelines for what they named gavage:

a goose is force-fed three times a day for seventeen days.

Ninety-five days later, the goose is slaughtered,

its liver now transformed into foie gras.

Apparently, there are many steps required

to create luxury. So plain, the ordinary liver.

I say the liver is miraculous, almost mythic.

One can remove 70% of it and the remaining

tissue will regenerate the entirety of the organ.

Can the brain do that? No. I am thinking

about the liver today because I sometimes like to

examine things others overlook. It is a kind of fetish.

The liver makes proteins, removes toxins from our blood.

It is a goddamned hard-working organ.

So today, I praise it, I thank it, I relish it. I wish I had

paid more attention to it. As a young man

in Gross Anatomy, I spent a week studying

and dissecting the heart. But we were given

very little time to remove the liver, catalog its

different lobes, and detail its blood supply.

Herodotus introduced us to the concept

of the Fountain of Youth. And for centuries, men

dreamed of finding it. But it was there

within us the entire time. The Liver. Examine

any nonagenarian and you will find they all have

highly-functioning livers capable of removing

the poisons produced by life. It turns out

the chemistry of living, the byproducts of living,

are the very things that eventually kill us.

One must be trained to locate it. One finds it

by finding the Lion first and then the Brothers.

The faintest of the 13 signs in the night sky,

we have learned to see it by discerning what flanks it.

You were right that evening in Vermont to say

it doesn’t even look like a crab. I joked it looked

more like an upside-down Y, more like the Greek

λ, a symbol which, for me, had more to do with

radioactivity calculations used in radiation therapy.

I was showing off, you see, making sure I would be seen

as a doctor as well as a writer. But by then we were

already close enough for you to forgive my arrogance.

But your question came quickly: How do you do it

every day? All those people with cancer … We stared

at the stars, and I recounted a sordid story

about an old poet we admired. The stars,

the resulting story, and your laughter: the things

memory made indelible. You knew it was the veins

spreading out in a solid tumor seen when cut and examined

that reminded Hippocrates of the crab, something

far less poetic than the stars seen in the night sky,

but that is how you chose to think about it. And because

oncologists always think of cancer, I purposely chose

to think of reflux when, over lunch two years ago, you

kept coughing, kept choking. Later, you told me

that as you lay in the scanner you loved the idea of light

passing through you, photons used to look inside your chest.

Even then, you chose the poetic. Your greatest fear

was that the biopsy might discover an ulcer leading to

restrictions on fine food and wine. Instead, they found the crab.

You were born under the sign of the scorpion, but I

always saw you as a Lion. A brother, I assumed you were safely

distanced from the crab. Let the light pass through you now.

Not the photons we manipulate for Medicine,

but the starlight that has traveled with us for millennia.

We need not look for the Lion or the Brothers anymore.

1.

A whale is a country of blurry borders,

a land that never shows up on the maps,

a nation that could easily be found

in the Brief Guide to Imaginary Places

between Balnibarbi (dominion of distracted men)

and Barataria (the isle that Don Quixote delegated to Sancho Panza).

Seen from above, a whale is a stone island

suspended in the middle of the sea.

 

2.

Cachalots are gray ghosts in the water.

Their skin is purple-black with yellow spots.

Whale bellies are chock-full of little creatures:

a whale can harbor over seven thousand other beings.

A whale is also a house.

 

3.

There are at least two white whales.

The first swam through real-life oceans in 1820

and sank a whaling ship, the Essex.

According to explorer Jeremiah Reynolds,

this whale breathed differently from all the rest:

its jet of water shot up at another angle,

its head was crowned with barnacles.

The second swam the imaginary seas of 1851,

and swims the pages of a book,

and swims the fury of a limping,

wild, vengeful captain, commander of silence.

 

4.

Books profess that sperm whales weigh forty tons.

That can’t be true:

a sperm whale is as light and soft

as every other thing that can’t be owned.

A whale is a country:

it’s weightless because it has no anatomy. It has geography instead.

 

5.

Blue whale gray whale bowhead whale

minke whale pilot

whale southern

white whale hump-

back whale

beluga

dwarf sperm

whale pygmy right whale

narwhal.

We give them names but don’t know what they’re like.

A whale is always somewhere else.

6.

No one knows why cachalots have a sperm-like substance on their heads. Scientists think that the large cavity on their foreheads is a kind of biological ballast, a container of oil whose density changes with the temperature. Maybe it’s a sound system they use to help them navigate and communicate with other sperm whales. Or maybe the oil helps males absorb the head-butts they exchange among themselves, the blows they’re dealt by whaling ships.

Is a whale’s head a floating device?
Yes.

And a speaker.
And a speed bump.

 

7.

Squeeze! Squeeze! Squeeze! all the morning long; I squeezed that sperm till I myself almost melted into it; I squeezed that sperm till a strange sort of insanity came over me, and I found myself unwittingly squeezing my co-labourers’ hands in it, mistaking their hands for the gentle globules.

Whales are also gentle globules.

8.

In 1989, the hydrophones of the US Navy

detected a sound in the depths:

a whale who sang at 52 hertz,

a higher frequency than other whales,

a little higher than a tuba’s lowest note.

No one responds; no one knows who it is.

This whale’s deformed,

a hybrid, deaf,

its song is broken,

it’s a tuba.

The last whale of its species. A tuba whale.

We can’t know what makes a whale feel love, but we do know

that a sperm whale’s heart is as big as a small car.

 

9.

They’re like us, whales.

They weep at the abduction of their children,

they’re 97% water,

each family has a language of its own,

their teeth get cavities, they’re polygamous,

they spend hours hung at a diagonal,

curled up against each other.

And when they dream, whales

are delicate flesh-petaled flowers.

 

10.

There’s a sculpture of Teddy Roosevelt on horseback at the entrance of the American

Museum of Natural History.

Hunter-Conservationist, the plaque says.

What does it say about us that we murder what we want to keep?

 

11.

Whales were terrestrial animals once.

They walked the land as Pakicetidae:

wooly foxes with thick tails and hooves

that could hear underwater.

12.

Some whales have teeth, but others don’t.

Blue whales don’t eat.

They filter and absorb:

they have two rows of keratin bristles,

two parallel combs, four meters long.

When they open their mouths, the world pours in.

They break the world.

And just as we have wisdom teeth,

appendixes, just as we too get goosebumps,

they have a bone that marks

where their forebears’ pelvis was.

Its skeleton looks nothing like the whale.
It doesn’t mind the difference.

 

13.

Just like a self-sustaining fruit,

whales have no need for what they don’t contain.

 

14.

They aren’t like us, whales.

Each family has a language of its own,

but they don’t sing to hurt each other.

Polygamous, they don’t know how to lie.

Their teeth are trunks:

you learn how old a whale is if you cut a tooth in half.

A whale has more in common with a California redwood than with us.

I kiss her

& death

is the shadow of that loving bird

shaking

on the pool

yet

when she turns to look

it has flown.

*
She’s gone,

sleepwalking

with her kisses

cold.

*
Only

a trace of her voice

is left

— those red pomegranate seeds —

on the snow.

You depart.

The train has stopped.

No! Clouds do not float with the wind.

The sheets are wrinkled

& dreams are shrunk

& grown are the stones’ shadows:

The newsman’s dirty hat & the greasy locks of hair

& conversation circles & the smell of smoke

misty lenses of glasses & dusty telegraph wires

& stains of snow & the sun

& tic-tocks of the station’s slow clock

& the unsafe refuge of the stairs

& the morgue-smelling newspapers.

Who is standing alone against the wind?

And the silence

whistles

& the lamps smoke

& the glasses break.

Signs that whirl

& faces that whirl

& recede & whirl

wrinkle & whirl

& whirl & are hollowed.

What a ridiculous dance

on the wires & broken glasses

to the black blind cat’s black wail.

Sheets were white

& names & letters too

& the snow flamed on the windows

& kisses slid with the breath on the skin

& the horse was exhausted & the horse’s memory was exhausted & exhausted

was the death blow

–– who stands alone against the wind? ––

& the big crazy boy pulled the emergency brake.

The train stopped.

Junctions ––

Newspaper headlines browse the deserted stations

& drowse at the windows in the pale sun as the evening breezes wheeze.

The train has stopped.

Since the flowerpot on the shelf cracked,

you never came back even once

with the clouds or the roses’ breeze.

You don’t appear in my dreams anymore

with an excuse whatever

& this house is empty without your image.

I’ve seen only your signs in my dreams:

the flowerpot on the shelf that cracked,

even though in my dream ––

You never came back even once.

Isn’t this house yours?

Don’t get upset with me,

O cloud, o roses’ breeze!

Please

accept

my apologies.

Coastal trees together in the wind

standing on the sunny dunes

trembling with sun and sea light.

Water on the sand and on the rock

water of whirlpool and waterfall

and salt bubbles

and tiny suns.

It begins rising up my walls

and in my blood

the foam full of flickering

stars.

How to not be with you and be

sand with you

ancient and turbulent voice, love naked

crumbling cold.

It slipped by, brushing stones at the edge

roots, trunks

and before turning into foam and noise

seemed to rest as if in two quiet waves

heavy, equal, lustrous.

The sun lent a strong gold at times

and in the wells at the bottom, smoke color,

a strange gray from the sun over the water.

And bright streaks ran, swift

coming together then parting

and falling over the rocks, breaking into bubbles.

And there above leaves and branches are moving

— swaying in the wind —

and further up still blue light, warm

solar blue, very high.

My neighbor from the ghetto raps at my temples

Just like then, when a swarm of blonde locusts

invaded my mother city

and mowed it down:

“Oh my dear brother, life is of no importance to me,

what I want is to survive, that is everything.”

Now, as my temples tap out that same verse, already

for the umpteenth time, ever more mysteriously

what was said demands its due within me:

To survive.

Of course, I also wanted to survive,

I wanted, and still want to survive.

To survive — what sort of thing and whom?

To survive terror? To survive

some someone who shows unkindness to me?

And perhaps to survive death altogether?

It seems very little, seems very little …

She-He gazed in amazement

in the direction of the sky

in the direction of the clouds

spectacularly alive.

She-He feels a heart beat

one arm touching the earth

one arm touching the mist

self-compressed and breathing.

She-He will go under the river

steering with a strong tail

steering commitments

into the afterlife.






